Age of Discovery - Wikipedia
Age of Discovery
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Period of European global exploration from the 15th century to the 18th century
This article needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Age of Discovery" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Portuguese invention of the caravel, which was maneuverable and able to undertake ocean voyages, was essential to European maritime exploration.
The present image shows the "Caravela Vera Cruz", navigating the Tagus river, Lisboa.
The Nao Victoria was the Spanish ship that managed to carry out the first circumnavigation in history.
The present image shows a replica of Victoria, built in 1992, visiting Nagoya, Japan, for Expo 2005.
The Age of Discovery (or the Age of Exploration), also known as the early modern period, was a period largely overlapping with the Age of Sail, approximately from the 15th century to the 17th century in European history, in which seafaring Europeans explored regions across the globe.
The extensive overseas exploration, with the Portuguese and Spanish at the forefront, later joined by the Dutch, English, and French, emerged as a powerful factor in European culture, most notably the European encounter and colonization of the Americas.
It also marks an increased adoption of colonialism as a government policy in several European states.
As such, it is sometimes synonymous with the first wave of European colonization.
European exploration outside the Mediterranean started with the maritime expeditions of Portugal to the Canary Islands in 1336, and later with the Portuguese discoveries of the Atlantic archipelagos of Madeira and Azores, the coast of West Africa in 1434 and the establishment of the sea route to India in 1498 by Vasco da Gama, which is often considered a very remarkable voyage, as it initiated the Portuguese maritime and trade presence in Kerala and the Indian Ocean.
A main event in the Age of Discovery took place when Spain sponsored the transatlantic voyages of Christopher Columbus between 1492 and 1504, which saw the beginning of the colonization of the Americas.
Years later, the Spanish expedition of Magellan–Elcano expedition made the first circumnavigation of the globe between 1519 and 1522, which was regarded as a major achievement in seamanship, and had a significant impact on the European understanding of the world.
These discoveries led to numerous naval expeditions across the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific oceans, and land expeditions in the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Australia that continued into the late 19th century, followed by the exploration of the polar regions in the 20th century.
European overseas exploration led to the rise of international trade and the European colonial empires, with the contact between the Old World (Europe, Asia, and Africa) and the New World (the Americas), as well as Australia, producing the Columbian exchange, a wide transfer of plants, animals, food, human populations (including slaves), communicable diseases, and culture between the Eastern and Western Hemispheres.
The Age of Discovery and later European exploration allowed the mapping of the world, resulting in a new worldview and distant civilizations coming into contact.
At the same time, new diseases were propagated, decimating populations not previously in contact with the Old World, particularly concerning Native Americans.
The era saw the widespread enslavement, exploitation and military conquest of native populations concurrent with the growing economic influence and spread of European culture and technology.
Contents
Concept
Main article: Discovery (observation)
The concept of discovery has been scrutinized, critically highlighting the history of the core term of this periodization.
The term "age of discovery" has been in the historical literature and still commonly used. J. H. Parry, calling the period alternatively the Age of Reconnaissance, argues that not only was the era one of European explorations to regions heretofore unknown to them but that it also produced the expansion of geographical knowledge and empirical science. "It saw also the first major victories of empirical inquiry over authority, the beginnings of that close association of science, technology, and everyday work which is an essential characteristic of the modern western world." Anthony Pagden draws on the work of Edmundo O'Gorman for the statement that "For all Europeans, the events of October 1492 constituted a 'discovery'. Something of which they had no prior knowledge had suddenly presented itself to their gaze." O'Gorman argues further that the physical and geographical encounter with new territories was less important than the Europeans’ effort to integrate this new knowledge into their worldview, what he calls "the invention of America". Pagden examines the origins of the terms "discovery" and "invention". In English, "discovery" and its forms in the romance languages derive from "disco-operio, meaning to uncover, to reveal, to expose to the gaze” with the implicit idea that what was revealed existed previously.
Few Europeans during the period of explorations used the term "invention" for the European encounters, with the notable exception of Martin Waldseemüller, whose map first used the term "America". 
A central legal concept of the Discovery Doctrine, expounded by the United States Supreme Court in 1823, draws on assertions of European powers' right to claim land during their explorations.  The concept of "discovery" been used to enforce colonial claiming and the age of discovery, but has been also vocally challenged by indigenous peoples and researchers.
Many indigenous peoples have fundamentally challenged the concept and colonial claiming of "discovery" over their lands and people as forced and negating indigenous presence.
The period alternatively called the Age of Exploration, has also been scrutinized through reflections on the understanding and use of exploration.
Its understanding and use, like science more generally, has been discussed as being framed and used for colonial ventures, discrimination and exploitation, by combining it with concepts such as the "frontier" (as in frontierism) and manifest destiny, up to the contemporary age of space exploration.
Alternatively, the term and concept of contact, as in first contact, has been used to shed a more nuanced and reciprocal light on the age of discovery and colonialism, using the alternative names of Age of Contact or Contact Period, discussing it as an "unfinished, diverse project".
Overview
The Portuguese began systematically exploring the Atlantic coast of Africa in 1418, under the sponsorship of Infante Dom Henrique (Prince Henry). Under the direction of Henry the Navigator, the Portuguese developed a new, much lighter ship, the caravel, which could sail farther and faster, and, above all, was highly maneuverable and could sail much nearer the wind, or into the wind.
In 1488, Bartolomeu Dias reached the Indian Ocean by this route.
In 1492, the Catholic Monarchs of Castile and Aragon funded Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus's plan to sail west to reach the Indies by crossing the Atlantic.
Columbus encountered a continent uncharted by most Europeans (though it had begun to be explored and was temporarily colonized by the Norse starting some 500 years earlier). Later, it was called America after Amerigo Vespucci, a trader working for Portugal.
Portugal quickly claimed those lands under the terms of the Treaty of Alcáçovas but Castile was able to persuade the Pope, who was himself a Castilian, to issue four papal bulls to divide the world into two regions of exploration, where each kingdom had exclusive rights to claim newly discovered lands.
These were modified by the Treaty of Tordesillas, ratified by Pope Julius II. Map with the main travels of the Age of Discovery.
See details in an expandable table:  Major discoveries   Major discovery/Destination Main explorer Year Funding by   Congo River Diogo Cão 1482 John II of Portugal   Cape of Good Hope Indian Ocean Dias 1488 John II of Portugal   West Indies Columbus 1492 Ferdinand and Isabella   India Vasco da Gama 1498 Manuel I   Brazil Cabral 1500 Manuel I   Spice Islands Australasia (Western Pacific Ocean) Albuquerque, Abreu, and Serrão 1512 Manuel I   Pacific Ocean Vasco Balboa 1513 Ferdinand II of Aragon   Strait of Magellan Magellan 1520 Charles I of Spain   Philippines Magellan 1521 Charles I of Spain   Circumnavigation Magellan and Elcano 1522 Charles I of Spain   Australia Willem Janszoon 1606 United East India Company   New Zealand Abel Tasman 1642 United East India Company   Islands Near Antarctica James Cook 1773 George III   Hawaii James Cook 1778 George III 
In 1498, a Portuguese expedition commanded by Vasco da Gama reached India by sailing around Africa, opening up direct trade with Asia.
While other exploratory fleets were sent from Portugal to northern North America, in the following years Portuguese India Armadas also extended this Eastern oceanic route, touching sometimes South America and by this way opening a circuit from the New World to Asia (starting in 1500, under the command of Pedro Álvares Cabral), and explored islands in the South Atlantic and Southern Indian Oceans.
Soon, the Portuguese sailed further eastward, to the valuable Spice Islands in 1512, landing in China one year later.
Japan was reached by the Portuguese only in 1543. In 1513, Spanish Vasco Núñez de Balboa crossed the Isthmus of Panama and reached the "other sea" from the New World.
Thus, Europe first received news of the eastern and western Pacific within a one-year span around 1512. East and west exploration overlapped in 1522, when a Castilian (Spanish) expedition, led by Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan and, after his death in the Maluku islands, by Spanish Basque navigator Juan Sebastián Elcano, sailing westward, completed the first circumnavigation of the world, while Spanish conquistadors explored the interior of the Americas, and later, some of the South Pacific islands.
The main objective of this voyage was to disrupt Portuguese trade in the East. 
Since 1495, the French, the English, and the Dutch entered the race of exploration after learning of these exploits, defying the Iberian monopoly on maritime trade by searching for new routes, first to the western coasts of North and South America, through the first English and French expeditions (starting with the first expedition of John Cabot in 1497 to the north, in the service of England, followed by the French expeditions to South America and later to North America), and into the Pacific Ocean around South America, but eventually by following the Portuguese around Africa into the Indian Ocean; discovering Australia in 1606, New Zealand in 1642, and Hawaii in 1778. Meanwhile, from the 1580s to the 1640s, Russians explored and conquered almost the whole of Siberia and Alaska in the 1730s.
Background
See also: Early world maps and Chronology of European exploration of Asia
Rise of European trade
After the fall of Rome largely severed the connection between Europe and lands further east, Christian Europe was largely a backwater compared to the Arab world, which quickly conquered and incorporated large territories in the Middle East and North Africa.
The Christian crusades to retake the Holy Land from the Muslims was not a military success, but it did bring Europe into contact with the Middle East and the valuable goods manufactured or traded there.
From the 12th century, the European economy was transformed by the interconnecting of river and sea trade routes, leading Europe to create trading networks.: 345 
Before the 12th century, a major obstacle to trade east of the Strait of Gibraltar, which divided the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean, was Muslim control of great swaths of territory, including the Iberian peninsula and the trade monopolies of Christian city-states on the Italian peninsula, especially Venice and Genoa.
Economic growth of Iberia followed the Christian reconquest of Al-Andalus in what is now southern Spain and the Siege of Lisbon (1147 AD), in Portugal.
The decline of Fatimid Caliphate naval strength that started before the First Crusade helped the maritime Italian states, mainly Venice, Genoa and Pisa, dominate trade in the eastern Mediterranean, with merchants there becoming wealthy and politically influential.
Further changing the mercantile situation in the Eastern Mediterranean was the waning of Christian Byzantine naval power following the death of Emperor Manuel I Komnenos in 1180, whose dynasty had made several notable treaties and concessions with Italian traders, permitting the use of Byzantine Christian ports.  The Norman Conquest of England in the late 11th century allowed for peaceful trade on the North Sea.
The Hanseatic League, a confederation of merchant guilds and their towns in northern Germany along the North Sea and Baltic Sea, was instrumental in commercial development of the region.  In the 12th century, the region of Flanders, Hainault and Brabant produced the finest quality textiles in northern Europe, which encouraged merchants from Genoa and Venice to sail there directly from the Mediterranean through the Strait of Gibraltar and up the Atlantic coast.: 316–38  Nicolòzzo Spinola made the first recorded direct voyage from Genoa to Flanders in 1277.: 328 
Technology: Ship Design and the Compass
A caravel with two lateen sail rigs and a headsail.
Caravels were invented by the Portuguese, they had more manoeuvrability and were essential to the Age of Exploration.Technological advancements that were important to the Age of Exploration were the adoption of the magnetic compass and advances in ship design.
The compass was an addition to the ancient method of navigation based on sightings of the sun and stars.  The compass had been used for navigation in China by the 11th century and was adopted by the Arab traders in the Indian Ocean.
The compass spread to Europe by the late 12th or early 13th century.  Use of the compass for navigation in the Indian Ocean was first mentioned in 1232.: 351–2  The first mention of use of the compass in Europe was in 1180.: 382   The Europeans used a "dry" compass, with a needle on a pivot.  The compass card was also a European invention.
The Javanese built ocean going merchant ships called po since at least the 1st century AD. It was over 50 m in length and had a freeboard of 5.2–7.8 m.
The po was capable of carrying 700 people together with more than 10,000 hú (斛) of cargo (250–1000 tons according to various interpretations). They are built with multiple planks to resist storms, and had 4 sails plus a bowsprit sail.
The Javanese already reached Ghana by the 8th century.: 275–276 : 262 
Ships grew in size, required smaller crews and were able to sail longer distances without stopping.
This led to significant lower long-distance shipping costs by the 14th century.: 342  Cogs remained popular for trade because of their low cost.
Galleys were also used in trade.
Early geographical knowledge and maps
Pintle-and-gudgeon stern-post rudder of the Hanseatic league flagship Adler von Lübeck (1567–1581).The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, a document dating from 40 to 60 AD, describes a newly discovered route through the Red Sea to India, with descriptions of the markets in towns around Red Sea, Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean, including along the eastern coast of Africa, which states "for beyond these places the unexplored ocean curves around toward the west, and running along by the regions to the south of Aethiopia and Libya and Africa, it mingles with the western sea (possible reference to the Atlantic Ocean)".  European medieval knowledge about Asia beyond the reach of the Byzantine Empire was sourced in partial reports, often obscured by legends, dating back from the time of the conquests of Alexander the Great and his successors.
Another source was the Radhanite Jewish trade networks of merchants established as go-betweens between Europe and the Muslim world during the time of the Crusader states.
Ptolemy's world map (2nd century) in a 15th-century reconstruction by Nicolaus Germanus.
In 1154, the Arab geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi created a description of the world and a world map, the Tabula Rogeriana, at the court of King Roger II of Sicily, but still Africa was only partially known to either Christians, Genoese and Venetians, or the Arab seamen, and its southern extent unknown.
There were reports of great African Sahara, but the factual knowledge was limited for the Europeans to the Mediterranean coasts and little else since the Arab blockade of North Africa precluded exploration inland.
Knowledge about the Atlantic African coast was fragmented and derived mainly from old Greek and Roman maps based on Carthaginian knowledge, including the time of Roman exploration of Mauritania.
The Red Sea was barely known and only trade links with the Maritime republics, the Republic of Venice especially, fostered collection of accurate maritime knowledge.
Indian Ocean trade routes were sailed by Arab traders.
Between 1405 and 1421, the Yongle Emperor of Ming China sponsored a series of long range tributary missions under the command of Zheng He (Cheng Ho). The fleets visited Arabia, East Africa, India, Maritime Southeast Asia and Thailand.
But the journeys, reported by Ma Huan, a Muslim voyager and translator, were halted abruptly after the emperor's death and were not followed up, as the Chinese Ming Dynasty retreated in the haijin, a policy of isolationism, having limited maritime trade.
By 1400, a Latin translation of Ptolemy's Geographia reached Italy coming from Constantinople.
The rediscovery of Roman geographical knowledge was a revelation, both for map-making and worldview, although reinforcing the idea that the Indian Ocean was landlocked.
Medieval European travel (1241–1438)
The Silk Road and spice trade routes later blocked by the Ottoman Empire in 1453 spurring exploration to find alternative sea routes
Marco Polo travels (1271–1295)
A prelude to the Age of Discovery was a series of European expeditions crossing Eurasia by land in the late Middle Ages.
The Mongols had threatened Europe, but Mongol states also unified much of Eurasia and, from 1206 on, the Pax Mongolica allowed safe trade routes and communication lines stretching from the Middle East to China.
A series of Europeans took advantage of these to explore eastwards.
Most were Italians, as trade between Europe and the Middle East was controlled mainly by the Maritime republics.[citation needed] The close Italian links to the Levant raised great curiosity and commercial interest in countries which lay further east.[page needed]
There are a few accounts of merchants from North Africa and the Mediterranean region who traded in the Indian Ocean in late medieval times.
Christian embassies were sent as far as Karakorum during the Mongol invasions of the Levant, from which they gained a greater understanding of the world.[citation needed] The first of these travellers was Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, dispatched by Pope Innocent IV to the Great Khan, who journeyed to Mongolia and back from 1241 to 1247. About the same time, Russian prince Yaroslav of Vladimir, and subsequently his sons Alexander Nevsky and Andrey II of Vladimir, travelled to the Mongolian capital.
Though having strong political implications, their journeys left no detailed accounts.
Other travellers followed, like French André de Longjumeau and Flemish William of Rubruck, who reached China through Central Asia.
Marco Polo, a Venetian merchant, dictated an account of journeys throughout Asia from 1271 to 1295, describing being a guest at the Yuan Dynasty court of Kublai Khan in Travels, and it was read throughout Europe.
The Muslim fleet guarding the Strait of Gibraltar was defeated by Genoa in 1291. In that year, the Genoese attempted their first Atlantic exploration attempt when merchant brothers Vadino and Ugolino Vivaldi sailed from Genoa with two galleys but disappeared off the Moroccan coast, feeding the fears of oceanic travel.
From 1325 to 1354, a Moroccan scholar from Tangier, Ibn Battuta, journeyed through North Africa, the Sahara desert, West Africa, Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, the Horn of Africa, the Middle East and Asia, having reached China.
After returning, he dictated an account of his journeys to a scholar he met in Granada, The Rihla ("The Journey"), the unheralded source on his adventures.
Between 1357 and 1371 a book of supposed travels compiled by John Mandeville acquired extraordinary popularity.
Despite the unreliable and often fantastical nature of its accounts it was used as a reference for the East, Egypt, and the Levant in general, asserting the old belief that Jerusalem was the centre of the world.
Following the period of Timurid relations with Europe, in 1439 Niccolò de' Conti published an account of his travels as a Muslim merchant to India and Southeast Asia and, later in 1466–1472, Russian merchant Afanasy Nikitin of Tver travelled to India, which he described in his book A Journey Beyond the Three Seas.
These overland journeys had little immediate effect.
The Mongol Empire collapsed almost as quickly as it formed and soon the route to the east became more difficult and dangerous.
The Black Death of the 14th century also blocked travel and trade.
The rise of the Ottoman Empire further limited the possibilities of European overland trade.
Chinese missions (1405–1433)
Further information: Ming treasure voyages and Chinese exploration
"Mao Kun map", believed to be based on Zheng He's travels, showing sailing directions between ports of SE Asia and as far as Malindi, in Wu Bei Zhi (1628)
The Chinese had wide connections through trade in Asia and had been sailing to Arabia, East Africa, and Egypt since the Tang Dynasty (AD 618–907). Between 1405 and 1421, the third Ming emperor Yongle sponsored a series of long range tributary missions in the Indian Ocean under the command of admiral Zheng He (Cheng Ho). As important as they are, these voyages did not result in permanent links to overseas territories because of isolationist policy changes in China ending the voyages and knowledge of them.
A large fleet of new junk ships was prepared for these international diplomatic expeditions.
The largest of these junks—that the Chinese termed bao chuan (treasure ships)—may have measured 121 metres (400 feet) stem to stern, and thousands of sailors were involved.
The first expedition departed in 1405. At least seven well-documented expeditions were launched, each bigger and more expensive than the last.
The fleets visited Arabia, East Africa, India, Malay Archipelago and Thailand (at the time called Siam), exchanging goods along the way.
They presented gifts of gold, silver, porcelain and silk; in return, received such novelties as ostriches, zebras, camels, ivory and giraffes.
After the emperor's death, Zheng He led a final expedition departing from Nanking in 1431 and returning to Beijing in 1433. It is very likely that this last expedition reached as far as Madagascar.
The travels were reported by Ma Huan, a Muslim voyager and translator who accompanied Zheng He on three of the seven expeditions, his account published as the Yingya Shenglan (Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores) (1433).
The voyages had a significant and lasting effect on the organization of a maritime network, utilizing and creating nodes and conduits in its wake, thereby restructuring international and cross-cultural relationships and exchanges.
It was especially impactful as no other polity had exerted naval dominance over all sectors of the Indian Ocean prior to these voyages.
The Ming promoted alternative nodes as a strategy to establish control over the network.
For instance, due to Chinese involvement, ports such as Malacca (in Southeast Asia), Cochin (on the Malabar Coast), and Malindi (on the Swahili Coast) had grown as key alternatives to other important and established ports.[a] The appearance of the Ming treasure fleet generated and intensified competition among contending polities and rivals, each seeking an alliance with the Ming.
The voyages also brought about the Western Ocean's regional integration and the increase in international circulation of people, ideas, and goods.
It also provided a platform for cosmopolitan discourses, which took place in locations such as the ships of the Ming treasure fleet, the Ming capitals of Nanjing as well as Beijing, and the banquet receptions organized by the Ming court for foreign representatives.
Diverse groups of people from across the maritime countries congregated, interacted, and traveled together as the Ming treasure fleet sailed from and to Ming China.
For the first time in its history, the maritime region from China to Africa was under the dominance of a single imperial power and thereby allowed for the creation of a cosmopolitan space.
These long-distance journeys were not followed up, as the Chinese Ming dynasty retreated in the haijin, a policy of isolationism, having limited maritime trade.
Travels were halted abruptly after the emperor's death, as the Chinese lost interest in what they termed barbarian lands, turning inward, and successor emperors felt the expeditions were harmful to the Chinese state; Hongxi Emperor ended further expeditions and Xuande Emperor suppressed much of the information about Zheng He's voyages.
Atlantic Ocean (1419–1507)
See also: Maritime history of Europe § The European Age of Discovery (1400–1600), and Portuguese discoveries
Genoese (red) and Venetian (green) maritime trade routes in the Mediterranean and Black Sea
From the 8th century until the 15th century, the Republic of Venice and neighboring maritime republics held the monopoly of European trade with the Middle East.
The silk and spice trade, involving spices, incense, herbs, drugs and opium, made these Mediterranean city-states phenomenally rich.
Spices were among the most expensive and demanded products of the Middle Ages, as they were used in medieval medicine, religious rituals, cosmetics, perfumery, as well as food additives and preservatives.
They were all imported from Asia and Africa.
Muslim traders—mainly descendants of Arab sailors from Yemen and Oman—dominated maritime routes throughout the Indian Ocean, tapping source regions in the Far East and shipping for trading emporiums in India, mainly Kozhikode, westward to Ormus in the Persian Gulf and Jeddah in the Red Sea.
From there, overland routes led to the Mediterranean coasts.
Venetian merchants distributed the goods through Europe until the rise of the Ottoman Empire, that eventually led to the fall of Constantinople in 1453, barring Europeans from important combined-land-sea routes in areas around the Aegean, Bosporus, and Black Sea.
The Venetians and other Italian Maritime Republics maintained some, more limited, access to Asian goods, via south-eastern Mediterranean trade, in such ports as Antioch, Acre, and Alexandria.
Forced to reduce their activities in the Black Sea, and at war with Venice, the Genoese had turned to North African trade of wheat, olive oil (valued also as an energy source) and a search for silver and gold.
Europeans had a constant deficit in silver and gold, as coin only went one way: out, spent on eastern trade that was now cut off.
Several European mines were exhausted, the lack of bullion leading to the development of a complex banking system to manage the risks in trade (the very first state bank, Banco di San Giorgio, was founded in 1407 at Genoa). Sailing also into the ports of Bruges (Flanders) and England, Genoese communities were then established in Portugal, who profited from their enterprise and financial expertise.
European sailing had been primarily close to land cabotage, guided by portolan charts.
These charts specified proven ocean routes guided by coastal landmarks: sailors departed from a known point, followed a compass heading, and tried to identify their location by its landmarks.
For the first oceanic exploration Western Europeans used the compass, as well as progressive new advances in cartography and astronomy.
Arab navigational tools like the astrolabe and quadrant were used for celestial navigation.
Portuguese exploration
See also: Portuguese maritime exploration and European exploration of Africa
Saharan trade routes c. 1400, with modern Niger highlighted
A map of Africa as it was known to Europeans in 1482. created by German cartographer Lienhart Holl and based on Ptolemey's fourth map of Africa
In 1297, King Dinis of Portugal took personal interest in exports.
In 1317, he made an agreement with Genoese merchant sailor Manuel Pessanha (Pessagno), appointing him first admiral of the Portuguese Navy, with the goal of defending the country against Muslim pirate raids.
Outbreaks of bubonic plague led to severe depopulation in the second half of the 14th century: only the sea offered alternatives, with most population settling in fishing and trading coastal areas.
Between 1325 and 1357, Afonso IV of Portugal encouraged maritime commerce and ordered the first explorations.
The Canary Islands, already known to the Genoese, were claimed as officially discovered under patronage of the Portuguese but in 1344 Castile disputed them, expanding their rivalry into the sea.
To ensure their monopoly on trade, Europeans (beginning with the Portuguese) attempted to install a mediterranean system of trade which used military might and intimidation to divert trade through ports they controlled; there it could be taxed.
In 1415, Ceuta was conquered by the Portuguese aiming to control navigation of the African coast.
Young prince Henry the Navigator was there and became aware of profit possibilities in the Trans-Saharan trade routes.
For centuries slave and gold trade routes linking West Africa with the Mediterranean passed over the Western Sahara Desert, controlled by the Moors of North Africa.
Henry wished to know how far Muslim territories in Africa extended, hoping to bypass them and trade directly with West Africa by sea, find allies in legendary Christian lands to the south like the long-lost Christian kingdom of Prester John and to probe whether it was possible to reach the Indies by sea, the source of the lucrative spice trade.
He invested in sponsoring voyages down the coast of Mauritania, gathering a group of merchants, shipowners and stakeholders interested in new sea lanes.
Soon the Atlantic islands of Madeira (1419) and the Azores (1427) were reached.
In particular, they were discovered by voyages launched by the command of Prince Henry the Navigator.
The expedition leader himself, who established settlements on the island of Madeira, was Portuguese explorer João Gonçalves Zarco.
At the time, Europeans did not know what lay beyond Cape Non (Cape Chaunar) on the African coast, and whether it was possible to return once it was crossed.
Nautical myths warned of oceanic monsters or an edge of the world, but Prince Henry's navigation challenged such beliefs: starting in 1421, systematic sailing overcame it, reaching the difficult Cape Bojador that in 1434 one of Prince Henry's captains, Gil Eanes, finally passed.
A major advance was the introduction of the caravel in the mid-15th century, a small ship able to sail windward more than any other in Europe at the time.
Evolved from fishing ships designs, they were the first that could leave the coastal cabotage navigation and sail safely on the open Atlantic.
For celestial navigation the Portuguese used the ephemerides, which experienced a remarkable diffusion in the 15th century.
These were astronomical charts plotting the location of the stars over a distinct period of time.
Published in 1496 by the Jewish astronomer, astrologer, and mathematician Abraham Zacuto, the Almanach Perpetuum included some of these tables for the movements of stars.
These tables revolutionized navigation, allowing the calculation of latitude.
Exact longitude, however, remained elusive, and mariners struggled to determine it for centuries.
Using the caravel, systematic exploration continued ever more southerly, advancing on average one degree a year.
Senegal and Cape Verde Peninsula were reached in 1445 and in 1446, Álvaro Fernandes pushed on almost as far as present-day Sierra Leone.
In 1453, the Fall of Constantinople to the hands of the Ottomans was a blow to Christendom and the established business relations linking with the east.
In 1455, Pope Nicholas V issued the bull Romanus Pontifex reinforcing the previous Dum Diversas (1452), granting all lands and seas discovered beyond Cape Bojador to King Afonso V of Portugal and his successors, as well as trade and conquest against Muslims and pagans, initiating a mare clausum policy in the Atlantic.
The king, who had been inquiring of Genoese experts about a seaway to India, commissioned the Fra Mauro world map, which arrived in Lisbon in 1459.
In 1456, Diogo Gomes reached the Cape Verde archipelago.
In the next decade several captains at the service of Prince Henry—including the Genoese Antonio da Noli and Venetian Alvise Cadamosto—discovered the remaining islands which were occupied during the 15th century.
The Gulf of Guinea would be reached in the 1460s.
Portuguese exploration after Prince Henry
Portuguese discoveries 1415–1543; in green = in the Reign of D. João III
In 1460, Pedro de Sintra reached Sierra Leone.
Prince Henry died in November that year after which, given the meagre revenues, exploration was granted to Lisbon merchant Fernão Gomes in 1469, who in exchange for the monopoly of trade in the Gulf of Guinea had to explore 100 miles (161 kilometres) each year for five years.
With his sponsorship, explorers João de Santarém, Pedro Escobar, Lopo Gonçalves, Fernão do Pó, and Pedro de Sintra made it even beyond those goals.
They reached the Southern Hemisphere and the islands of the Gulf of Guinea, including São Tomé and Príncipe and Elmina on the Gold Coast in 1471. (In the Southern Hemisphere, they used the Southern Cross as the reference for celestial navigation.) There, in what came to be called the "Gold Coast" in what is today Ghana, a thriving alluvial gold trade was found among the natives and Arab and Berber traders.
In 1478, during the War of the Castilian Succession, near the coast at Elmina was fought a large battle between a Castilian armada of 35 caravels and a Portuguese fleet for hegemony of the Guinea trade (gold, slaves, ivory, and melegueta pepper). The war ended with a Portuguese naval victory followed by the official recognition by the Catholic Monarchs of Portuguese sovereignty over most of the disputed West African territories embodied in the Treaty of Alcáçovas, 1479. This was the first colonial war among European powers.
In 1481, the recently crowned João II decided to build São Jorge da Mina factory.
In 1482 the Congo River was explored by Diogo Cão, who in 1486 continued to Cape Cross (modern Namibia).
Replica of caravel ship introduced in the mid-15th century for oceanic exploration
The next crucial breakthrough was in 1488, when Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa, which he named "Cape of Storms" (Cabo das Tormentas), anchoring at Mossel Bay and then sailing east as far as the mouth of the Great Fish River, proving that the Indian Ocean was accessible from the Atlantic.
Simultaneously Pêro da Covilhã, sent out travelling secretly overland, had reached Ethiopia having collected important information about the Red Sea and Quenia coast, suggesting that a sea route to the Indies would soon be forthcoming.
Soon the cape was renamed by King John II of Portugal the "Cape of Good Hope" (Cabo da Boa Esperança), because of the great optimism engendered by the possibility of a sea route to India, proving false the view that had existed since Ptolemy that the Indian Ocean was land-locked.
Based on much later stories of the phantom island known as Bacalao and the carvings on Dighton Rock some have speculated that Portuguese explorer João Vaz Corte-Real discovered Newfoundland in 1473, but the sources cited are considered by mainstream historians to be unreliable and unconvincing.
Spanish exploration: Columbus's landfall in the Americas
See also: Voyages of Christopher Columbus and Spanish colonization of the Americas
The four voyages of Christopher Columbus 1492–1503
Portugal's Iberian rival, Castile, had begun to establish its rule over the Canary Islands, located off the west African coast, in 1402, but then became distracted by internal Iberian politics and the repelling of Islamic invasion attempts and raids through most of the 15th century.
Only late in the century, following the unification of the crowns of Castile and Aragon did an emerging modern Spain become fully committed to the search for new trade routes overseas.
The Crown of Aragon had been an important maritime potentate in the Mediterranean, controlling territories in eastern Spain, southwestern France, major islands like Sicily, Malta, and the Kingdom of Naples and Sardinia, with mainland possessions as far as Greece.
In 1492 the joint rulers conquered the Moorish kingdom of Granada, which had been providing Castile with African goods through tribute, and decided to fund Christopher Columbus's expedition in the hope of bypassing Portugal's monopoly on west African sea routes, to reach "the Indies" (east and south Asia) by travelling west.
Twice before, in 1485 and 1488, Columbus had presented the project to king John II of Portugal, who rejected it.
On the evening of 3 August 1492, Columbus departed from Palos de la Frontera with three ships; one larger carrack, Santa María, nicknamed Gallega (the Galician), and two smaller caravels, Pinta (the Painted) and Santa Clara, nicknamed Niña.
Columbus first sailed to the Canary Islands, where he restocked for what turned out to be a five-week voyage across the ocean, crossing a section of the Atlantic that became known as the Sargasso Sea.
Land was sighted on 12 October 1492, and Columbus called the island (one of the islands now comprising The Bahamas – but which one is disputed) San Salvador, in what he thought to be the "East Indies". Columbus also explored the northeast coast of Cuba (landed on 28 October) and the northern coast of Hispaniola, by 5 December.
He was received by the native cacique Guacanagari, who gave him permission to leave some of his men behind.
Replicas of Niña, Pinta and Santa María at Palos de la Frontera, Spain Columbus left 39 men and founded the settlement of La Navidad in what is now Haiti.
Before returning to Spain, he kidnapped some ten to twenty-five natives and took them back with him.
Only seven or eight of the native 'Indians' arrived in Spain alive, but they made quite an impression on Seville.
On the return, a storm forced him to dock in Lisbon, on 4 March 1493. After a week in Portugal, he set sail for Spain and on 15 March 1493 arrived in Barcelona, where he reported to Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand.
Word of his discovery of new lands rapidly spread throughout Europe.
Columbus and other Spanish explorers were initially disappointed with their discoveries—unlike Africa or Asia, the Caribbean islanders had little to trade with the Castilian ships.
The islands thus became the focus of colonization efforts.
It was not until the continent itself was explored that Spain found the wealth it had sought.
Treaty of Tordesillas (1494)
Main article: Treaty of Tordesillas
The 1494 Tordesilhas Treaty meridian (purple) and the later Maluku Islands antimeridian (green), set at the Treaty of Zaragoza (1529)
Shortly after Columbus's return from what would later be called the "West Indies", a division of influence became necessary to avoid conflict between the Spanish and Portuguese.
On 4 May 1493, two months after Columbus's arrival, the Catholic Monarchs received a bull (Inter caetera) from Pope Alexander VI stating that all lands west and south of a pole-to-pole line 100 leagues west and south of the Azores or the Cape Verde Islands should belong to Castile and, later, all mainlands and islands then belonging to India.
It did not mention Portugal, which could not claim newly discovered lands east of the line.
King John II of Portugal was not pleased with the arrangement, feeling that it gave him far too little land—preventing him from reaching India, his main goal.
He then negotiated directly with King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain to move the line west, and allowing him to claim newly discovered lands east of it.
An agreement was reached in 1494, with the Treaty of Tordesillas that divided the world between the two powers.
In this treaty the Portuguese received everything outside Europe east of a line that ran 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde islands (already Portuguese), and the islands discovered by Christopher Columbus on his first voyage (claimed for Castile), named in the treaty as Cipangu and Antilia (Cuba and Hispaniola). This gave them control over Africa, Asia and eastern South America (Brazil). The Spanish (Castile) received everything west of this line.
At the time of negotiation, the treaty split the known world of Atlantic islands roughly in half, with the dividing line about halfway between Portuguese Cape Verde and the Spanish discoveries in the Caribbean.
Pedro Álvares Cabral encountered in 1500 what is now known as the Brazilian coast, originally thought to be a large island.  Since it was east of the dividing line, he claimed it for Portugal and this was respected by the Spanish.  Portuguese ships sailed west into the Atlantic to get favourable winds for the journey to India, and this is where Cabral was headed on his journey, in a corridor the treaty was negotiated to protect.  Some suspect the Portuguese had secretly discovered Brazil earlier, and this is why they had the line moved eastward and how Cabral found it, but there is no reliable evidence of this.  Others suspect Duarte Pacheco Pereira secretly discovered Brazil in 1498, but this is not considered credible by mainstream historians.
Later the Spanish territory would prove to include huge areas of the continental mainland of North and South America, though Portuguese-controlled Brazil would expand across the line, and settlements by other European powers ignored the treaty.
The Americas: The New World
Detail of 1507 Waldseemüller map showing the name "America" for the first time.
Very little of the divided area had actually been seen by Europeans, as it was only divided by a geographical definition rather than control on the ground.
Columbus's first voyage in 1492 spurred maritime exploration and, from 1497, a number of explorers headed west.
North America
That year John Cabot, also a commissioned Italian, got letters patent from King Henry VII of England.
Sailing from Bristol, probably backed by the local Society of Merchant Venturers, Cabot crossed the Atlantic from a northerly latitude hoping the voyage to the "West Indies" would be shorter and made a landfall somewhere in North America, possibly Newfoundland.
In 1499 João Fernandes Lavrador was licensed by the King of Portugal and together with Pêro de Barcelos they first sighted Labrador, which was granted and named after him.
After returning he possibly went to Bristol to sail in the name of England.
Nearly at the same time, between 1499 and 1502 brothers Gaspar and Miguel Corte Real explored and named the coasts of Greenland and also Newfoundland.
Both explorations are noted in the 1502 Cantino planisphere.
The "True Indies" and Brazil
In 1497, newly crowned King Manuel I of Portugal sent an exploratory fleet eastwards, fulfilling his predecessor's project of finding a route to the Indies.
In July 1499 news spread that the Portuguese had reached the "true indies", as a letter was dispatched by the Portuguese king to the Spanish Catholic Monarchs one day after the celebrated return of the fleet.
The third expedition by Columbus in 1498 was the beginning of the first successful Castilian (Spanish) colonization in the West Indies, on the island of Hispaniola.
Despite growing doubts, Columbus refused to accept that he had not reached the Indies.
During the voyage he discovered the mouth of the Orinoco River on the north coast of South America (now Venezuela) and thought that the huge quantity of fresh water coming from it could only be from a continental land mass, which he was certain was the Asian mainland.
As shipping between Seville and the West Indies grew, knowledge of the Caribbean islands, Central America and the northern coast of South America grew.
One of these Spanish fleets, that of Alonso de Ojeda and Amerigo Vespucci in 1499–1500, reached land at the coast of what is now Guyana, when the two explorers seem to have separated in opposite directions.
Vespucci sailed southward, discovering the mouth of the Amazon River in July 1499, and reaching 6°S, in present-day north east Brazil, before turning around.
In the beginning of 1500, Vicente Yáñez Pinzon was blown off course by a storm and reached what is now the north east coast of Brazil on 26 January 1500, exploring as far south as the present-day state of Pernambuco.
His fleet was the first to fully enter the Amazon River estuary which he named Río Santa María de la Mar Dulce (Saint Mary's River of the Freshwater Sea). However, the land was too far east for the Castilians to claim under the Treaty of Tordesillas, but the discovery created Castilian (Spanish) interest, with a second voyage by Pinzon in 1508 (an expedition that coasted the northern coast to the Central American coastal mainland, in search of a passage to the East) and a voyage in 1515–16 by a navigator of the 1508 expedition, Juan Díaz de Solís.
The 1515–16 expedition was spurred on by reports of Portuguese exploration of the region (see below). It ended when de Solís and some of his crew disappeared when exploring a River Plate in a boat, but what it found re-ignited Spanish interest, and colonization began in 1531.
In April 1500, the second Portuguese India Armada, headed by Pedro Álvares Cabral, with a crew of expert captains, including Bartolomeu Dias and Nicolau Coelho, encountered the Brazilian coast as it swung westward in the Atlantic while performing a large "volta do mar" to avoid becalming in the Gulf of Guinea.
On 21 April 1500 a mountain was seen and was named Monte Pascoal, and on 22 April Cabral landed on the coast.
On 25 April the entire fleet sailed into the harbour they named Porto Seguro (Port Secure). Cabral perceived that the new land lay east of the line of Tordesillas, and sent an envoy to Portugal with the discovery in letters, including the letter of Pero Vaz de Caminha.
Believing the land to be an island, he named it Ilha de Vera Cruz (Island of the True Cross). Some historians have suggested that the Portuguese may have encountered the South American bulge earlier while sailing the "volta do mar", hence the insistence of John II in moving the line west of Tordesillas in 1494—so his landing in Brazil may not have been an accident; although John's motivation may have simply been to increase the chance of claiming new lands in the Atlantic.
From the east coast, the fleet then turned eastward to resume the journey to the southern tip of Africa and India.
Cabral was the first captain to touch four continents, leading the first expedition that connected and united Europe, Africa, the New World, and Asia.
At the invitation of King Manuel I of Portugal, Amerigo Vespucci—a Florentine who had been working for a branch of the Medici Bank in Seville since 1491, fitting oceanic expeditions and travelling twice to The Guianas with Juan de la Cosa in the service of Spain—participated as observer in these exploratory voyages to the east coast of South America.
The expeditions became widely known in Europe after two accounts attributed to him, published between 1502 and 1504, suggested that the newly discovered lands were not the Indies but a "New World", the Mundus novus; this is also the Latin title of a contemporary document based on Vespucci letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, which had become widely popular in Europe.
It was soon understood that Columbus had not reached Asia but had found a new continent, the Americas.
The Americas were named in 1507 by cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann, probably after Amerigo Vespucci.
From 1501 to 1502, one of these Portuguese expeditions, led by Gonçalo Coelho (and/or André Gonçalves or Gaspar de Lemos), sailed south along the coast of South America to the bay of present-day Rio de Janeiro.
Amerigo Vespucci's account states that the expedition reached the latitude "South Pole elevation 52° S", in the "cold" latitudes of what is now southern Patagonia (possibly near the Strait), before turning back.
Vespucci wrote that they headed toward the southwest and south, following "a long, unbending coastline" (apparently coincident with the southern South American coast). This seems controversial, since he changed part of his description in the subsequent letter, stating a shift, from about 32° S (Southern Brazil), to south-southeast, to open sea; maintaining, however, that they reached 50°/52° S (if it was by his own decision or by D. Manuel's censors who had to pressure him to alter his account, because he had revealed far too much to Lorenzo de' Medici and into the public domain, is unknown).
In 1503, Binot Paulmier de Gonneville, challenging the Portuguese policy of mare clausum, led one of the earliest French Normand and Breton expeditions to Brazil.
He intended to sail to the East Indies, but near the Cape of Good Hope his ship was diverted to west by a storm, and landed in the present day state of Santa Catarina (southern Brazil), on 5 January 1504.
Americae Sive Quartae Orbis Partis Nova Et Exactissima Descriptio by Diego Gutiérrez, the largest map of the Americas until the 17th century, and the first map to use the name "California". British Library, London.
From 1511 to 1512, Portuguese captains João de Lisboa and Estevão de Fróis reached the River Plate estuary in present-day Uruguay and Argentina, and went as far south as the present-day Gulf of San Matias at 42°S (recorded in the Newen Zeytung auss Pressilandt meaning "New Tidings from the Land of Brazil"). The expedition reached a cape extending north to south which they called Cape of "Santa Maria" (Punta del Este, keeping the name the Cape nearby); and after 40°S they found a "Cape" or "a point or place extending into the sea", and a "Gulf" (in June and July). After they had navigated for nearly 300 km (186 mi) to round the cape, they again sighted the continent on the other side, and steered towards the northwest, but a storm prevented them from making any headway.
Driven away by the Tramontane or north wind, they retraced their course.
Also gives the first news of the White King and the "people of the mountains" to the interior (the Inca Empire), and a gift, an ax of silver, obtained from the Charrúa natives on their return ("to the coast or side of Brazil"), and "to West" (along the coast and the River Plate estuary), and offered to King Manuel I. Christopher de Haro, a Flemish of Sephardic origin (one of the financiers of the expedition along with D. Nuno Manuel), who would serve the Spanish Crown after 1516, believed that the navigators had discovered a southern strait to west and Asia.
In 1519, an expedition sent by the Spanish Crown to find a way to Asia was led by the experienced Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan.
The fleet explored the rivers and bays as it charted the South American coast until it found a way to the Pacific Ocean through the Strait of Magellan.
From 1524 to 1525, Aleixo Garcia, a Portuguese conquistador (possibly a veteran of the Solís expedition of 1516), led a private expedition of a few shipwrecked Castilian and Portuguese adventurers, that recruited about 2000 Guaraní Indians.
They explored the territories of present-day southern Brazil, Paraguay and Bolivia, using the native trail network, the Peabiru.
They were also the first Europeans to cross the Chaco and reach the outer territories of the Inca Empire on the hills of the Andes, near Sucre.
Indian Ocean (1497–1513)
Vasco da Gama's route to India
See also: Portuguese India Armadas
Vasco da Gama's 1497–1499 travel to India (black). Previous travels of Pêro da Covilhã (orange) and Afonso de Paiva (blue), and their common route (green)
Protected from direct Spanish competition by the treaty of Tordesillas, Portuguese eastward exploration and colonization continued apace.
Twice, in 1485 and 1488, Portugal officially rejected Genoese Christopher Columbus's idea of reaching India by sailing westwards.
King John II of Portugal's experts rejected it, for they held the opinion that Columbus's estimation of a travel distance of 2,400 miles (3,860 km) was low, and in part because Bartolomeu Dias departed in 1487 trying the rounding of the southern tip of Africa.
They believed that sailing east would require a far shorter journey.
Dias's return from the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, and Pêro da Covilhã's travel to Ethiopia overland indicated that the richness of the Indian Ocean was accessible from the Atlantic.
A long-overdue expedition was prepared.
Outward and return voyages of the Portuguese India Armadas in the Atlantic and the Indian oceans, with the North Atlantic Gyre (Volta do mar) picked up by Henry's navigators, and the outward route of the South Atlantic westerlies that Bartolomeu Dias discovered in 1488, followed and explored by the expeditions of Vasco da Gama and Pedro Alvares Cabral
In July 1497, a small exploratory fleet of four ships and about 170 men left Lisbon under the command of Vasco da Gama.
By December the fleet passed the Great Fish River—where Dias had turned back—and sailed into waters unknown to the Europeans.
Sailing into the Indian Ocean, da Gama entered a maritime region that had three different and well-developed trade circuits.
The one da Gama encountered connected Mogadishu on the east coast of Africa; Aden, at the tip of the Arabian peninsula; the Persian port of Hormuz; Cambay, in north eastern India; and Calicut, in southeastern India.
On 20 May 1498, they arrived at Calicut.
The efforts of Vasco da Gama to get favorable trading conditions were hampered by the low value of their goods, compared with the valuable goods traded there.[page needed] Two years and two days after departure, Gama and a survivor crew of 55 men returned in glory to Portugal as the first ships to sail directly from Europe to India.
Da Gama's voyage is romanticized in the Lusiads.
An epic poem by fellow discovery era traveler Luís de Camões.
The poem is widely regarded as  Portugal's greatest literary achievement.
In 1500, a second, larger fleet of thirteen ships and about 1500 men were sent to India.
Under command of Pedro Álvares Cabral, they made the first landfall on the Brazilian coast, giving Portugal its claim.
Later, in the Indian Ocean, one of Cabral's ships reached Madagascar (1501), which was partly explored by Tristão da Cunha in 1507; Mauritius was discovered in 1507, Socotra occupied in 1506. In the same year Lourenço de Almeida landed in Sri Lanka, the eastern island named "Taprobane" in remote accounts of Alexander the Great's and 4th-century BC Greek geographer Megasthenes.
On the Asiatic mainland the first factories (trading-posts) were established at Kochi and Calicut (1501) and then Goa (1510).
The "Spice Islands" and China
Replica of Flor de la Mar carrack housing the Maritime Museum of Malacca in Malaysia.
The Portuguese continued sailing eastward from India, entering a second existing circuit of the Indian Ocean trade, from Calicut and Quillon in India, to southeast Asia, including Malacca, and Palembang.
In 1511, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Malacca for Portugal, then the center of Asian trade.
East of Malacca, Albuquerque sent several diplomatic missions: Duarte Fernandes as the first European envoy to the Kingdom of Siam (modern Thailand).
Learning the location of the so-called "spice islands", heretofore a secret from the Europeans, were the Maluku Islands, mainly the Banda, then the world's only source of nutmeg and cloves.
Reaching these was the main purpose for the Portuguese voyages in the Indian Ocean.  Albuquerque sent an expedition led by António de Abreu to Banda (via Java and the Lesser Sunda Islands), where they were the first Europeans to arrive in early 1512, after taking a route through which they also reached first the islands of Buru, Ambon and Seram.
From Banda Abreu returned to Malacca, while his vice-captain Francisco Serrão, after a separation forced by a shipwreck and heading north, reached once again Ambon and sank off Ternate, where he obtained a license to build a Portuguese fortress-factory: the Fort of São João Baptista de Ternate, which founded the Portuguese presence in the Malay Archipelago.
In May 1513 Jorge Álvares, one of the Portuguese envoys, reached China.
Although he was the first to land on Lintin Island in the Pearl River Delta, it was Rafael Perestrello—a cousin of the famed Christopher Columbus—who became the first European explorer to land on the southern coast of mainland China and trade in Guangzhou in 1516, commanding a Portuguese vessel with crew from a Malaccan junk that had sailed from Malacca.
Fernão Pires de Andrade visited Canton in 1517 and opened up trade with China.
The Portuguese were defeated by the Chinese in 1521 at the Battle of Tunmen and in 1522 at the Battle of Xicaowan, during which the Chinese captured Portuguese breech-loading swivel guns and reverse engineered the technology, calling them "Folangji" 佛郎機 (Frankish) guns, since the Portuguese were called "Folangji" by the Chinese.
After a few decades, hostilities between the Portuguese and Chinese ceased and in 1557 the Chinese allowed the Portuguese to occupy Macau.
To enforce a trade monopoly, Muscat, and Hormuz in the Persian Gulf, were seized by Afonso de Albuquerque in 1507 and in 1515, respectively.
He also entered into diplomatic relations with Persia.
In 1513 while trying to conquer Aden, an expedition led by Albuquerque cruised the Red Sea inside the Bab al-Mandab, and sheltered at Kamaran island.
In 1521, a force under António Correia conquered Bahrain, ushering in a period of almost eighty years of Portuguese rule of the Gulf archipelago.
In the Red Sea, Massawa was the most northerly point frequented by the Portuguese until 1541, when a fleet under Estevão da Gama penetrated as far as Suez.
Pacific Ocean (1513–1529)
Vasco Núñez de Balboa's travel to the "South Sea", 1513
Balboa's expedition to the Pacific Ocean
In 1513, about 40 miles (64 kilometres) south of Acandí, in present-day Colombia, Spanish Vasco Núñez de Balboa heard unexpected news of an "other sea" rich in gold, which he received with great interest.
With few resources and using information given by caciques, he journeyed across the Isthmus of Panama with 190 Spaniards, a few native guides, and a pack of dogs.
Using a small brigantine and ten native canoes, they sailed along the coast and made landfalls.
On September 6, the expedition was reinforced with 1,000 men, fought several battles, entered a dense jungle, and climbed the mountain range along the Chucunaque River from where this "other sea" could be seen.
Balboa went ahead and, before noon September 25, he saw on the horizon an undiscovered sea, becoming the first European to have seen or reached the Pacific from the New World.
The expedition descended towards the shore for a short reconnaissance trip, thus becoming the first Europeans to navigate the Pacific Ocean off the coast of the New World.
After travelling more than 110 km (68 mi), Balboa named the bay where they ended up San Miguel.
He named the new sea  Mar del Sur (South Sea) since they had traveled south to reach it.
Balboa's main purpose in the expedition was the search for gold-rich kingdoms.
To this end, he crossed through the lands of caciques to the islands, naming the largest one Isla Rica (Rich Island, today known as Isla del Rey). He named the entire group Archipiélago de las Perlas, which they still keep today.
Subsequent developments to the east
From 1515 to 1516, the Spanish fleet led by Juan Díaz de Solís sailed down the east coast of South America as far as Río de la Plata, which Solís named shortly before he died, while trying to find a passage to the "South Sea".
First circumnavigation
Main article: Magellan–Elcano circumnavigation
Route of Magellan-Elcano world circumnavigation (1519–1522)
By 1516, several Portuguese navigators conflicting with King Manuel I of Portugal, had gathered in Seville to serve the newly crowned Charles I of Spain.
Among them were explorers Diogo and Duarte Barbosa, Estêvão Gomes, João Serrão and Ferdinand Magellan, cartographers Jorge Reinel and Diogo Ribeiro, cosmographers Francisco and Ruy Faleiro and the Flemish merchant Christopher de Haro.
Ferdinand Magellan—who had sailed in India for Portugal up to 1513, when the Maluku Islands were reached, kept contact with Francisco Serrão living there—developed the theory that the islands were in the Tordesillas Spanish area, supported on studies by Faleiro brothers.
Aware of the efforts of the Spanish to find a route to India by sailing west, Magellan presented his plan to Charles I of Spain.
The king and Christopher de Haro financed Magellan's expedition.
A fleet was put together, and Spanish navigators such as Juan Sebastián Elcano joined the enterprise.
On August 10, 1519, they departed from Seville with a fleet of five ships—the flagship Trinidad under Magellan's command, San Antonio, Concepcion, Santiago and Victoria, the first being a caravel, and all others rated as carracks or "naus"—with a crew of about 237 European men from several regions, with the goal of reaching the Maluku Islands by travelling west, trying to reclaim it under Spain's economic and political sphere.
Victoria, the single ship to have completed the first world circumnavigation. (Detail from Maris Pacifici by Ortelius, 1589.)
The fleet sailed further and further south, avoiding the Portuguese territories in Brazil, and became the first to reach Tierra del Fuego at the tip of the Americas.
On October 21, starting in Cape Virgenes, they began an arduous trip through a 373-mile (600 km) long strait that Magellan named Estrecho de Todos los Santos, the modern Strait of Magellan.
On November 28, three ships entered the Pacific Ocean—then named Mar Pacífico because of its apparent stillness.
The expedition managed to cross the Pacific.
Magellan died in the battle of Mactan in the Philippines, leaving the Spaniard Juan Sebastián Elcano the task of completing the voyage, reaching the Spice Islands in 1521. On September 6, 1522 Victoria returned to Spain, thus completing the first circumnavigation of the globe.
Of the men who set out on five ships, only 18 completed the circumnavigation and managed to return to Spain in this single vessel led by Elcano.
Seventeen others arrived later in Spain: twelve captured by the Portuguese in Cape Verde some weeks earlier, and between 1525 and 1527, and five survivors of the Trinidad.
Antonio Pigafetta, a Venetian scholar and traveller who had asked to be on board and become a strict assistant of Magellan, kept an accurate journal that become the main source for much of what we know about this voyage.
This round-the-world voyage gave Spain valuable knowledge of the world and its oceans which later helped in the exploration and settlement of the Philippines.
Although this was not a realistic alternative to the Portuguese route around Africa (the Strait of Magellan was too far south, and the Pacific Ocean too vast to cover in a single trip from Spain) successive Spanish expeditions used this information to explore the Pacific Ocean and discovered routes that opened up trade between Acapulco, New Spain (present-day Mexico) and Manila in the Philippines, Ferdinard Magellan was killed by a poisonous arrow during a skirmish.
Westward and eastward exploration meet
View from Ternate to Tidore islands in Maluku, where Portuguese eastward and Spanish westward explorations ultimately met and clashed between 1522 and 1529
Saavedra's failed attempts to find a return route from the Maluku to New Spain (Mexico) in 1529
Soon after Magellan's expedition, the Portuguese rushed to seize the surviving crew and built a fort in Ternate.
In 1525, Charles I of Spain sent another expedition westward to colonize the Maluku Islands, claiming that they were in his zone of the Treaty of Tordesillas.
The fleet of seven ships and 450 men was led by García Jofre de Loaísa and included the most notable Spanish navigators: Juan Sebastián Elcano and Loaísa, who lost their lives then, and the young Andrés de Urdaneta.
Near the Strait of Magellan one of the ships was pushed south by a storm, reaching 56° S, where they thought seeing "earth's end": so Cape Horn was crossed for the first time.
The expedition reached the islands with great difficulty, docking at Tidore.
The conflict with the Portuguese established in nearby Ternate was inevitable, starting nearly a decade of skirmishes.
As there was not a set eastern limit to the Tordesillas line, both kingdoms organized meetings to resolve the issue.
From 1524 to 1529, Portuguese and Spanish experts met at Badajoz-Elvas trying to find the exact location of the antimeridian of Tordesillas, which would divide the world into two equal hemispheres.
Each crown appointed three astronomers and cartographers, three pilots and three mathematicians.
Lopo Homem, Portuguese cartographer and cosmographer was in the board, along with cartographer Diogo Ribeiro on the Spanish delegation.
The board met several times, without reaching an agreement: the knowledge at that time was insufficient for an accurate calculation of longitude, and each group gave the islands to its sovereign.
The issue was settled only in 1529, after a long negotiation, with the signing of Treaty of Zaragoza, that attributed the Maluku Islands to Portugal and the Philippines to Spain.
Between 1525 and 1528, Portugal sent several expeditions around the Maluku Islands.
Gomes de Sequeira and Diogo da Rocha were sent north by the governor of Ternate Jorge de Menezes, being the first Europeans to reach the Caroline Islands, which they named "Islands de Sequeira". In 1526, Jorge de Meneses docked on Biak and Waigeo islands, Papua New Guinea.
Based on these explorations stands the theory of Portuguese discovery of Australia, one among several competing theories about the early discovery of Australia, supported by Australian historian Kenneth McIntyre, stating it was discovered by Cristóvão de Mendonça and Gomes de Sequeira.
In 1527, Hernán Cortés fitted out a fleet to find new lands in the "South Sea" (Pacific Ocean), asking his cousin Álvaro de Saavedra Cerón to take charge.
On 31 October 1527, Saavedra sailed from New Spain, crossing the Pacific and touring the north of New Guinea, then named Isla de Oro.
In October 1528, one of the vessels reached the Maluku Islands.
In his attempt to return to New Spain he was diverted by the northeast trade winds, which threw him back, so he tried sailing back down, to the south.
He returned to New Guinea and sailed northeast, where he sighted the Marshall Islands and the Admiralty Islands, but again was surprised by the winds, which brought him a third time to the Moluccas.
This westbound return route was hard to find, but was eventually discovered by Andrés de Urdaneta in 1565.
Inland Spanish expeditions (1519–1532)
Rumors of undiscovered islands northwest of Hispaniola had reached Spain by 1511 and King Ferdinand II of Aragon was interested in forestalling further exploration.
While Portuguese were making huge gains in the Indian Ocean, the Spanish invested in exploring inland in search of gold and other valuable resources.
The members of these expeditions, the "conquistadors", were not soldiers in an army, but more like soldiers of fortune; they came from a variety of backgrounds including artisans, merchants, clergy, lawyers, lesser nobility and a few freed slaves.
They usually supplied their own equipment or were extended credit to purchase it in exchange for a share in profits.  They usually had no professional military training, but a number of them had previous experience on other expeditions.
On the mainland of the Americas the Spanish encountered indigenous empires that were as large and populous as those in Europe.
Relatively small expeditions of conquistadors, made alliances with indigenous allies, which had grievances and against the main power of an empire.
Once Spanish sovereignty was established, and a major source of wealth established, the Spanish crown focused on the replication of institutions of state and church in Spain, now in America.
An early key element was the so-called "spiritual conquest" of indigenous through Christian evangelization.  The initial economy of newly conquer with Spanish conquerors receiving tribute goods and forced labor of the indigenous in an arrangement called the encomienda.  Once major sources of wealth were found in the form of vast deposits of silver, not only the colonial economies of Mexico and Peru were transformed, but so too was the European economy.  The Spanish Empire was transformed into a great world power.
Global trade networks were establish that included high value crops from the Americas, but with silver from Spanish America becoming the motor of the world economy.
During this time, pandemics of European disease such as smallpox decimated the indigenous populations.
In 1512, to reward Juan Ponce de León for exploring Puerto Rico in 1508, king Ferdinand urged him to seek these new lands.
He would become governor of discovered lands, but was to finance himself all exploration.
With three ships and about 200 men, Léon set out from Puerto Rico in March 1513. In April they sighted land and named it La Florida—because it was Easter (Florida) season—believing it was an island, becoming credited as the first European to land in the continent.
The arrival location has been disputed between St.
Augustine, Ponce de León Inlet and Melbourne Beach.
They headed south for further exploration and on April 8 encountered a current so strong that it pushed them backwards: this was the first encounter with the Gulf Stream that would soon become the primary route for eastbound ships leaving the Spanish Indies bound for Europe.
They explored down the coast reaching Biscayne Bay, Dry Tortugas and then sailing southwest in an attempt to circle Cuba to return, reaching Grand Bahama on July.
Cortés' Mexico and the Aztec Empire
Main article: Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire
See also: Spanish conquest of Yucatán and Spanish conquest of Guatemala
Route of Cortés inland progress 1519–1521
In 1517, Cuba's governor Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar commissioned a fleet under the command of Hernández de Córdoba to explore the Yucatán peninsula.
They reached the coast where Mayans invited them to land.
They were attacked at night and only a remnant of the crew returned.
Velázquez then commissioned another expedition led by his nephew Juan de Grijalva, who sailed south along the coast to Tabasco, part of the Aztec empire.
In 1518, Velázquez gave the mayor of the capital of Cuba, Hernán Cortés, the command of an expedition to secure the interior of Mexico but, due to an old gripe between them, revoked the charter.
In February 1519, Cortés went ahead anyway, in an act of open mutiny.
With about 11 ships, 500 men, 13 horses and a small number of cannons he landed in Yucatán, in Mayan territory, claiming the land for the Spanish crown.
From Trinidad he proceeded to Tabasco and won a battle against the natives.
Among the vanquished was Marina (La Malinche), his future mistress, who knew both (Aztec) Nahuatl language and Maya, becoming a valuable interpreter and counsellor.
Cortés learned about the wealthy Aztec Empire through La Malinche,
In July, his men took over Veracruz and he placed himself under direct orders of new king Charles I of Spain.
There Cortés asked for a meeting with Aztec Emperor Montezuma II, who repeatedly refused.
They headed to Tenochtitlan and on the way made alliances with several tribes.
In October, accompanied by about 3,000 Tlaxcaltec they marched to Cholula, the second largest city in central Mexico.
Either to instill fear upon the Aztecs waiting for him or (as he later claimed) wishing to make an example when he feared native treachery, they massacred thousands of unarmed members of the nobility gathered at the central plaza and partially burned the city.
Map of the island city Tenochtitlán and Mexico gulf made by one of Cortés' men, 1524, Newberry Library, Chicago
Arriving in Tenochtitlan with a large army, on November 8 they were peacefully received by Moctezuma II, who deliberately let Cortés enter the heart of the Aztec Empire, hoping to know them better to crush them later.
The emperor gave them lavish gifts in gold which enticed them to plunder vast amounts.
In his letters to King Charles, Cortés claimed to have learned then that he was considered by the Aztecs to be either an emissary of the feathered serpent god Quetzalcoatl or Quetzalcoatl himself – a belief contested by a few modern historians.
But he soon learned that his men on the coast had been attacked, and decided to hostage Moctezuma in his palace, demanding a ransom as tribute to King Charles.
Meanwhile, Velasquez sent another expedition, led by Pánfilo de Narváez, to oppose Cortès, arriving in Mexico in April 1520 with 1,100 men.
Cortés left 200 men in Tenochtitlan and took the rest to confront Narvaez, whom he overcame, convincing his men to join him.
In Tenochtitlán one of Cortés's lieutenants committed a massacre in the Great Temple, triggering local rebellion.
Cortés speedily returned, attempting the support of Moctezuma but the Aztec emperor was killed, possibly stoned by his subjects.
The Spanish fled for the Tlaxcaltec during the Noche Triste, where they managed a narrow escape while their back guard was massacred.
Much of the treasure looted was lost during this panicked escape.
After a battle in Otumba they reached Tlaxcala, having lost 870 men.
Having prevailed with the assistance of allies and reinforcements from Cuba, Cortés besieged Tenochtitlán and captured its ruler Cuauhtémoc in August 1521. As the Aztec Empire ended he claimed the city for Spain, renaming it Mexico City.
Pizarro's Peru and the Inca Empire
Main article: Spanish conquest of Peru
Francisco Pizarro's route of exploration during the conquest of Peru (1531–1533)
A first attempt to explore western South America was undertaken in 1522 by Pascual de Andagoya.
Native South Americans told him about a gold-rich territory on a river called Pirú. Having reached San Juan River (Colombia), Andagoya fell ill and returned to Panama, where he spread news about "Pirú" as the legendary El Dorado.
These, along with the accounts of success of Hernán Cortés, caught the attention of Pizarro.
Francisco Pizarro had accompanied Balboa in the crossing of the Isthmus of Panama.
In 1524 he formed a partnership with priest Hernando de Luque and soldier Diego de Almagro to explore the south, agreeing to divide the profits.
They dubbed the enterprise the "Empresa del Levante": Pizarro would command, Almagro would provide military and food supplies, and Luque would be in charge of finances and additional provisions.
On 13 September 1524, the first of three expeditions left to conquer Peru with about 80 men and 40 horses.
The expedition was a failure, reaching no farther than Colombia before succumbing to bad weather, hunger and skirmishes with hostile locals, where Almagro lost an eye.
The place names bestowed along their route, Puerto deseado (desired port), Puerto del hambre (port of hunger) and Puerto quemado (burned port), attest to the difficulties of their journey.
Two years later they began a second expedition with reluctant permission from the Governor of Panama.
In August 1526, they left with two ships, 160 men and several horses.
Upon reaching San Juan River they separated, Pizarro staying to explore the swampy coasts and Almagro sent back for reinforcements.
Pizarro's main pilot sailed south and, after crossing the equator, captured a raft from Tumbes.
To his surprise, it carried textiles, ceramic and much-desired gold, silver, and emeralds, becoming the central focus of the expedition.
Soon Almagro joined with reinforcements and they resumed.
After a difficult voyage facing strong winds and currents, they reached Atacames where they found a large native population under Inca rule, but they did not land.
Pizarro remained safe near the coast, while Almagro and Luque went back for reinforcements with proof of the rumoured gold.
The new governor outright rejected a third expedition and ordered two ships to bring everyone back to Panama.
Almagro and Luque grasped the opportunity to join Pizarro.
When they arrived at the Isla de Gallo, Pizarro drew a line in the sand, saying: "There lies Peru with its riches; Here, Panama and its poverty.
Choose, each man, what best becomes a brave Castilian." Thirteen men decided to stay and became known as The Famous Thirteen.
They headed for La Isla Gorgona, where they remained for seven months before the arrival of provisions.
They decided to sail south and, by April 1528, reached the northwestern Peruvian Tumbes Region and were warmly received by local Tumpis.
Two of Pizarro's men reported incredible riches, including gold and silver decorations around the chief's house.
They saw for the first time a llama which Pizarro called "little camels". The natives named the Spanish "Children of the Sun" for their fair complexion and brilliant armours.
They decided then to return to Panama to prepare a final expedition.
Before leaving they sailed south through territories they named such as Cabo Blanco, port of Payta, Sechura, Punta de Aguja, Santa Cruz, and Trujillo, reaching the ninth degree south.
In the spring of 1528 Pizarro sailed for Spain, where he had an interview with king Charles I. The king heard of his expeditions in lands rich in gold and silver and promised to support him.
The Capitulación de Toledo authorized Pizarro to proceed with the conquest of Peru.
Pizarro was then able to convince many friends and relatives to join: his brothers Hernándo Pizarro, Juan Pizarro, Gonzalo Pizarro and also Francisco de Orellana, who would later explore the Amazon River, as well as his cousin Pedro Pizarro.
Pizarro's third and final expedition left Panama for Peru on 27 December 1530. With three ships and one hundred and eighty men they landed near Ecuador and sailed to Tumbes, finding the place destroyed.
They entered the interior and established the first Spanish settlement in Peru, San Miguel de Piura.
One of the men returned with an Incan envoy and an invitation for a meeting.
Since the last meeting, the Inca had begun a civil war and Atahualpa had been resting in northern Peru following the defeat of his brother Huáscar.
After marching for two months, they approached Atahualpa.
He refused the Spanish, however, saying he would "be no man's tributary." There were fewer than 200 Spanish to his 80,000 soldiers, but Pizarro attacked and won the Incan army in the Battle of Cajamarca, taking Atahualpa captive at the so-called ransom room.
Despite fulfilling his promise of filling one room with gold and two with silver, he was convicted for killing his brother and plotting against Pizarro, and was executed.
In 1533, Pizarro invaded Cuzco with indigenous troops and wrote to King Charles I: "This city is the greatest and the finest ever seen in this country or anywhere in the Indies ... it is so beautiful and has such fine buildings that it would be remarkable even in Spain." After the Spanish had sealed the conquest of Peru, Jauja in fertile Mantaro Valley was established as Peru's provisional capital, but it was too far up in the mountains, and Pizarro founded the city of Lima on 18 January 1535, which Pizarro considered one of the most important acts in his life.
Major new trade routes (1542–1565)
Portuguese trade routes (blue) and the rival Manila-Acapulco galleons trade routes (white) established in 1568
In 1543, three Portuguese traders accidentally became the first Westerners to reach and trade with Japan.
According to Fernão Mendes Pinto, who claimed to be in this journey, they arrived at Tanegashima, where the locals were impressed by firearms that would be immediately made by the Japanese on a large scale.
The Spanish conquest of the Philippines was ordered by Philip II of Spain, and Andrés de Urdaneta was the designated commander.
Urdaneta agreed to accompany the expedition but refused to command and Miguel López de Legazpi was appointed instead.
The expedition set sail on November 1564. After spending some time on the islands, Legazpi sent Urdaneta back to find a better return route.
Urdaneta set sail from San Miguel on the island of Cebu on 1 June 1565, but was obliged to sail as far as 38 degrees North latitude to obtain favorable winds.
Portuguese carrack in Nagasaki, Nanban art attributed to Kanō Naizen, 1570–1616 Japan
He reasoned that the trade winds of the Pacific might move in a gyre as the Atlantic winds did.
If in the Atlantic, ships made the Volta do mar to pick up winds that would bring them back from Madeira, then, he reasoned, by sailing far to the north before heading east, he would pick up trade winds to bring him back to North America.
His hunch paid off, and he hit the coast near Cape Mendocino, California, then followed the coast south.
The ship reached the port of Acapulco, on 8 October 1565, having traveled 12,000 miles (19,312 kilometres) in 130 days.
Fourteen of his crew died; only Urdaneta and Felipe de Salcedo, nephew of López de Legazpi, had strength enough to cast the anchors.
Thus, a cross-Pacific Spanish route was established, between Mexico and the Philippines.
For a long time these routes were used by the Manila galleons, thereby creating a trade link joining China, the Americas, and Europe via the combined trans-Pacific and trans-Atlantic routes.
Northern European involvement (1595–17th century)
In 1570 (May 20) Gilles Coppens de Diest at Antwerp published 53 maps created by Abraham Ortelius under the title Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, considered the "first modern atlas". Three Latin editions of this (besides a Dutch, a French and a German edition) appeared before the end of 1572; the atlas continued to be in demand till about 1612. This is the world map from this atlas.
European nations outside Iberia did not recognize the Treaty of Tordesillas between Portugal and Castile, nor did they recognize Pope Alexander VI's donation of the Spanish finds in the New World.
France, the Netherlands and England each had a long maritime tradition and had been engaging in privateering.
Despite Iberian protections, the new technologies and maps soon made their way north.
After the marriage of Henry VIII of England and Catherine of Aragon failed to produce a male heir and Henry failed to obtain a papal dispensation to annul his marriage, he broke with the Roman Catholic Church and established himself as head of the Church of England.
This added religious conflict to political conflict.
When much of The Netherlands became Protestant, it sought political and religious independence from Catholic Spain.
In 1568, the Dutch rebelled against the rule of Philip II of Spain leading to the Eighty Years' War.
War between England and Spain also broke out.
In 1580, Philip II became King of Portugal, as heir to its Crown.
Although he ruled Portugal and its empire as separate from the Spanish Empire, the union of the crowns produced a Catholic superpower, which England and the Netherlands challenged.
In the eighty year Dutch war of independence, Philip's troops conquered the important trading cities of Bruges and Ghent.
Antwerp, then the most important port in the world, fell in 1585.[citation needed] The Protestant population was given two years to settle affairs before leaving the city.
Many settled in Amsterdam.
Those were mainly skilled craftsmen, rich merchants of the port cities and refugees that fled religious persecution, particularly Sephardi Jews from Portugal and Spain and, later, the Huguenots from France.
The Pilgrim Fathers also spent time there before going to the New World.
This mass immigration was an important driving force: a small port in 1585, Amsterdam quickly transformed into one of the most important commercial centres in the world.
After the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, there was a huge expansion of maritime trade even though the defeat of the English Armada would confirm the naval supremacy of the Spanish navy over the emergent competitors.
The emergence of Dutch maritime power was swift and remarkable: for years Dutch sailors had participated in Portuguese voyages to the east, as able seafarers and keen mapmakers.
In 1592, Cornelis de Houtman was sent by Dutch merchants to Lisbon, to gather as much information as he could about the Spice Islands.
In 1595, merchant and explorer Jan Huyghen van Linschoten, having travelled widely in the Indian Ocean at the service of the Portuguese, published a travel report in Amsterdam, the "Reys-gheschrift vande navigatien der Portugaloysers in Orienten" ("Report of a journey through the navigations of the Portuguese in the East"). This included vast directions on how to navigate between Portugal and the East Indies and to Japan.
That same year Houtman followed this directions in the Dutch first exploratory travel that discovered a new sea route, sailing directly from Madagascar to Sunda Strait in Indonesia and signing a treaty with the Banten Sultan.
Another example of the Netherlands rise in maritime power is their seizure of Malacca from Portugal in 1641, which was led to by a long series of battles between the Dutch and the Portuguese; starting in 1602.
Dutch and British interest, fed on new information, led to a movement of commercial expansion, and the foundation of English (1600), and Dutch (1602) chartered companies.
Dutch, French, and English sent ships which flouted the Portuguese monopoly, concentrated mostly on the coastal areas, which proved unable to defend against such a vast and dispersed venture.
Exploring North America
Map of Henry Hudson's 1609–1611 voyages to North America for the Dutch East India Company (VOC)
The 1497 English expedition authorized by Henry VII of England was led by Italian Venetian John Cabot (Giovanni Caboto); it was the first of a series of French and English missions exploring North America.
Mariners from the Italian peninsula played an important role in early explorations, most especially Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus.
With its major conquests of central Mexico and Peru and discoveries of silver, Spain put limited efforts into exploring the northern part of the Americas; its resources were concentrated in Central and South America where more wealth had been found.
These other European expeditions were initially motivated by the same idea as Columbus, namely a westerly shortcut to the Asian mainland.
After the existence of "another ocean" (the Pacific) was confirmed by Balboa in 1513, there still remained the motivation of potentially finding an oceanic Northwest Passage to Asian trade.
This was not discovered until the early twentieth century, but other possibilities were found, although nothing on the scale of the spectacular ones of the Spanish.  In the early 17th century colonists from a number of Northern European states began to settle on the east coast of North America.
Between 1520 and 1521, the Portuguese João Álvares Fagundes, accompanied by couples of mainland Portugal and the Azores, explored Newfoundland and Nova Scotia (possibly reaching the Bay of Fundy on the Minas Basin), and established a fishing colony on the Cape Breton Island that would last until at least the 1570s or near the end of the century.
In 1524, Italian Giovanni da Verrazzano sailed under the authority of Francis I of France, who was motivated by indignation over the division of the world between Portuguese and Spanish.
Verrazzano explored the Atlantic Coast of North America, from South Carolina to Newfoundland, and was the first recorded European to visit what would later become the Virginia Colony and the United States.
In the same year Estevão Gomes, a Portuguese cartographer who had sailed in Ferdinand Magellan's fleet, explored Nova Scotia, sailing South through Maine, where he entered what is now New York Harbor, the Hudson River and eventually reached Florida in August 1525. As a result of his expedition, the 1529 Diogo Ribeiro world map outlines the East coast of North America almost perfectly.
From 1534 to 1536, French explorer Jacques Cartier, believed to have accompanied Verrazzano to Nova Scotia and Brazil, was the first European to travel inland in North America, describing the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, which he named "The Country of Canadas", after Iroquois names, claiming what is now Canada for Francis I of France.
Henry Hudson's ship Halve Maen in the Hudson River
Europeans explored the Pacific Coast beginning in the mid-16th century.
Spaniards Francisco de Ulloa explored the Pacific coast of present-day Mexico including the Gulf of California, proving that Baja California was a peninsula.
Despite his report based on first hand information, the myth persisted in Europe that California was an island.
His account provided the first recorded use of the name "California". João Rodrigues Cabrilho, a Portuguese navigator sailing for the Spanish Crown, was the first European to set foot in California, landing on September 28, 1542, on the shores of San Diego Bay and claiming California for Spain.
He also landed on San Miguel, one of the Channel Islands, and continued as far north as Point Reyes on the mainland.
After his death the crew continued exploring as far north as Oregon.
The English privateer Francis Drake sailed along the coast in 1579 north of Cabrillo's landing site while circumnavigating the world.
Drake had a long and largely successful career attacking Spanish settlements in the Caribbean islands and the mainland, so that for the English, he was a great hero and fervent Protestant, but for the Spanish he was "a frightening monster." Drake played a major role in the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, but led an armada himself to the Spanish Caribbean that was unsuccessful in dislodging the Spanish.  On 5 June 1579, the ship briefly made first landfall at South Cove, Cape Arago, just south of Coos Bay, Oregon, and then sailed south while searching for a suitable harbor to repair his damaged ship.
On 17 June, Drake and his crew found a protected cove when they landed on the Pacific coast of what is now Northern California near Point Reyes.
While ashore, he claimed the area for Queen Elizabeth I of England as Nova Albion or New Albion.
To document and assert his claim, Drake posted an engraved plate of brass to claim sovereignty for Queen Elizabeth and her successors on the throne.  Drake's landfalls on the west coast of North America are one small part of his 1577-1580 circumnavigation of the globe, the first captain of his own ship to do so.  Drake died in 1596 off the coast of Panama, following injuries from a raid.
Between 1609 and 1611, after several voyages on behalf of English merchants to explore a prospective Northeast Passage to India, English mariner Henry Hudson, under the auspices of the Dutch East India Company (VOC), explored the region around present-day New York City, while looking for a western route to Asia.
He explored the Hudson River and laid the foundation for Dutch colonization of the region.
Hudson's final expedition ranged farther north in search of the Northwest Passage, leading to his discovery of the Hudson Strait and Hudson Bay.
After wintering in James Bay, Hudson tried to press on with his voyage in the spring of 1611, but his crew mutinied and they cast him adrift.
Search for a northern route
Report in German of one of Martin Frobisher's arctic expeditions
France, the Netherlands, and England were left without a sea route to Asia, either via Africa or South America.
When it became apparent that there was no route through the heart of the Americas, attention turned to the possibility of a passage through northern waters.
The desire to establish such a route motivated much of the European exploration of the Arctic coasts of both North America and Russia.
In Russia the idea of a possible seaway connecting the Atlantic and the Pacific was first put forward by the diplomat Gerasimov in 1525, although Russian settlers on the coast of the White Sea, the Pomors, had been exploring parts of the route as early as the 11th century.
In 1553, English explorer Hugh Willoughby with chief pilot Richard Chancellor were sent out with three vessels in search of a passage by London's Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands.
During the voyage across the Barents Sea, Willoughby thought he saw islands to the north, and islands called Willoughby's Land were shown on maps published by Plancius and Mercator into the 1640s.
The vessels were separated by "terrible whirlwinds" in the Norwegian Sea and Willoughby sailed into a bay near the present border between Finland and Russia.
His ships with the frozen crews, including Captain Willoughby and his journal, were found by Russian fishermen a year later.
Richard Chancellor was able to drop anchor in the White Sea and make his way overland to Moscow and Ivan the Terrible's Court, opening trade with Russia and the Company of Merchant Adventurers became the Muscovy Company.
In June 1576, English mariner Martin Frobisher led an expedition consisting of three ships and 35 men to search for a north-west passage around North America.
The voyage was supported by the Muscovy Company, the same merchants that hired Hugh Willoughby to find a north-east passage above Russia.
Violent storms sank one ship and forced another to turn back but Frobisher and the remaining ship reached the coast of Labrador in July.
A few days later they came upon the mouth of what is now Frobisher Bay.
Frobisher believed it to be the entrance to a north-west passage and named it Frobisher's Strait and claimed Baffin Island for Queen Elizabeth.  After some preliminary exploration, Frobisher returned to England.
He commanded two subsequent voyages in 1577 and 1578, but failed to find the hoped-for passage.
Frobisher brought to England his ships laden with ore, but it was found to be worthless and damaged his reputation as an explorer.
He remains an important early historical figure in Canada.
Barentsz' Arctic exploration
1599 map of Arctic exploration by Willem Barentsz in his third voyage
On 5 June 1594, Dutch cartographer Willem Barentsz departed from Texel in a fleet of three ships to enter the Kara Sea, with the hopes of finding the Northeast Passage above Siberia.
At Williams Island the crew encountered a polar bear for the first time.
They managed to bring it on board, but the bear rampaged and was killed.
Barentsz reached the west coast of Novaya Zemlya and followed it northward, before being forced to turn back in the face of large icebergs.
The following year, Prince Maurice of Orange named him chief pilot of a new expedition of six ships, loaded with merchant wares that the Dutch hoped to trade with China.
The party came across Samoyed "wild men" but eventually turned back upon discovering the Kara Sea frozen.
In 1596, the States-General offered a high reward for anybody who successfully navigated the Northeast Passage.
The Town Council of Amsterdam purchased and outfitted two small ships, captained by Jan Rijp and Jacob van Heemskerk, to search for the elusive channel, under the command of Barents.
They set off on May, and on June discovered Bear Island and Spitsbergen, sighting its northwest coast.
They saw a large bay, later called Raudfjorden and entered Magdalenefjorden, which they named Tusk Bay, sailing into the northern entrance of Forlandsundet, which they called Keerwyck, but were forced to turn back because of a shoal.
On 28 June they rounded the northern point of Prins Karls Forland, which they named Vogelhoek, on account of the large number of birds, and sailed south, passing Isfjorden and Bellsund, which were labelled on Barentsz's chart as Grooten Inwyck and Inwyck.
Crew of Willem Barentsz fighting a polar bear
The ships once again reached Bear Island on 1 July, which led to a disagreement.
They parted ways, with Barentsz continuing northeast, while Rijp headed north.
Barentsz reached Novaya Zemlya and, to avoid becoming entrapped in ice, headed for the Vaigatch Strait but became stuck within the icebergs and floes.
Stranded, the 16-man crew was forced to spend the winter on the ice.
The crew used lumber from their ship to build a lodge they called Het Behouden Huys (The Kept House). Dealing with extreme cold, they used the merchant fabrics to make additional blankets and clothing and caught Arctic foxes in primitive traps, as well as polar bears.
When June arrived, and the ice had still not loosened its grip on the ship, scurvy-ridden survivors took two small boats out into the sea.
Barentsz died at sea on 20 June 1597, while studying charts.
It took seven more weeks for the boats to reach Kola where they were rescued by a Russian merchant vessel.
Only 12 crewmen remained, reaching Amsterdam in November.
Two of Barentsz' crewmembers later published their journals, Jan Huyghen van Linschoten, who had accompanied him on the first two voyages, and Gerrit de Veer who had acted as the ship's carpenter on the last.
In 1608, Henry Hudson made a second attempt, trying to go across the top of Russia.
He made it to Novaya Zemlya but was forced to turn back.
Between 1609 and 1611, Hudson, after several voyages on behalf of English merchants to explore a prospective Northern Sea Route to India, explored the region around modern New York City while looking for a western route to Asia under the auspices of the Dutch East India Company (VOC).
Dutch Australia and New Zealand
The route of Abel Tasman's 1642 and 1644 voyages in New Holland (Australia) in the service of the VOC (Dutch East India Company)
Terra Australis Ignota (Latin, "the unknown land of the south") was a hypothetical continent appearing on European maps from the 15th to the 18th centuries, with roots in a notion introduced by Aristotle.
It was depicted on the mid-16th-century Dieppe maps, where its coastline appeared just south of the islands of the East Indies; it was often elaborately charted, with a wealth of fictitious detail.
The discoveries reduced the area where the continent could be found; however, many cartographers held to Aristotle's opinion, like Gerardus Mercator (1569) and Alexander Dalrymple even so late as 1767 argued for its existence, with such arguments as that there should be a large landmass in the Southern Hemisphere as a counterweight to the known landmasses in the Northern Hemisphere.
As new lands were discovered, they were often assumed to be parts of this hypothetical continent.
Juan Fernández, sailing from Chile in 1576, claimed he had discovered the Southern Continent.
Luis Váez de Torres, a Galician navigator working for the Spanish Crown, proved the existence of a passage south of New Guinea, now known as Torres Strait.
Pedro Fernandes de Queirós, a Portuguese navigator sailing for the Spanish Crown, saw a large island south of New Guinea in 1606, which he named La Australia del Espiritu Santo.
He represented this to the King of Spain as the Terra Australis incognita.
In fact, it was not Australia but an island in present-day Vanuatu.
Duyfken replica, Swan River, Australia
Dutch navigator and colonial governor, Willem Janszoon sailed from the Netherlands for the East Indies for the third time on December 18, 1603, as captain of the Duyfken (or Duijfken, meaning "Little Dove"), one of twelve ships of the great fleet of Steven van der Hagen.
Once in the Indies, Janszoon was sent to search for other outlets of trade, particularly in "the great land of Nova Guinea and other East and Southlands." On November 18, 1605, the Duyfken sailed from Bantam to the coast of western New Guinea.
Janszoon then crossed the eastern end of the Arafura Sea, without seeing the Torres Strait, into the Gulf of Carpentaria.
On February 26, 1606, he made landfall at the Pennefather River on the western shore of Cape York in Queensland, near the modern town of Weipa.
This is the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent.
Janszoon proceeded to chart some 320 kilometres (199 miles) of the coastline, which he thought was a southerly extension of New Guinea.
In 1615, Jacob le Maire and Willem Schouten's rounding of Cape Horn proved that Tierra del Fuego was a relatively small island.
From 1642 to 1644, Abel Tasman, also a Dutch explorer and merchant in the service of the VOC, circumnavigated New Holland proving that Australia was not part of the mythical southern continent.
He was the first known European expedition to reach the islands of Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania) and New Zealand and to sight the Fiji islands, which he did in 1643. Tasman, his navigator Visscher, and his merchant Gilsemans also mapped substantial portions of Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific Islands.
Russian exploration of Siberia (1581–1660)
Main articles: Russian conquest of Siberia, Conquest of the Khanate of Sibir, Siberian River Routes, and List of Russian explorers
Siberian river routes were of primary significance in the process of exploration.
In the mid-16th century, the Tsardom of Russia conquered the Tatar khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan, thus annexing the entire Volga Region and opening the way to the Ural Mountains.
The colonization of the new easternmost lands of Russia and further onslaught eastward was led by the rich merchants Stroganovs.
Tsar Ivan IV granted vast estates near the Urals as well as tax privileges to Anikey Stroganov, who organized large scale migration to these lands.
Stroganovs developed farming, hunting, saltworks, fishing, and ore mining on the Urals and established trade with Siberian tribes.
Conquest of the Khanate of Sibir
Around 1577, Semyon Stroganov and other sons of Anikey Stroganov hired a Cossack leader called Yermak to protect their lands from the attacks of Siberian Khan Kuchum.
By 1580, Stroganovs and Yermak came up with the idea of a military expedition to Siberia, in order to fight Kuchum in his own land.
In 1581, Yermak began his voyage into the depths of Siberia.
After a few victories over the khan's army, Yermak's people defeated the main forces of Kuchum on Irtysh River in a 3-day Battle of Chuvash Cape in 1582. The remains of the khan's army retreated to the steppes, and thus Yermak captured the Siberia Khanate, including its capital Qashliq near modern Tobolsk.
Kuchum still was strong and suddenly attacked Yermak in 1585 in the dead of night, killing most of his people.
Yermak was wounded and tried to swim across the Wagay River (Irtysh's tributary), but drowned under the weight of his own chain mail.
The Cossacks had to withdraw from Siberia completely, but thanks to Yermak's having explored all the main river routes in West Siberia, Russians successfully reclaimed all his conquests just several years later.
Yermak Timofeyevich and his band of adventurers crossing the Ural Mountains at Tagil, entering Asia from Europe
Siberian river routes
In the early 17th century, the eastward movement of Russians was slowed by the internal problems in the country during the Time of Troubles.
However, very soon the exploration and colonization of the huge territories of Siberia was resumed, led mostly by Cossacks hunting for valuable furs and ivory.
While Cossacks came from the Southern Urals, another wave of Russians came by the Arctic Ocean.
These were Pomors from the Russian North, who already had been making fur trade with Mangazeya in the north of the Western Siberia for quite a long time.
In 1607, the settlement of Turukhansk was founded on the northern Yenisey River, near the mouth of Lower Tunguska.
In 1619, Yeniseysk ostrog was founded on the mid-Yenisey at the mouth of the Upper Tunguska.
Between 1620 and 1624, a group of fur hunters led by Demid Pyanda left Turukhansk and explored some 1,430 miles (2,301 kilometres) of the Lower Tunguska, wintering in the proximity of the Vilyuy and Lena Rivers.
According to later legendary accounts (folktales collected a century after the fact), Pyanda discovered the Lena.
He allegedly explored some 1,500 miles (2,414 kilometres) of its length, reaching as far as central Yakutia.
He returned up the Lena until it became too rocky and shallow, and portaged to the Angara River.
In this way, Pyanda may have become the first Russian to meet Yakuts and Buryats.
He built new boats and explored some 870 miles (1,400 kilometres) of the Angara, finally reaching Yeniseysk and discovering that the Angara (a Buryat name) and Upper Tunguska (Verkhnyaya Tunguska, as initially known by Russians) are one and the same river.
In 1627, Pyotr Beketov was appointed Yenisei voevoda in Siberia.
He successfully carried out the voyage to collect taxes from the Zabaykalye Buryats, becoming the first Russian to step in Buryatia.
He founded the first Russian settlement there, Rybinsky ostrog.
Beketov was sent to the Lena River in 1631, where in 1632 he founded Yakutsk and sent his Cossacks to explore the Aldan River and farther down the Lena, to found new fortresses, and to collect taxes.
Yakutsk soon turned into a major starting point for further Russian expeditions eastward, southward and northward.
Maksim Perfilyev, who earlier had been one of the founders of Yeniseysk, founded Bratsk ostrog on the Angara in 1631. In 1638, Perfilyev became the first Russian to step into Transbaikalia, travelling there from Yakutsk.
A map of Irkutsk and Lake Baikal in its neighbourhood, as depicted in the late-17th-century Remezov Chronicle
In 1643, Kurbat Ivanov led a group of Cossacks from Yakutsk to the south of the Baikal Mountains and discovered Lake Baikal, visiting its Olkhon Island.
Ivanov later made the first chart and description of Baikal.
Russians reach the Pacific
In 1639, a group of explorers led by Ivan Moskvitin became the first Russians to reach the Pacific Ocean and to discover the Sea of Okhotsk, having built a winter camp on its shore at the Ulya River mouth.
The Cossacks learned from the locals about the large Amur River far to the south.
In 1640, they apparently sailed south, explored the south-eastern shores of the Okhotsk Sea, perhaps reaching the mouth of the Amur River and possibly discovering the Shantar Islands on their way back.
Based on Moskvitin's account, Kurbat Ivanov drew the first Russian map of the Far East in 1642.
In 1643, Vasily Poyarkov crossed the Stanovoy Range and reached the upper Zeya River in the country of the Daurs, who were paying tribute to the Manchu Chinese.
After wintering, in 1644, Poyarkov pushed down the Zeya and became the first Russian to reach the Amur River.
He sailed down the Amur and finally discovered the mouth of that great river from land.
Since his Cossacks provoked the enmity of the locals behind, Poyarkov chose a different way back.
They built boats and in 1645, sailed along the Sea of Okhotsk coast to the Ulya River and spent the next winter in the huts that had been built by Ivan Moskvitin six years earlier.
In 1646, they returned to Yakutsk.
A 17th-century koch in a museum in Krasnoyarsk.
Kochi were the earliest icebreakers and were widely used by Russians in the Arctic and on Siberian rivers.
In 1644, Mikhail Stadukhin discovered the Kolyma River and founded Srednekolymsk.
A merchant named Fedot Alekseyev Popov organized a further expedition eastward, and Semyon Dezhnyov became a captain of one of the kochi.
In 1648, they sailed from Srednekolymsk down to the Arctic and after some time they rounded Cape Dezhnyov, thus becoming the first explorers to pass through the Bering Strait and to discover Chukotka and the Bering Sea.
All their kochi and most of their men (including Popov himself) were lost in storms and clashes with the natives.
A small group led by Dezhnyov reached the mouth of the Anadyr River and sailed up it in 1649, having built new boats from the wreckage.
They founded Anadyrsk and were stranded there, until Stadukhin found them, coming from Kolyma by land.
Subsequently, Stadukhin set off south in 1651 and discovered Penzhin Bay on the northern coast of the Okhotsk Sea.
He also may have explored the western shores of Kamchatka.
Between 1649 and 1650, Yerofey Khabarov became the second Russian to explore the Amur River.
Through Olyokma, Tungir and Shilka Rivers he reached Amur (Dauria), returned to Yakutsk and then back to Amur with a larger force in 1650–1653. This time he was met with armed resistance.
He built winter quarters at Albazin, then sailed down Amur and found Achansk, which preceded the present-day Khabarovsk, defeating or evading large armies of Daurian Manchu Chinese and Koreans on his way.
He charted the Amur in his Draft of the Amur river.
Subsequently, Russians held on to the Amur Region until 1689, when by the Treaty of Nerchinsk this land was assigned to the Chinese Empire (it was returned, however, by the Treaty of Aigun in 1858).
Between 1659 and 1665, Kurbat Ivanov was the next head of Anadyrsky ostrog after Semyon Dezhnyov.
In 1660, he sailed from Anadyr Bay to Cape Dezhnyov.
Atop his earlier pioneering charts, Ivanov is credited with creation of the early map of Chukotka and Bering Strait, which was the first to show on paper (very schematically) the yet undiscovered Wrangel Island, both Diomede Islands and Alaska, based on the data collected from the natives of Chukotka.
By the mid-17th century, Russians established the borders of their country close to modern ones, and explored almost the whole of Siberia, except the eastern Kamchatka and some regions north of the Arctic Circle.
The conquest of Kamchatka later would be achieved in the early 1700s by Vladimir Atlasov, while the discovery of the Arctic coastline and Alaska would be completed by the Great Northern Expedition in 1733–1743.
Further information: Major explorations after the Age of Discovery
Global impact
Main articles: Columbian exchange, History of colonialism, and Globalization
New World crops.
Clockwise from top left: 1. Maize (Zea mays) 2. Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) 3. Potato (Solanum tuberosum) 4. Vanilla (genus Vanilla, esp.
Vanilla planifolia) 5. Pará rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) 6. Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) 7. Tobacco (Nicotiana rustica)
European overseas expansion led to the contact between the Old and New Worlds producing the Columbian exchange.
It started the global silver trade and led to direct European involvement the Chinese porcelain trade.
It involved the transfer of goods unique to one hemisphere to another.
Europeans brought cattle, horses, and sheep to the New World, and from the New World Europeans received tobacco, potatoes, tomatoes, and maize.
Other items and commodities becoming important in global trade were the tobacco, sugarcane, and cotton crops of the Americas, along with the gold and silver brought from the American continent not only to Europe but elsewhere in the Old World.
The formation of new trans-oceanic links and subsequent expansion of European influence led to the Age of Imperialism, a historical period which began during the Age of Discovery during which colonial powers from Europe gradually colonized most territory on the planet.
European demand for trade, commodities, colonies and slaves had a drastic impact on the rest of the world; during Europe's colonization of the Americas, European colonial powers conquered and colonized numerous indigenous nations and cultures, and conducted numerous forced conversions and attempts at forcible cultural assimilation.
Combined with the introduction of infectious diseases from Europe, these events led to a drastic decrease of the indigenous American population.
Indigenous accounts of European colonization were summarized by scholar Peter C. Mancall as such: "the arrival of Europeans brought death, displacement, sorrow, and despair to Native Americans". In some areas, like North America, Central America, Australia, New Zealand, and Argentina, indigenous peoples were badly treated, driven off their lands, and reduced to dependent minorities in the territory.
Portuguese Nanbanjin arriving at Japan much to the surprise of locals, detail from a Nanban panel of the Kanō school, 1593–1600
Similarly, in West Africa and East Africa, local states supplied the appetite of European slave traders, changing the complexion of coastal African states and fundamentally altering the nature of slavery in Africa, causing impacts on societies and economies deep inland.
In North America, there were many conflicts between Europeans and indigenous peoples.
The Europeans had many advantages over the Indigenous people.
Introduced Eurasian diseases wiped out 50–90% of the indigenous population because they had not been exposed to them before and lacked acquired immunity.
Maize and manioc were introduced into Africa in the 16th century by the Portuguese.
They are now important staple foods, replacing native African crops.
Alfred W. Crosby speculated that increased production of maize, manioc, and other New World crops led to heavier concentrations of population in the areas from which slavers captured their victims.
In the global silver trade, the Ming dynasty was stimulated by trade with the Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch.
Although global, much of that silver ended up in the hands of the Chinese and China dominated silver imports.
Between 1600 and 1800 China received 100 tons of silver on average per year.
A large populace near the Lower Yangzte averaged a hundreds of taels of silver per household in the late 16th century.
Altogether, more than 150,000 tons of silver were shipped from Potosí by the end of the 18th century.
From 1500 to 1800, Mexico and Peru produced about 80% of the world's silver with more than 30% of it eventually ending up in China (largely because of European merchants who used it to purchase exotic Chinese commodities). In the late 16th and early 17th century, Japan was also exporting heavily into China and the foreign trade at large.
Trade with European powers and the Japanese brought in massive amounts of silver, which then replaced copper and paper banknotes as the common medium of exchange in China.
During the last decades of the Ming the flow of silver into China was greatly diminished, thereby undermining state revenues and indeed the entire Ming economy.
This damage to the economy was compounded by the effects on agriculture of the incipient Little Ice Age, natural calamities, crop failure, and sudden epidemics.
The ensuing breakdown of authority and people's livelihoods allowed rebel leaders such as Li Zicheng to challenge Ming authority.
Jesuit scholars collaborated extensively with Chinese astronomers, introducing Copernican principles.
Top: Matteo Ricci, Adam Schaal and Ferdinand Verbiest (1623–1688); Bottom: Paul Siu (Xu Guangqi), Colao or Prime Minister of State, and his granddaughter Candide Hiu
New crops that had come to Asia from the Americas via the Spanish colonizers in the 16th century contributed to the Asia's population growth.
Although the bulk of imports to China were silver, the Chinese also purchased New World crops from the Spanish Empire.
This included sweet potatoes, maize, and peanuts, foods that could be cultivated in lands where traditional Chinese staple crops—wheat, millet, and rice—could not grow, hence facilitating a rise in the population of China.
In the Song Dynasty (960–1279), rice had become the major staple crop of the poor; after sweet potatoes were introduced to China around 1560, it gradually became the traditional food of the lower classes.
The arrival of the Portuguese to Japan in 1543 initiated the Nanban trade period, with the Japanese adopting several technologies and cultural practices, like the arquebus, European-style cuirasses, European ships, Christianity, decorative art, and language.
After the Chinese had banned direct trade by Chinese merchants with Japan, the Portuguese filled this commercial vacuum as intermediaries between China and Japan.
The Portuguese bought Chinese silk and sold it to the Japanese in return for Japanese-mined silver; since silver was more highly valued in China, the Portuguese could then use Japanese silver to buy even larger stocks of Chinese silk.
However, by 1573—after the Spanish established a trading base in Manila—the Portuguese intermediary trade was trumped by the prime source of incoming silver to China from the Spanish Americas.
Although China acted as the cog running the wheel of global trade during the 16th to 18th centuries, Japan's huge contribution of silver exports to China were critical to the world economy and China's liquidity and success with the commodity.
Italian Jesuit Matteo Ricci (1552–1610) was the first European allowed into the Forbidden City.
He taught the Chinese how to construct and play the spinet, translated Chinese texts into Latin and vice versa, and worked closely with his Chinese associate Xu Guangqi (1562–1633) on mathematical work.
Economic impact in Europe
Main articles: Commercial Revolution, Renaissance, Renaissance in the Low Countries, and Great Divergence
RenaissanceThe School of Athens (1509–11) by Raphael
Topics
Humanism
Age of Discovery
Architecture
Dance
Fine arts
Literature
Music
Philosophy
Science
Technology
Warfare
Regions
England
France
Germany
Italy
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Scotland
Northern Europe
Low Countries
Criticism
Criticism
As a wider variety of global luxury commodities entered the European markets by sea, previous European markets for luxury goods stagnated.
The Atlantic trade largely supplanted pre-existing Italian and German trading powers which had relied on their Baltic, Russian and Islamic trade links.
The new commodities also caused social change, as sugar, spices, silks and chinawares entered the luxury markets of Europe.
The European economic centre shifted from the Mediterranean to Western Europe.
The city of Antwerp, part of the Duchy of Brabant, became "the centre of the entire international economy", and the richest city in Europe at this time.
Centred in Antwerp first and then in Amsterdam, "Dutch Golden Age" was tightly linked to the Age of Discovery.
Francesco Guicciardini, a Venetian envoy, stated that hundreds of ships would pass Antwerp in a day, and 2,000 carts entered the city each week.
Portuguese ships laden with pepper and cinnamon would unload their cargo.
With many foreign merchants resident in the city and governed by an oligarchy of banker-aristocrats forbidden to engage in trade, the economy of Antwerp was foreigner-controlled, which made the city very international, with merchants and traders from Venice, Ragusa, Spain, and Portugal and a policy of toleration, which attracted a large Orthodox Jewish community.
The city experienced three booms during its golden age, the first based on the pepper market, a second launched by New World silver coming from Seville (ending with the bankruptcy of Spain in 1557), and a third boom, after the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis, in 1559, based on the textiles industry.
Despite initial hostilities, by 1549 the Portuguese were sending annual trade missions to Shangchuan Island in China.
In 1557 they managed to convince the Ming court to agree on a legal port treaty that would establish Macau as an official Portuguese trade colony.
The Portuguese friar Gaspar da Cruz (c. 1520 February 5, 1570) wrote the first complete book on China and the Ming Dynasty that was published in Europe; it included information on its geography, provinces, royalty, official class, bureaucracy, shipping, architecture, farming, craftsmanship, merchant affairs, clothing, religious and social customs, music and instruments, writing, education, and justice.
From China the major exports were silk and porcelain, adapted to meet European tastes.
The Chinese export porcelains were held in such great esteem in Europe that, in English, china became a commonly-used synonym for porcelain.
Kraak porcelain (believed to be named after the Portuguese carracks in which it was transported) was among the first Chinese ware to arrive in Europe in mass quantities.
Only the richest could afford these early imports, and Kraak often featured in Dutch still life paintings.
Soon the Dutch East India Company established a lively trade with the East, having imported 6 million porcelain items from China to Europe between the years 1602 to 1682. The Chinese workmanship impressed many.
Between 1575 and 1587 Medici porcelain from Florence was the first successful attempt to imitate Chinese porcelain.
Although Dutch potters did not immediately imitate Chinese porcelain, they began to do it when the supply to Europe was interrupted, after the death of Wanli Emperor in 1620. Kraak, mainly the blue and white porcelain, was imitated all over the world by potters in Arita, Japan and Persia—where Dutch merchants turned when the fall of the Ming Dynasty rendered Chinese originals unavailable—and ultimately in Delftware.
Dutch and later English Delftware inspired by Chinese designs persisted from about 1630 to the mid-18th century alongside European patterns.
Antonio de Morga (1559–1636), a Spanish official in Manila, listed an extensive inventory of goods that were traded by Ming China at the turn of the 16th to 17th century, noting there were "rarities which, did I refer to them all, I would never finish, nor have sufficient paper for it". After noting the variety of silk goods traded to Europeans, Ebrey writes of the considerable size of commercial transactions: In one case a galleon to the Spanish territories in the New World carried over 50,000 pairs of silk stockings.
In return China imported mostly silver from Peruvian and Mexican mines, transported via Manila.
Chinese merchants were active in these trading ventures, and many emigrated to such places as the Philippines and Borneo to take advantage of the new commercial opportunities.
The increase in gold and silver experienced by Spain coincided with a major inflationary cycle both within Spain and Europe, known as the price revolution.
Spain had amassed large quantities of gold and silver from the New World.
In the 1540s large scale extraction of silver from Mexico's Guanajuato began.
With the opening of the silver mines in Zacatecas and Bolivia's Potosí in 1546 large shipments of silver became the fabled source of wealth.
During the 16th century, Spain held the equivalent of US$1.5 trillion (1990 terms) in gold and silver from New Spain.
Being the most powerful European monarch at a time full of war and religious conflicts, the Habsburg rulers spent the wealth in wars and arts across Europe. "I learnt a proverb here", said a French traveller in 1603: "Everything is dear in Spain except silver". The spent silver, suddenly spread throughout a previously cash-starved Europe, caused widespread inflation.
The inflation was worsened by a growing population with a static production level, low salaries and a rising cost of living, which damaged local industry.
Increasingly, Spain became dependent on the revenues flowing in from the mercantile empire in the Americas, leading to Spain's first bankruptcy in 1557 due to rising military costs.
Phillip II of Spain defaulted on debt payments in 1557, 1560, 1575 and 1596. The increase in prices as a result of currency circulation fuelled the growth of the commercial middle class in Europe, the bourgeoisie, which came to influence the politics and culture of many countries.
One effect of the inflation, particularly in Great Britain, was that tenant farmers who held long-term leases from lords saw real decreases in rent.
Some lords opted to sell their leased land, giving rise to small land-owing farmers such as yeoman and gentlemen farmers.
World map from Johannes Kepler's Rudolphine Tables (1627), incorporating many of the new discoveries.
Delftware depicting Chinese scenes, 18th century.
Ernest Cognacq Museum
Jan Davidsz. de Heem, detail of silverware from A Richly Laid Table with Parrots, c. 1650
See also
History portal
Oceans portal
World portal
Atlantic slave trade
Catholic Church and the Age of Discovery
Chinese maritime exploration
Chronology of European exploration of Asia
Columbian Exchange
Exploration
Exploration of North America
European colonization of the Americas
European exploration of Australia
Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration
History of navigation
L'Anse aux Meadows
List of explorations
Major explorations after the Age of Discovery
Maritime history
Portuguese inventions
Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact
Scramble for Africa
Timeline of European exploration
Timeline of maritime migration and exploration
Winds in the Age of Sail
Footnotes
Major ports in their respective regions included Palembang on the Malaccan Strait, Calicut on the Malabar coast, and Mombasa on the Swahili Coast (see Sen 2016).
References
Butel, Paul (2002-03-11). The Atlantic.
Taylor & Francis.
ISBN 978-0-203-01044-0. Archived from the original on 2021-04-21. Retrieved 2021-11-15.
"Portuguese, The - Banglapedia". en.banglapedia.org.
Archived from the original on 1 April 2017.
Tapan Raychaudhuri (1982). The Cambridge Economic History of India: Volume 1, C.1200-c.1750. CUP Archive.
ISBN 978-0-521-22692-9. Archived from the original on 2014-07-04. Retrieved 2022-05-19.
Washburn, Wilcomb E. (1962). "The Meaning of "Discovery" in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries". The American Historical Review.
JSTOR. 68 (1): 1–21. doi:10.2307/1847180. ISSN 0002-8762. JSTOR 1847180.
Parry, J. H. (1973). The Age of Reconnaissance: Discovery, Exploration, and Settlement, 1450–1650. London: Cardinal. p. 13.
Pagden 1993, p. 5.
O’Gorman, Edmundo.
The Invention of America.
An Inquiry into the Historical Nature of the New World and the Meaning of History.
Bloomington, IN 1961, 9-47.
Pagden 1993, pp. 5–6.
Pagden 1993, p. 6.
"Dismantling the Doctrine of Discovery" (PDF). Assembly of First Nations. 2018-01-22. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-09-04. Retrieved 2021-06-19.
Frichner, Tonya Gonnella. (2010). “Preliminary Study of the Impact on Indigenous Peoples of the International Legal Construct Known as the Doctrine of Discovery.” Archived 2021-07-24 at the Wayback Machine E/C.19/2010/13. Presented at the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Ninth Session, United Nations Economic and Social Council, New York, 27 Apr 2010.
Roy, Rohan Deb; Conversation, The (2018-04-09). "Science Still Bears the Fingerprints of Colonialism". Smithsonian Magazine.
Archived from the original on 2021-08-03. Retrieved 2021-08-15.
Renstrom, Joelle (2021-03-18). "The Troubling Rhetoric of Space Exploration". Undark Magazine.
Archived from the original on 2021-08-12. Retrieved 2021-08-15.
DNLee (26 March 2015). "When discussing Humanity's next move to space, the language we use matters". Scientific American.
Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2019.
Drake, Nadia (2018-11-09). "We need to change the way we talk about space exploration". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 2019-10-16. Retrieved 2019-10-19.
Alan Marshall (February 1995). "Development and imperialism in space". Space Policy. 11 (1): 41–52. Bibcode:1995SpPol..11...41M. doi:10.1016/0265-9646(95)93233-B. Archived from the original on 2022-01-21. Retrieved 2020-06-28.
Katie Whitehurst. "Age of Contact". PBS. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 9 January 2021.
Nassaney, Michael Shakir (2014).  Claire Smith (ed.). "North America During the European Contact Period". Encyclopedia of Global Archaeology.
New York, NY: Springer: 5350–5371. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-0465-2_1641. ISBN 978-1-4419-0426-3. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 9 January 2021.
Silliman, Stephen W. (2005). "Culture Contact or Colonialism? Challenges in the Archaeology of Native North America". American Antiquity.
Cambridge University Press (CUP). 70 (1): 55–74. doi:10.2307/40035268. ISSN 0002-7316. JSTOR 40035268. S2CID 161467685.
Wilson, Samuel (1999). The emperor's giraffe and other stories of cultures in contact.
Boulder, Colo: Westview Press.
ISBN 0-8133-3585-X. OCLC 40567393.
Merson, John (1990). The Genius That Was China: East and West in the Making of the Modern World.
Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-87951-397-9. A companion to the PBS Series The Genius That Was China.
"Bartolomeu Dias". infoplease.
Sandbox Networks, Inc.
Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015.
"BBC - History - Leif Erikson". 
Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (2007). Amerigo: The Man Who Gave His Name to America.
New York: Random House. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-4000-6281-2. Archived from the original on 2022-04-18. Retrieved 2020-10-06.
Davidson, M. H. (1997). Columbus Then and Now: A Life Re-examined.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, p. 417.
"Columbus to the Caribbean". fsmitha.com.
Archived from the original on 2022-03-31. Retrieved 2016-01-31.
"Christopher Columbus – Exploration". history.com.
Archived from the original on 2022-06-24. Retrieved 2016-01-31.
Diffie, Bailey W., and George D. Windus, "Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580", p. 176
Zweig, Stefan, "Conqueror of the Seas – The Story of Magellan", Read Books, 2007, ISBN 1-4067-6006-4
a b c d e f g h i Paine, Lincoln (2013). The Sea and Civilization: A Maritime History of the World.
New York: Random House, LLC.
Merson, John (1990). The Genius That Was China: East and West in the Making of the Modern World.
Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press.
ISBN 978-0-87951-397-9. A companion to the PBS Series The Genius That Was China.
Wan Chen, Strange Things of the South, from Robert Temple
Manguin, Pierre-Yves (September 1980). "The Southeast Asian Ship: An Historical Approach". Journal of Southeast Asian Studies. 11 (2): 266–276. doi:10.1017/S002246340000446X. JSTOR 20070359.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves (1993). "Trading Ships of the South China Sea.
Shipbuilding Techniques and Their Role in the History of the Development of Asian Trade Networks". Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient: 253–280.
Arnold 2002, p. xi.
Houben, 2002, pp. 102–04.
Harley & Woodward, 1992, pp. 156–61.
Abu-Lughod 1991, p. 121.
a b Arnold 2002, p. 7.
a b Mancall 2006, p. 17.
Arnold 2002, p. 5.
Love 2006, p. 130.
silk-road 2008, web.
a b DeLamar 1992, p. 328.
Abu-Lughod 1991, p. 158.
Crowley, Roger (2011). City of Fortune (Main ed.). Faber & Faber.
ISBN 978-0-571-24595-6.
Mancall 2006, p. 14.
Mancall 2006, p. 3.
Stark, Rodney (2005). The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism and Western Success.
New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks. p. 137. ISBN 978-0-8129-7233-7.
Parry 2006, p. 69.[full citation needed]
Diffie 1977, pp. 24–25.
Dunn 2004, p. 310.
Chen, Yuan Julian (2021-10-11). "Between the Islamic and Chinese Universal Empires: The Ottoman Empire, Ming Dynasty, and Global Age of Explorations". Journal of Early Modern History. 25 (5): 422–456. doi:10.1163/15700658-bja10030. ISSN 1385-3783. S2CID 244587800. Archived from the original on 2022-04-17. Retrieved 2022-03-24.
Mancall 1999, p. 36.
DeLamar 1992, p. 329.
Tamura 1997, p. 70.
Cromer 1995, p. 117.
Tsai 2002, p. 206.
Mancall 2006, p. 115.
a b c d Sen (2016), 609–611 & 631–633.
Sen (2016), 609.
Sen (2016), 615.
Sen (2016), 620–621.
Sen (2016), 611.
Spice importance for medieval humorism principles of medicine was such that shortly after entering the trade, apothecaries and physicians like Tomé Pires and Garcia da Orta (see Burns 2001, p. 14) were sent to India having studied spices in works like Suma Oriental (see Pires 1512, p. lxii) and Colóquios dos simples e drogas da India ("Conversations on the simples, drugs and materia medica of India)
ScienceDaily 1998, news.
"Byzantine-Ottoman Wars: Fall of Constantinople and spurring "age of discovery"". Archived from the original on 4 June 2015. Retrieved 18 August 2012.
"Overview of Age of Exploration". Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved 18 August 2012.
Spufford 1989, pp. 339–49.
Spufford 1989, p. 343.
Abu-Lughod 1991, p. 122.
Parry 1981, p. 33.
Diffie 1977, p. 210.
Newitt 2005, p. 9.
Diffie 1960, p. 49.
Diffie 1977, pp. 29–31.
Butel 1999, p. 36.
Chaudhuri, K.N. (1985). Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise of Islam to 1750. Cambridge University Press. p. 64.
DeLamar 1992, p. 333.
Anderson 2000, p. 50.
Joaquinn Pedro Oliveira Martins, The Golden Age Of Prince Henry The Navigator. (New York: Dutton), p. 72.
Locke 1824, p. 385.
Boxer 1969, p. 29.
Nissan Mindel, Rabbi Abraham Zacuto – (1450–1515), 
Parry 1981, p. 145.
Diffie 1977, pp. 132–34.
Russell-Wood 1998, p. 9.
Daus 1983, p. 33.
Bagrow 1964, p. 72.
Diffie 1977, pp. 145–48.
DeLamar 1992, p. 335.
Anderson 2000, p. 59.
Lusa. "Portugueses chegaram à América 19 anos antes de Colombo". Expresso.
Archived from the original on 2018-12-15. Retrieved 2018-07-29.
DeLamar 1992, p. 341.
Maclean 2008, web.
Forbes 1993, p. 22
Mancall 1999, p. 26.
DeLamar 1992, p. 345.
Davenport 1917, pp. 107–11.
Croxton 2007, web (on subscription)
Diffie 1977, pp. 463–64.
Diffie 1977, pp. 464–65.
Diffie 1977, p. 185.
Pohl, Frederick J. (1966). Amerigo Vespucci: Pilot Major.
New York: Octagon Books. pp. 54–55.
Archived 2021-11-08 at the Wayback Machine Arciniegas, German (1978) Amerigo and the New World: The Life & Times of Amerigo Vespucci: Octagon Press
Morison, Samuel (1974). The European Discovery of America: The Southern Voyages, 1492–1616. New York: Oxford University Press.
N. McAlister, Lyle. (1984) Spain and Portugal in the New World: 1492–1700. p. 75.
Crow 1992, p. 136.
Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580 Archived 2016-02-08 at the Wayback Machine, Bailey Wallys Diffie and George D. Winius.
University of Minnesota Press, 1977 p. 187
The Coming of the Portuguese Archived 2014-10-31 at the Wayback Machine by Paul Lunde, London University's School of Oriental and African Studies, in Saudi Aramco World – July/August 2005 Volume 56, Number 4,
Diffie 1977, pp. 456–62.
Catholic Encyclopædia 2, web.
Arciniegas 1978, pp. 295–300.
Diffie 1977, p. 458.
The Invention of America Archived 2018-12-15 at the Wayback Machine.
Indiana University Press. pp. 106–07, by Edmundo O'Gorman
Imago Mvndi – Brill Archive – Leiden, Editorial Board Archived 2020-07-25 at the Wayback Machine.
Leo Bagrow, Stokholm – New light on Vespucci's third voyage, By R. Levillier pp. 40–45
Bethell, Leslie (1984). The Cambridge History of Latin America, Volume 1, Colonial Latin America.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 257. ISBN 978-0-521-23223-4. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2020-05-03.
Laguarda Trias, Rolando A. (1988). Pilotos portugueses en el Rio de La Plata durante el siglo XVI. Coimbra: UC Biblioteca Geral 1. pp. 59–61. Archived from the original on 2020-12-11. Retrieved 2020-11-08.
"Newen Zeytung auss Presillg Landt" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-06-02. Retrieved 2013-07-01.
Peabiru, the route lost Archived 2022-04-22 at the Wayback Machine in English
Morison 1942, pp. 65–75.
a b Abu-Lughod 1991, 252
Bernstein, William J. (2008). A Splendid Exchange: How Trade Shaped the World.
New York: Grove Press.
ISBN 978-0-8021-4416-4.
"The Lusiads". the Guardian. 2001-05-21. Archived from the original on 2022-08-24. Retrieved 2022-08-24.
Magazine, Smithsonian; Fiegl, Amanda. "Adventures of a Portuguese Poet". Smithsonian Magazine.
Archived from the original on 2022-08-24. Retrieved 2022-08-24.
Milton 1999, pp. 5–7.
Cortesão, Armando (1944). The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires: an account of the east, from the Red Sea to Japan, written in Malacca and India in 1512–1515/The Book of Francisco Rodrigues rutter of a voyage in the Red Sea, nautical rules, almanack and maps, written and drawn in the east before 1515. The Hakluyt Society.
ISBN 978-81-206-0535-0. Archived from the original on 2021-11-14. Retrieved 2016-02-10.
Pfoundes 1882, p. 89.
Nowell 1947, p. 8.
Cole 2002, p. 37.
Otfinoski 2004, p. 33
Zweig 1938, p. 51.
Donkin 2003, p. 29.
DeLamar 1992, p. 349.
Catholic Encyclopædia 2007, web.
Fernandez-Armesto 2006, p. 200.
Society, National Geographic (2020-04-06). "Magellan Killed in Philippine Skirmish". National Geographic Society.
Archived from the original on 2022-05-24. Retrieved 2021-03-26.
a b c Newitt 2005, p. 104.
Lach 1998, p. 1397
Lach 1998, p. 1397.
Diffie 1977, p. 375.
Diffie 1977, pp. 368, 473.
Galvano 1563, p. 168
Fernandez-Armesto 2006, p. 202.
U.C. 2009, web
Lawson 2007, pp. 84–88.
Lawson 2007, pp. 29–32.
Weddle 1985, p. 42.
a b c d e f Grunberg 2007, magazine
Restall 2004, pp. 659–87.
Castillo 1963, p. 294.
Cervantes web, original text.
Pacey 1991, p. 88
N. McAlister, Lyle. (1984) Spain and Portugal in the New World: 1492–1700. p. 316.
Boxer 1977, p. 18.
Linschoten 1598, original book
Boxer 1969, p 109.
a b Paine 2000, p. xvi.
Mount Allison University, Marshlands: Records of Life on the Tantramar: European Contact and Mapping Archived 2021-04-19 at the Wayback Machine, 2004
Tratado das ilhas novas e descombrimento dellas e outras couzas, 1570 Francisco de Souza, p. 6  Archived 2020-01-25 at the Wayback Machine
Cartier E.B. 2009, web.
Histori.ca 2009, web.
Gutierrez 1998. pp. 81–82.
San Diego HS, web.
Pattridge, Blake D. "Francis Drake" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 2, 402
Von der Porten, Edward (January 1975). "Drake's First Landfall". Pacific Discovery, California Academy of Sciences. 28 (1): 28–30.
Morison, Samuel Eliot (1978). The Great Explorere: The European Discovery of America.
New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. p. 700. ISBN 978-0195042221.
Cassels, Sir Simon (August 2003). "Where Did Drake Careen The Golden Hind in June/July 1579? A Mariner's Assessment". The Mariner's Mirror. 89 (1): 263. doi:10.1080/00253359.2003.10659292. S2CID 161710358.
a b Gough, Barry (1980). Distant Dominion: Britain and the Northwest Coast of North America, 1579-1809. Vancouver: U Univ. of British Columbia Press. p. 15. ISBN 0-7748-0113-1.
Turner, Michael (2006). In Drake's Wake Volume 2 The World Voyage.
United Kingdom: Paul Mould Publishing. p. 163. ISBN 978-1-904959-28-1.
Cassels, Sir Simon (August 2003). "Where Did Drake Careen The Golden Hind in June/July 1579? A Mariner's Assessment". The Mariner's Mirror. 89 (1): 263,264. doi:10.1080/00253359.2003.10659292. S2CID 161710358.
Sugden, John (2006). Sir Francis Drake.
London: Pimlico. p. 136,137. ISBN 978-1-844-13762-6.
Turner, Michael (2006). In Drake's Wake Volume 2 The World Voyage.
United Kingdom: Paul Mould Publishing. p. 173. ISBN 978-1-904959-28-1.
Pattridge, "Francis Drake", 406
Hacquebord 1995,
McDermott, James (28 May 2015). "Frobisher, Sir Martin". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/10191. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Archived 2022-05-22 at the Wayback Machine "Martin Frobisher", The Canadian Encyclopedia accessed 16 July 2021
Synge 1912, p. 258
ULT 2009, web
Wilford 1982, p. 139.
Medina 1918, pp. 136–246.
Mutch 1942, p. 17.
Lincoln 1994, p. 62
The Perfilyevs, web (in Russian)
Sbaikal, web (in Russian)
Lincoln 1994, p. 247
Fisher 1981, p. 30
Dymytryshyn 1985, web
McNeill 2019, web.
Hahn, Barbara (31 July 2019) [27 August 2018]. "Tobacco - Atlantic History". oxfordbibliographies.com.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/obo/9780199730414-0141. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2021.
Escudero, Antonio Gutiérrez (2014). "Hispaniola's Turn to Tobacco: Products from Santo Domingo in Atlantic Commerce".  In Aram, Bethany; Yun-Casalilla, Bartolomé (eds.). Global Goods and the Spanish Empire, 1492–1824: Circulation, Resistance, and Diversity.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 216–229. doi:10.1057/9781137324054_12. ISBN 978-1-137-32405-4.
a b Knight, Frederick C. (2010). "Cultivating Knowledge: African Tobacco and Cotton Workers in Colonial British America". Working the Diaspora: The Impact of African Labor on the Anglo-American World, 1650–1850. New York and London: New York University Press. pp. 65–85. doi:10.18574/nyu/9780814748183.003.0004. ISBN 9780814748183. LCCN 2009026860. Archived from the original on 2021-09-04. Retrieved 2021-09-04.
Nater, Laura (2006). "Colonial Tobacco: Key Commodity of the Spanish Empire, 1500–1800".  In Topik, Steven; Marichal, Carlos; Frank, Zephyr (eds.). From Silver to Cocaine: Latin American Commodity Chains and the Building of the World Economy, 1500–2000. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. pp. 93–117. doi:10.1215/9780822388029-005. ISBN 978-0-8223-3753-9. Archived from the original on 2021-09-04. Retrieved 2021-09-04.
Peter C. Mancall (1998). "The Age of Discovery". Reviews in American History. 26 (1): 35. ISSN 0048-7511. JSTOR 30030873. Other documents from the sixteenth century, such as the magnificent Florentine Codex, contain testimony from native observers whose views were recorded by European witnesses to the conquest.
These texts provide details about indigenous practices as well as views of the conquest from the perspective of the invaded.
Some of these indigenous sources have been translated into English.
On the issue of the encounter, these sources concur: the arrival of Europeans brought death, displacement, sorrow, and despair to Native Americans.
Cook 1998, p. 13
OSU 2006, news.
"The cassava transformation in Africa Archived 2014-06-09 at the Wayback Machine". The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Scitizen 2007, web.
Crosby 1972, p. 188.
von Glahn, Richard (1996). "Myth and Reality of China's Seventeenth Century Monetary Crisis". Journal of Economic History. 2: 132. ... silver wanders throughout all the world... before flocking to China, where it remains as if at its natural center.
Huang, Ray (1975), "Financial management", Taxation and Governmental Finance in Sixteenth-Century Ming China, Cambridge University Press, pp. 266–305, doi:10.1017/cbo9780511735400.011, ISBN 9780511735400
"Potosí Silver Mines". Atlas Obscura.
Archived from the original on 2016-05-05. Retrieved 2016-05-08.
a b Flynn, Dennis O. (1995). "Born with a "Silver Spoon": The Origin of World Trade in 1571" (PDF). Journal of World History.
University of Hawaii Press.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-04-23.
Columbia University 2009, web.
a b Ebrey 2006, p. 211.
Crosby 1972, pp. 198–201
Gernet 1962, p. 136.
Crosby 1972, p. 200.
Spence 1999, pp. 19–20.
Brook 1998, p. 205.
Flynn, Dennis Owen; Giraldez, Arturo (2002). "Cycles of Silver: Global Economic Unity through the Mid-Eighteenth Century". Journal of World History. 13 (2): 391–427. doi:10.1353/jwh.2002.0035. ISSN 1527-8050. S2CID 145805906.
Braudel 1985, p. 143.
Dunton 1896, p. 163.
Brook 1998, p. 124.
Aas 1976, pp. 410–11.
For a study on foreign objects in Dutch paintings, see Hochstrasser 2007, Still life and trade in the Dutch golden age.
Volker 1971, p. 22.
Brook 1998, p. 206.
Howard 1978, p. 7.
Brook 1998, pp. 205–206.
Walton 1994, pp. 43–44
Braudel 1979, p. 171.
Tracy 1994, p. 655.
Braudel 1979, pp. 523–25
Overton, Mark (1996). Agricultural Revolution in England: The transformation of the agrarian economy 1500–1850. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-56859-3.
Bibliography
Primary sources
Castillo, Bernal Díaz del, John Michael Cohen (1963) [First published 1632]. The conquest of New Spain.
Penguin Classics. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-14-044123-9. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Galvano, Antonio (2004-03-01) [First published 1563]. The Discoveries of the World from Their First Original Unto the Year of Our Lord 1555, issued by the Hakluyt Society.
Kessinger Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-7661-9022-1. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Linschoten, Jan Huyghen van (2004) [First published 1598]. Voyage to Goa and Back, 1583–1592, with His Account of the East Indies: From Linschoten's Discourse of Voyages, in 1598. New Delhi, AES. ISBN 978-81-206-1928-9.
Mancall, Peter C. (2006). Travel narratives from the age of discovery: an anthology.
Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-515597-6. Archived from the original on 2022-07-26. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Pires, Tomé, Armando Cortesão, Francisco Rodrigues (1990) [First published 1512]. The Suma oriental of Tome Pires: an account of the East, from the Red Sea to China, written in Malacca and India in 1512–1515; and, The book of Francisco Rodrigues: Pilot-Major of the armada that discovered Banda and the Moluccas.
Asian Educational Services.
ISBN 978-81-206-0535-0. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
"Real Cédula aprobando la capitulación concedida por Carlos V a Francisco Pizarro para la conquista y población del Perú" (in Spanish). Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes.
Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
Secondary works
Abu-Lughod, Janet (1991). Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250–1350. Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-506774-3. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Anderson, James Maxwell (2000). The history of Portugal.
Greenwood Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-0-313-31106-2. Archived from the original on 2022-04-07. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Arciniegas, Germán (1978). Amerigo and the New World: The Life & Times of Amerigo Vespucci.
Octagon Books.
ISBN 978-0-374-90280-3.
Armesto, Felipe Fernandez (2006). Pathfinders: A Global History of Exploration. W.W. Norton & Company.
ISBN 978-0-393-06259-5.
Arnold, David (2002). The Age of Discovery, 1400–1600, Lancaster pamphlets.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-27996-3. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Boxer, Charles Ralph (1969). The Portuguese Seaborne Empire 1415–1825. Hutchinson.
ISBN 978-0-09-131071-4. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Boxer, Charles Ralph (1977). The Dutch seaborne empire, 1600–1800. Taylor & Francis.
ISBN 978-0-09-131051-6. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Braudel, Fernand (1992) [First published 1979]. The Wheels of Commerce, vol.
II of Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Century.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-08115-4. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Braudel, Fernand (1992) [First published 1985]. The perspective of the world.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-08116-1. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Brook, Timothy (1998). The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-22154-3. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Burns, William E. (2001). The scientific revolution: an encyclopædia.
ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Butel, Paul (1999). The Atlantic.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-10690-0. Archived from the original on 2022-09-10. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Cole, Juan Ricardo (2002). Sacred Space and Holy War. I.B.Tauris.
ISBN 978-1-86064-736-9. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Cook, Noble David (1998). Born to die: disease and New World conquest, 1492–1650. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-62730-6. Archived from the original on 2022-04-07. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Crosby, Alfred W., Jr (2003) [First published 1972]. The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (30th Anniversary ed.). Greenwood Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-0-275-98092-4. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Cromer, Alan (1995). Uncommon Sense: The Heretical Nature of Science.
Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-509636-1. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Crow, John A. (1992). The Epic of Latin America.
University of California Press. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-520-07723-2. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Daus, Ronald (1983). Die Erfindung des Kolonialismus.
Wuppertal/Germany: Peter Hammer Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-87294-202-9.
Davenport, Frances Gardiner (1917). European Treaties Bearing on the History of the United States and Its Dependencies to 1648. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institute of Washington.
Retrieved 2011-06-16.
De Lamar, Jensen (1992). Renaissance Europe: age of recovery and reconciliation. D.C. Heath.
ISBN 978-0-669-20007-2.
Diffie, Bailey (1977). Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580. University of Minnesota Press.
ISBN 978-0-8166-0782-2. Archived from the original on 2016-11-28. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Diffie, Bailey (1960). Prelude to empire: Portugal overseas before Henry the Navigator.
University of Nebraska Press.
ISBN 978-0-8032-5049-9. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Dymytryshyn, Basil, E.A.P. Crownhart-Vaughan, Thomas Vaughan (1985). Russia's conquest of Siberia, 1558–1700: a documentary record (in Russian). Western Imprints, The Press of the Oregon Historical Society.
ISBN 978-0-8032-5049-9. Archived from the original on 2013-06-26. Retrieved 2016-02-10.
Donkin, R.A. (2003). Between east and west: the Moluccas and the traffic in spices up to the arrival of Europeans.
Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society, Diane Publishing. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-87169-248-1. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Dunn, Ross E. (2004). The adventures of Ibn Battuta, a Muslim traveler of the fourteenth century.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-24385-9. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Dunton, Larkin (1896). The World and Its People.
Silver, Burdett.
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley, Anne Walthall, James B. Palais (2006–2008). East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History.
Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN 978-0-618-13384-0. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Fisher, Raymond H. (1981). The Voyage of Semen Dezhnev in 1648. The Hakluyt Society.
ISBN 978-0-904180-07-7.
Fiske, John (1892–2009). The Discovery of America: With Some Account of Ancient America and the Spanish Conquest.
Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN 978-1-110-32015-8. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Forbes, Jack D. (1993). Africans and Native Americans: the language of race and the evolution of Red-Black peoples.
University of Illinois Press.
ISBN 978-0-252-06321-3. Archived from the original on 2022-04-07. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Gernet, Jacques (1962). Daily life in China, on the eve of the Mongol invasion, 1250–1276. Stanford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8047-0720-6. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Gitzen, Garry (2011). Francis Drake in Nehalem Bay 1579, Setting the Historical Record Straight.
Fort Nehalem.
Archived from the original on 2011-10-17. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Goodrich, Luther Carrington, Chao-ying Fang, Ming Biographical History Project Committee – Association for Asian Studies. (1976). Dictionary of Ming biography, 1368–1644. Columbia University Press.
ISBN 978-0-231-03833-1.
Gutierrez, Ramon A, and Richard J. Orsi (1998). Contested Eden: California before the Gold Rush.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-21274-9. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Hacquebord, Louwrens (September 1995). "In Search of Het Behouden Huys: A Survey of the Remains of the House of Willem Barentsz on Novaya Zemlya" (PDF). Arctic. 48 (3): 250. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.505.5702. doi:10.14430/arctic1246. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 2009-03-08.
Hochstrasser, Julie (2007). Still life and trade in the Dutch golden age.
Yale University Press.
ISBN 978-0-300-10038-9.
Howard, David and John Ayers (1978). China for the West: Chinese Porcelain and other Decorative Arts for Export, Illustrated from the Mottahedeh Collection.
London and New York: Sotheby Parke Bernet.
Lach, Donald F., Edwin J. Van Kley (1998). Asia in the Making of Europe, Volume III: A Century of Advance.
Book 3: Southeast Asia.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-46768-9. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Lawson, Edward W. (2007). The Discovery of Florida and Its Discoverer Juan Ponce de Leon.
Kessinger Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4325-6124-6.
Lincoln, W. Bruce (2007) [First published 1994]. The Conquest of a Continent: Siberia and the Russians.
Cornell University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8014-8922-8. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Locke, John (1824). The works of John Locke: in nine volumes, Volume 9" The history of navigation. C. and J. Rivington.
Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Love, Ronald S. (2006). Maritime Exploration in the Age of Discovery, 1415–1800. Greenwood Press.
ISBN 978-0-313-32043-9. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Mancall, Peter C. (1999). "The Age of Discovery" in The Challenge of American History, ed.
Louis Masur.
Johns Hopkins University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8018-6222-9. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Medina (1974) [First published 1918]. El Piloto Juan Fernandez descubridor de las islas que ilevan su hombre, y Juan Jufre, armador de la expedicion que hizo en busca de otras en el mar del zur (in Spanish). Gabriela Mistral.
ISBN 978-0-313-32043-9.
Milton, Giles (1999). Nathaniel's Nutmeg.
London: Sceptre.
ISBN 978-0-340-69676-7.
Morison, Samuel Eliot (2007) [First published 1942]. Admiral of the Ocean Sea: The Life of Christopher Columbus.
Read Books.
ISBN 978-1-4067-5027-0. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Mutch, T.D. (1942). The First Discovery of Australia.
Sydney: Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society.
Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Newitt, Malyn D.D. (2005). A History of Portuguese Overseas Expansion, 1400–1668. Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-23979-0. Archived from the original on 2011-12-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Nowell, Charles E. (1947). The Discovery of the Pacific: A Suggested Change of Approach.
The Pacific Historical Review" (Volume XVI, Number 1).
Otfinoski, Steven (2004). Vasco Nuñez de Balboa: explorer of the Pacific.
Marshall Cavendish.
ISBN 978-0-7614-1609-8. Archived from the original on 2022-09-10. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Pacey, Arnold (1991). Technology in world civilization: a thousand-year history.
MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0-262-66072-3. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Pagden, Anthony (1993). European Encounters with the New World: From Renaissance to Romanticism.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Paine, Lincoln P. (2000). Ships of discovery and exploration.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
ISBN 978-0-395-98415-4. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Parry, J. H. (1981). The Age of Reconnaissance.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-04235-3. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Parry, J. H. (1981). The Discovery of the Sea.
University of California Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-520-04237-7. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Penrose, Boies (1955). Travel and Discovery in the Renaissance:1420–1620. Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-689-70153-5.
Pfoundes, C. (1882). Notes on the History of Eastern Adventure, Exploration, and Discovery, and Foreign Intercourse with Japan.
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society (Volume X).
Restall, Matthew (2004). Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-517611-7. Archived from the original on 2022-09-10. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Russell-Wood, A.J.R. (1998). The Portuguese empire, 1415–1808: a world on the move.
JHU Press.
ISBN 978-0-8018-5955-7. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Sen, Tansen (2016). "The Impact of Zheng He's Expeditions on Indian Ocean Interactions". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 79 (3): 609–636. doi:10.1017/S0041977X16001038.
Spence, Jonathan D. (1999). The Chan's Great Continent: China in Western Minds. W.W. Norton & Co.
ISBN 978-0-393-31989-7.
Spufford, Peter (1989). Money and its Use in Medieval Europe.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-37590-0. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Bagrow, Leo, R.A. Skelton (1964). History of cartography.
Transaction Publishers, 2009. ISBN 978-1-4128-1154-5. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Synge, J.B. (2007) [First published 1912]. A Book of Discovery.
Yesterday's Classics.
ISBN 978-1-59915-192-2. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Tamura, Eileen H.; Linda K. Mention; Noren W. Lush; Francis K.C. Tsui; Warren Cohen (1997). China: Understanding Its Past.
University of Hawaii Press.
ISBN 978-0-8248-1923-1. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Tracy, James D. (1994). Handbook of European History 1400–1600: Late Middle Ages, Renaissance, and Reformation.
Boston: Brill Academic Publishers.
ISBN 978-90-04-09762-9.
Tsai, Shih-Shan Henry (2002). Perpetual Happiness: The Ming Emperor Yongle.
University of Washington Press.
ISBN 978-0-295-98124-6. Archived from the original on 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Volker, T. (1971). Porcelain and the Dutch East India Company: as recorded in the Dagh-registers of Batavia Castle, those of Hirado and Deshima and other contemporary papers, 1602–1682. E.J. Brill.
Walton, Timothy R. (1994). The Spanish Treasure Fleets.
Pineapple Press (FL). ISBN 978-1-56164-049-2. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Weddle, Robert S. (1985). Spanish Sea: the Gulf Of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500–1685. Texas A&M University Press.
ISBN 978-0-89096-211-4.
Wilford, John Noble (1982). The Mapmakers, the Story of the Great Pioneers in Cartography from Antiquity to Space Age.
Vintage Books, Random House.
ISBN 978-0-394-75303-4.
Zweig, Stefan (2007) [First published 1938]. Conqueror of the Seas – The Story of Magellan.
Read Books.
ISBN 978-1-4067-6006-4. Archived from the original on 2022-05-20. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Web sources
"Amerigo Vespucci". Catholic Encyclopædia (New Advent). Archived from the original on 5 September 2011. Retrieved 22 June 2010.
"Ancient Silk Road Travelers". Silk Road Foundation.
Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
"By the road of pathfinders" (in Russian). Sbaikal.ru.
Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
"Discovering Francis Drake's California Harbor". Drake Navigators Guild.
Archived from the original on 21 September 2011. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
"Oregon History of Francis Drake". Fort Nehalem Publishing.
Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 10 May 2014.
"Exploration–Jacques Cartier". The Historica Dominion Institute.
Archived from the original on 1 March 2010. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
"Ferdinand Magellan". Catholic Encyclopædia (New Advent). Archived from the original on 13 January 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
"Food Bacteria-Spice Survey Shows Why Some Cultures Like It Hot". ScienceDaily.
March 5, 1998. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
Grunberg, Bernard (July–August 2007). "La folle aventure d'Hernan Cortés". L'Histoire. 322: 22. Archived from the original on 2011-06-29. Retrieved 2010-06-17.
"Historic and contemporary political and physical maps of California, including early exploration". University of San Francisco.
Archived from the original on 29 August 2011. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
McNeill, J. R.; Sampaolo, Marco; Wallenfeldt, Jeff (30 September 2019) [28 September 2019]. "Columbian Exchange". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Edinburgh: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021.
"Issues and Trends in China's Demographic History". Columbia University.
Archived from the original on 22 June 2010. Retrieved 4 June 2010.
Eccles, W.J. "Jacques Cartier". Britannica Online Encyclopædia.
Archived from the original on 12 July 2010. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
"Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo". San Diego Historical Society.
Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
"Maize Streak Virus-Resistant Transgenic Maize: an African solution to an African Problem". 
"The Cabot Dilemma: John Cabot's 1497 Voyage & the Limits of Historiography" ((on subscription)). Derek Croxton, University of Virginia.
Archived from the original on 9 July 2011. Retrieved 15 June 2010.
"The European Voyages of Exploration". The Applied History Research Group, University of Calgary.
Archived from the original on 22 July 2010. Retrieved 22 June 2010.
"The Lost Fort of Columbus". Smithsonian Magazine.
Archived from the original on 11 April 2013. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
"The Perfilyevs family" (in Russian). VSP.ru.
Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
"Super-Sized Cassava Plants May Help Fight Hunger In Africa". Researchnews, The Ohio State University.
May 24, 2006. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013.
"Willem Barentsz and the Northeast passage". University Library of Tromsø – The Northern Lights Route.
Archived from the original on 25 August 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2010.
Harwood, Jeremy (2006). To the Ends of the Earth: 100 Maps that Changed the World. F+W Publications Inc.
Further reading
Library resources about  Age of Discovery 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Brook, Timothy (2007). Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World (reissue ed.). Bloomsbury Press.
ISBN 978-1-59691-444-5.
Cipolla, Carlo (1970). European Culture and Overseas Expansion.
Pelican, London.
DeVoto, Bernard (1998) [First published 1952]. The Course of Empire.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
ISBN 978-0-395-92498-3. Archived from the original on 2022-04-17. Retrieved 2011-06-16.
Hall, Robert L. (1991). "Savoring Africa in the New World".  In Viola, Herman J.; Margolis, Carolyn (eds.). Seeds of Change: A Quincentennial Commemoration.
Smithsonian Institution Press. pp. 161–?. ISBN 978-1-56098-036-0.
Rice, Eugene F. Jr. (1994) [First published 1970]. The Foundations of Early Modern Europe: 1460–1559. W. W. Norton & Co.
ISBN 978-0-393-96304-5.
Wright, John K. (March 1947). "Terrae Incognitae: The Place of the Imagination in Geography". Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 37 (1): 1–15. doi:10.1080/00045604709351940. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-09-10. Retrieved 2018-12-29.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Age of Discovery.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Age of Discovery.
"The Faustian Impulse and European Exploration" at The Fortnightly Review
"Discover Columbus: Re-reading the Past" at Zinn Education Project.org (six-page lesson plan for high school students from Rethinking Schools)
Renaissance Era and Early Modern Europe (1486–1789)OverviewsEras
Renaissance
Outline
High Renaissance
Early Modern period
Early modern Europe
Elizabethan era
Age of Discovery
Baroque
Age of Enlightenment
International relations (1648–1814)
By country
Northern Europe
England
Papacy
France
Germany
Low Countries
EventsPolitical
Fall of Constantinople
Decline of the Byzantine Empire
Technological:
Printing Revolution
Intellectual:
Scientific Revolution
Social historyConcepts
Absolute monarchy
Journalism of Early Modern Europe
The General Crisis
PoliticsCountries
Holy Roman Empire
Free imperial city
France
Germany 
Britain
British Empire
Ottoman Empire
Portuguese Empire
Spanish Empire
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Cossack Hetmanate
Swedish Empire
Dutch Republic
Seventeen Provinces
Economic history
Habsburg monarchy
Russian Empire
Kingdom of Bohemia
Lands of the Bohemian Crown
Protestant Union
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
Leaders
Habsburg monarchy
England
House of Stuart
House of Tudor
France
House of Bourbon
Absolute monarchy in France
Ancien Régime
Louis XIV
Wars
French Wars of Religion
Thirty Years' War
Second Hundred Years' War
War of the Spanish Succession
Seven Years' War
Diplomacy
Peace of Westphalia
Treaties of Nijmegen
Diplomatic Revolution of 1756
ReligionOverviews
Christianity in the modern era
Proto-Protestantism
Bohemian Reformation
Hussites
History of European Jews in the Middle Ages
Haskalah
Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe
Protestant Reformation
Ninety-five Theses
Calvinism
Huguenots
English
Lutheranism
Scottish
Switzerland
Radical
Counter-Reformation
European wars of religion
Academic fieldsGeneral
Philosophy:
Renaissance philosophy
Renaissance humanism
Northern Europe
Greek scholars in the Renaissance
Science/technology:
Science in the Renaissance
Works
Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486)
Authors:
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
Matteo Palmieri
Leonardo da Vinci
ArtsGeneral
Renaissance art
Painting:
Italian painting
Florentine painting
Venetian painting
Dutch and Flemish painting
Early Netherlandish painting
End of period
Late modern period
Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
Age of Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
Nationalism
Revolutions of 1848
See alsoEurope
Art of Europe
Genetic history of Europe
History of the European Union
Maritime history of Europe
Military history of Europe
World
History of Western civilization
History of Christianity
History of the Mediterranean region
Human history • History of philosophy • History of Europe
Exploration and explorers by nation or regionExplorers by country
Chinese
French
Italian
Portuguese
Spanish
Romanian
Russian
Explorers by type
Canopy
Cave
Circumnavigators
Climbers
Desert
Polar explorers
Ocean
Deep-sea
Undersea explorers
Seafarers
Space travelers
Exploration by region
Asia
Central Asia
Europeans in Tibet
Africa
Australia
Interior
Americas
Prehistoric
North America
Europeans in the Americas
Pacific
Polynesians
Polar
Arctic
Antarctica
Exploration timelines
Chinese exploration
European exploration
Age of Discovery
Europeans in Asia
Maritime exploration
Space exploration
Links to related articles
EmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Old Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Spring and Autumn
Warring States
Qin
Eighteen Kingdoms
Han
Three Kingdoms
Jin
Sixteen Kingdoms
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Hittite
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Indo-greek
Bactrian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Hunnic
White
Asian
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese Empire
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
Jīn
Yuan
Uyghur
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Egyptian Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Eastern
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Despotate of Epirus
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese Empire
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Darawiish
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish–Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish
Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire
History by continent
Africa
Americas (North America
South America)
Antarctica
Eurasia (Europe
Asia)
Oceania (Australia)
Dutch EmpireColonies and trading posts of the Dutch East India Company (1602–1798)Governorate General
Batavia
Governorates
Ambon
Banda Islands
Cape Colony
Celebes
Ceylon
Coromandel
Formosa
Malacca
Moluccas
Northeast coast of Java
Directorates
Bengal
Persia
Suratte
Commandments
Bantam
Malabar
West coast of Sumatra
Residencies
Bantam
Banjarmasin
Batavia
Cheribon
Malang
Palembang
Preanger
Pontianak
Opperhoofd settlements
Myanmar
Canton
Dejima
Mauritius
Siam
Timor
Tonkin
Vietnam (1637–43)
Colonies and trading posts of the Dutch West India Company (1621–1792)Colonies in the Americas
Berbice 1
Brazil
Cayenne
Curaçao and Dependencies
Demerara
Essequibo
New Netherland
Pomeroon
Sint Eustatius and Dependencies
Surinam 2
Tobago
Virgin Islands
Trading posts in Africa
Arguin
Gold Coast
Loango-Angola
Senegambia
Slave Coast
Settlements of the Noordsche Compagnie (1614–1642)Settlements
Jan Mayen
Smeerenburg
Colonies of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815–1962)Until 1825
Bengal
Coromandel
Malacca
Suratte
Until 1853
Dejima
Until 1872
Gold Coast
Until 1945
Dutch East Indies
Until 1954
Curaçao and Dependencies 3
Surinam 3
Until 1962
New Guinea
Kingdom of the Netherlands (1954–present)Constituent countries
Aruba
Curaçao
Netherlands
Sint Maarten
Special municipalities of the Netherlands
Bonaire
Saba
Sint Eustatius
French overseas empireFormerFormer French colonies in Africa and the Indian OceanNorth Africa
Algeria
Morocco
Tunisia
West Africa
Côte d'Ivoire
Dahomey
Sudan
Guinea
Mauritania
Arguin Island
Niger
Senegal
Four Communes
Upper Volta
Togoland
James Island
Albreda
Equatorial Africa
Chad
Gabon
Middle Congo
Ubangi-Shari
Cameroons
Comoros
Anjouan
Grande Comore
Mohéli
Somaliland (Djibouti)
Madagascar
Isle de France
Former French colonies in the AmericasNew France
Acadia
Louisiana
Canada
Terre Neuve
French Caribbean
Dominica
Grenada
The Grenadines
Saint-Domingue
Haïti, Dominican Republic
Saint Kitts & Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent
Tobago
Virgin Islands
Equinoctial France
Berbice
France Antarctique
Inini
French colonization of the Americas
French West India Company
Former French colonies in Asia and OceaniaFrench India
Chandernagor
Coromandel Coast
Madras
Mahé
Pondichéry
Karaikal
Yanaon
Indochinese Union
Cambodia
Laos
Vietnam[vi]
Cochinchina
Annam
Tonkin
Kouang-Tchéou-Wan
Mandate for Syriaand the Lebanon
State of Syria
Aleppo
Damascus
Alawite State
Greater Lebanon
Jabal al-Druze
Sanjak of Alexandretta
Oceania
New Hebrides
Vanuatu
Port Louis-Philippe (Akaroa)
France–Asia relations
French East India Company
PresentOverseas FranceInhabited territoriesOverseas​ regions1
French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Mayotte2
Réunion
Overseas​ collectivities
French Polynesia
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Wallis and Futuna
Sui generis​ collectivity
New Caledonia
Uninhabited territoriesNorth Pacific Ocean
Clipperton Island
Overseas territory​ (French Southern​ and Antarctic Lands)
Adélie Land
Crozet Islands
French domains of Saint Helena
Kerguelen Islands
Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands
Scattered Islands in​ the Indian Ocean
Bassas da India3
Europa Island3
Glorioso Islands2, 3
Banc du Geyser
Juan de Nova Island3
Tromelin Island4
Portuguese overseas empireNorth Africa
1415–1640 Ceuta 1458–1550 Alcácer Ceguer (El Qsar es Seghir) 1471–1550 Arzila (Asilah) 1471–1662 Tangier 1485–1550 Mazagan (El Jadida) 1487–16th century Ouadane 1488–1541 Safim (Safi) 1489 Graciosa
1505–1541 Santa Cruz do Cabo de Gué (Agadir) 1506–1525 Mogador (Essaouira) 1506–1525 Aguz (Souira Guedima) 1506–1769 Mazagan (El Jadida) 1513–1541 Azamor (Azemmour) 1515–1541 São João da Mamora (Mehdya) 1577–1589 Arzila (Asilah)
Sub-Saharan Africa
1455–1633 Arguim 1462–1975 Cape Verde 1470–1975 São Tomé1 1471–1975 Príncipe1 1474–1778 Annobón 1478–1778 Fernando Poo (Bioko) 1482–1637 Elmina (São Jorge da Mina) 1482–1642 Portuguese Gold Coast 1508–15472 Madagascar3 1498–1540 Mascarene Islands
1500–1630 Malindi 1501–1975 Portuguese Mozambique 1502–1659 Saint Helena 1503–1698 Zanzibar 1505–1512 Quíloa (Kilwa) 1506–1511 Socotra 1557–1578 Accra 1575–1975 Portuguese Angola 1588–1974 Cacheu4 1593–1698 Mombassa (Mombasa)
1645–1888 Ziguinchor 1680–1961 São João Baptista de Ajudá, Benin 1687–1974 Bissau4
1728–1729 Mombassa (Mombasa) 1753–1975 Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe
1879–1974 Portuguese Guinea 1885–1974 Portuguese Congo5
1506–1615 Gamru (Bandar Abbas) 1507–1643 Sohar 1515–1622 Hormuz (Ormus) 1515–1648 Quriyat 1515–? Qalhat 1515–1650 Muscat 1515?–? Barka 1515–1633? Julfar (Ras al-Khaimah) 1521–1602 Bahrain (Muharraq • Manama) 1521–1529? Qatif 1521?–1551? Tarut Island 1550–1551 Qatif 1588–1648 Matrah
1620–? Khor Fakkan 1621?–? As Sib 1621–1622 Qeshm 1623–? Khasab 1623–? Libedia 1624–? Kalba 1624–? Madha 1624–1648 Dibba Al-Hisn 1624?–? Bandar-e Kong
Indian subcontinent
1498–1545 Laccadive Islands(Lakshadweep)
Portuguese India
• 1500–1663 Cochim (Kochi)  • 1501–1663 Cannanore (Kannur)  • 1502–1658 1659–1661 Quilon(Coulão / Kollam)  • 1502–1661 Pallipuram (Cochin de Cima)  • 1507–1657 Negapatam (Nagapatnam)  • 1510–1961 Goa  • 1512–1525 1750 Calicut(Kozhikode)  • 1518–1619 Portuguese Paliacate outpost (Pulicat)  • 1521–1740 Chaul
(Portuguese India)  • 1523–1662 Mylapore  • 1528–1666 Chittagong(Porto Grande De Bengala)  • 1531–1571 Chaul  • 1531–1571 Chalé  • 1534–1601 Salsette Island  • 1534–1661 Bombay (Mumbai)  • 1535 Ponnani  • 1535–1739 Baçaím (Vasai-Virar)  • 1536–1662 Cranganore (Kodungallur)  • 1540–1612 Surat  • 1548–1658 Tuticorin (Thoothukudi)  • 1559–1961 Daman and Diu  • 1568–1659 Mangalore
(Portuguese India)  • 1579–1632Hugli  • 1598–1610Masulipatnam (Machilipatnam)
1518–1521 Maldives 1518–1658 Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka) 1558–1573 Maldives
Portuguese India
• 1687–1749 Mylapore
Portuguese India
• 1779–1954 Dadra and Nagar Haveli
East Asia and Oceania
1511–1641 Portuguese Malacca [Malaysia] 1512–1621 Maluku [Indonesia]  • 1522–1575  Ternate  • 1576–1605  Ambon  • 1578–1650  Tidore 1512–1665 Makassar [Indonesia] 1515–1859 Larantuka [Indonesia] 1557–1999 Macau [China] 1580–1586 Nagasaki [Japan]
1642–1975 Portuguese Timor (East Timor)1
Portuguese Macau
• 1864–1999 Coloane  • 1851–1999 Taipa  • 1890–1999 Ilha Verde
Portuguese Macau
• 1938–1941 Lapa and Montanha (Hengqin)
In 2002, East Timor's independence was fully recognized.North America & North Atlantic
1420 Madeira 1432 Azores
1500–1579? Terra Nova (Newfoundland) 1500–1579? Labrador 1516–1579? Nova Scotia
South America & Caribbean
1500–1822 Brazil  • 1534–1549  Captaincy Colonies of Brazil  • 1549–1572  Brazil  • 1572–1578  Bahia  • 1572–1578  Rio de Janeiro  • 1578–1607  Brazil  • 1621–1815  Brazil 1536–1620 Barbados
1621–1751 Maranhão 1680–1777 Nova Colónia do Sacramento
1751–1772 Grão-Pará and Maranhão 1772–1775 Grão-Pará and Rio Negro 1772–1775 Maranhão and Piauí
1808–1822 Cisplatina (Uruguay) 1809–1817 Portuguese Guiana (Amapá) 1822 Upper Peru (Bolivia)
Armorial of Portuguese colonies
Evolution of the Portuguese Empire
Portuguese colonial architecture
Portuguese colonialism in the East Indies
Portuguese colonization of the Americas
Theory of the Portuguese discovery of Australia
Spanish EmpireTimeline–immersed
Catholic Monarchs
Conquest of the Americas, Asia and the Pacific
Treaty of Tordesillas
Italian Wars
Habsburgs
Golden Age
War of the League of Cognac
Encomiendas
New Laws in favour of the indigenous
Expulsion of the Moriscos
Ottoman–Habsburg wars
French Wars of Religion
Bruneian–Spanish conflict
Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)
Piracy in the Caribbean
Eighty Years' War
Spanish–Moro conflict
Thirty Years' War
Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659)
Portuguese Restoration War
War of the Spanish Succession
Queen Anne's War
Bourbons
Bourbon Reforms
War of Jenkins' Ear
Treaty of Madrid (1750)
Seven Years' War
Nootka Convention
Napoleonic invasion
Third Treaty of San Ildefonso
Independence of Spanish continental Americas
Adams–Onís Treaty
Liberal constitution
Carlist Wars
Spanish–American War
German–Spanish Treaty (1899)
Spanish Civil War
Independence of Morocco
Independence of Equatorial Guinea
Western Sahara conflict
TerritoriesEurope
Spain
Gibraltar
Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia
Milan
Union with Holy Roman Empire
Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, northernmost France
Franche-Comté
Pyrénées-Orientales
Union with Portugal
Asia
Philippines
Pacific Islands (Guam, Mariana, Caroline, Micronesia, Palau, Marshall)
Northern Taiwan
Tidore
North America
Florida
New Spain (Western United States, Mexico, Central America, Spanish Caribbean)
Spanish Louisiana (Central United States)
Coastal Alaska
Central America
Trinidad
Jamaica
Haiti
Aruba
Curazao
Bonaire
Belize
South America
Venezuela, part of Guyana
New Granada (Colombia, Ecuador, Panama, Venezuela a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon)
Peru (Peru, Acre)
Río de la Plata (Argentina, Paraguay, Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Falkland Islands)
Chile
Africa
Equatorial Guinea
Northern Africa (Western Sahara, Spanish Morocco, Tripoli, Tunis, Peñón of Algiers, Oran,  Béjaïa, Ifni and Cape Juby)
Antarctica
Terra Australis
Administration
Archivo de Indias
Council of the Indies
Cabildo
Exequatur
Laws of the Indies
Papal bull
Royal Decree of Graces
Trial of residence
School of Salamanca
Administrative subdivisionsViceroyalties
Columbian
New Spain
New Granada
Perú
Río de la Plata
Captaincies General
Chile
Cuba
Guatemala
Philippines
Provincias Internas
Puerto Rico
Santo Domingo
Venezuela
Yucatán
Governorates
Castilla de Oro
Cuba
La Florida
La Luisiana
New Andalusia (1501–1513)
New Andalusia
New Castile
New Navarre
New Toledo
Paraguay
Río de la Plata
Terra Australis
Audiencias
Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Caracas
Charcas
Concepción
Cusco
Guadalajara
Guatemala
Lima
Manila
Mexico
Panamá
Quito
Santiago
Santo Domingo
EconomyCurrencies
Dollar (Peso)
Real
Maravedí
Escudo
Columnario
Doubloon
Trade
Manila galleon
Spanish treasure fleet
Casa de Contratación
Spanish Road
Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas
Barcelona Trading Company
Consulate of the Sea
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires
MilitaryArmies
Tercio
Army of Flanders
Free Company of Volunteers of Catalonia
Indian auxiliaries
Spanish Armada
Ships of the line
Royalists
Legión
Strategists
Duke of Alba
Antonio de Leyva
Martín de Goiti
Alfonso d'Avalos
García de Toledo Osorio
Duke of Savoy
Álvaro de Bazán the Elder
John of Austria
Charles Bonaventure de Longueval
Pedro de Zubiaur
Ambrosio Spinola
Blas de Lezo
Bernardo de Gálvez
Mariners
Christopher Columbus
Pinzón brothers
Ferdinand Magellan
Juan Sebastián Elcano
Juan de la Cosa
Juan Ponce de León
Miguel López de Legazpi
Pedro Menéndez de Avilés
Sebastián de Ocampo
Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
Alonso de Ojeda
Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Alonso de Salazar
Andrés de Urdaneta
Antonio de Ulloa
Ruy López de Villalobos
Diego Columbus
Alonso de Ercilla
Nicolás de Ovando
Juan de Ayala
Sebastián Vizcaíno
Juan Fernández
Luis Fajardo
Felipe González de Ahedo
Conquistadors
Hernán Cortés
Francisco Pizarro
Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada
Hernán Pérez de Quesada
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar
Pedro de Valdivia
Gaspar de Portolà
Pere Fages i Beleta
Joan Orpí
Pedro de Alvarado
Martín de Ursúa
Diego de Almagro
Pánfilo de Narváez
Diego de Mazariegos
Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera
Pere d'Alberní i Teixidor
García López de Cárdenas
Notable battlesOld WorldWon
Comuneros
Bicocca
Rome (1527)
Landriano
Pavia
Tunis
Mühlberg
St.
Quentin
Gravelines
Malta
Lepanto
Antwerp
Azores
Mons
Gembloux
Ostend
English Armada
Cape Celidonia
White Mountain
Breda
Nördlingen
Valenciennes
Ceuta
Bitonto
Bailén
Vitoria
Tetouan
Alhucemas
Lost
Capo d'Orso
Vienna (1529)
Preveza
Siege of Castelnuovo
Algiers
Ceresole
Balearic Islands (1558)
Djerba
Tunis
Spanish Armada
Leiden
Rocroi
Downs
Montes Claros
Passaro
Manila Bay
Trafalgar
Somosierra
Annual
Mactan
New WorldWon
Tenochtitlan
Cajamarca
Cusco
Bogotá savanna
Penco
Mataquito
Guadalupe Island
Recife
San Juan (1595)
Bahia
Colonia del Sacramento
Comuneros (Paraguay)
Cartagena de Indias
Cuerno Verde
Túpac Amaru II
Túpac Katari
Pensacola
Newfoundland
San Juan (1797)
Lost
La Noche Triste
Iguape
Tucapel
Guiana
Curalaba
Comuneros (New Granada)
Trinidad (1797)
Chacabuco
Boyacá
Carabobo
Pichincha
Ayacucho
Guam
Santiago de Cuba
Asomante
Spanish conquests
Canary Islands
The Americas
Aztec
Maya
Chiapas
Yucatán
Guatemala
Petén
El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua
Chibchan Nations
Colombia
Chile
Inca
Philippines
Other civil topics
Spanish missions in the Americas
Architecture
Mesoamerican codices
Cusco painting tradition
Indochristian painting in New Spain
Quito painting tradition
Tapada limeña
Academia Antártica
Colonial universities in Hispanic America
Colonial universities in the Philippines
General Archive of the Indies
Colonial Spanish Horse
Mustang
Castas
Criollos in the colonial society
Old inquisition
Slavery in Spanish Empire
Asiento
Law of coartación (which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others)
Great Potosí Mint Fraud of 1649
History of EuropePrehistory
Paleolithic Europe
Neolithic Europe
Bronze Age Europe
Iron Age Europe
Classical antiquity
Classical Greece
Roman Republic
Hellenistic period
Roman Empire
Early Christianity
Christianity in late antiquity
Crisis of the Third Century
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
Migration Period
Christianity in the Middle Ages
Christianization
Francia
Anglo-Saxon England
Byzantine Empire
Papal States
Bulgarian Empire
First
Second
Maritime republics
Venice
Genoa
Pisa
Amalfi
Viking Age
Kievan Rus'
Crown of Aragon
Holy Roman Empire
High Middle Ages
Republic of Florence
Feudalism
Crusades
Mongol invasion
Serbian Empire
Late Middle Ages
Black Death
Hundred Years' War
Kalmar Union
Early modern
Renaissance
Christianity in the modern era
Reformation
Age of Discovery
Baroque
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
Thirty Years' War
Absolute monarchy
Ottoman Empire
Portuguese Empire
Spanish Empire
Early modern France
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Cossack Hetmanate
Swedish Empire
Dutch Republic
British Empire
Habsburg monarchy
Russian Empire
Age of Enlightenment
Late modern
Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
Nationalism
Revolutions of 1848
World War I
Russian Revolution
Interwar period
World War II
Cold War
European integration
COVID-19 pandemic
See also
Art of Europe
Genetic history of Europe
History of Christianity
History of the Mediterranean region
History of the European Union
History of Western civilization
Maritime history of Europe
Military history of Europe
Crusading movement
Western world and cultureFoundations
Cradle of civilization
Old World
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Rome
Roman Empire
Western
Eastern
Roman legacy
Romanization
Romano-Germanic culture
Christendom
History
European Bronze Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
early
high
late
Renaissance
Early modern period
Age of Discovery
Reformation
Age of Enlightenment
Scientific Revolution
Late modern period
Age of Revolution
Abolitionism
Emancipation
Capitalism
Industrial Revolution
Great Divergence
Modern era
World War I
Interwar period
Universal suffrage
World War II
Cold War
Post–Cold War era
Information age
War on terror
Second Cold War
Culture
Alphabet
Greek
Latin
Cyrillic
Architecture
Art
Periods
Calendar
Cuisine
Diet
Classical tradition
Studies
Clothing
History
Dance
Esotericism
Astrology
Folklore
Law
Languages
Eurolinguistics
Standard Average European
Literature
Canon
Media
Internet
Music
Chant
Classical
Folk
Mythology
Painting (contemporary)
Philosophy
Science
Values
Religion
East–West Schism
Western Christianity
Decline
Secularism
Philosophy
Hellenistic philosophy
Judeo-Christian ethics
Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Christian existentialism
Humanism
Christian humanism
Secular humanism
Liberalism
Conservatism
Socialism
Continental philosophy
Analytic philosophy
Post-structuralism
Tolerance
Paradox
Relativism
Peritrope
Atlanticism
Religion
Judaism
Culture
Christianity
Culture
Western/Eastern
Catholic Church
Latin Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Paganism
Baltic
Celtic
Finnish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Frankish
Gothic
Old Norse
Hellenistic
Roman
Slavic
Neo
Agnosticism
Atheism
Law
Natural law
Rule of law
Equality before the law
Constitutionalism
Human rights
Life
Thought
Speech
Press
Religion
Property
Democracy
International law
Contemporaryintegration
ABCANZ Armies
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
ANZUS
Arctic Council
AUKUS
Baltic Assembly
Benelux
British–Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
EEA
EFTA
ESA
EU
EU Customs Union
Eurozone
EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Five Eyes
G7
Lancaster House Treaties
Lublin Triangle
NATO
Nordic Council
OSCE
Pacific Islands Forum
PROSUL/PROSUR
Rio Treaty
Schengen
Special Relationship
Three Seas Initiative
USMCA
Visegrád Group
West Nordic Council
Western Bloc
Western European and Others Group
Westernization
Authority control: National libraries 
Japan
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 5 October 2022, at 14:47 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
