Aristotle - Wikipedia
Aristotle
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Classical Greek philosopher and polymath (384–322 BC)
For other uses, see Aristotle (disambiguation).
AristotleRoman copy in marble of a Greek bronze bust of Aristotle by Lysippos, c. 330 BC, with modern alabaster mantleBorn384 BC[A]Stagira, ChalcidiceDied322 BC (aged 61–62)Euboea, Macedonian EmpireEducationPlatonic AcademyNotable workCorpus AristotelicumSpousePythiasEraAncient Greek philosophyRegionWestern philosophySchool
Peripatetic school
Aristotelianism
Classical republicanism
Notable studentsAlexander the Great, Theophrastus, AristoxenusMain interests
Biology
Zoology
Psychology
Physics
Metaphysics
Logic
Ethics
Rhetoric
Aesthetics
Music
Poetry
Economics
Politics
Government
Meteorology
Geology
Notable ideasAristotelianism
Speculative philosophy
Aristotelian logic, syllogism
Aristotelian theology
Four causes
Genus and differentia
Hylomorphism, substance, essence, accident
Hypokeimenon
Potentiality and actuality
Theory of universals
Unmoved mover
Natural philosophy
Aristotelian biology
Aristotelian physics
Common sense
Eternity of the world
Five wits
Horror vacui
Theory of elements, aether
Rational animal
Practical philosophy
Aristotelian ethics
Catharsis
Deliberative, epideictic and forensic rhetoric
Enthymeme and Paradeigma
Family as a model for the state
Golden mean
Kyklos
Magnanimity
Mimesis
Natural slavery
Intellectual virtues: sophia, episteme, nous, phronesis, techne
Three appeals: ethos, logos, pathos
Views on women
Influences
Plato
Socrates
Heraclitus
Parmenides
Empedocles
Phaleas
Hippodamus
Hippias
Influenced
Virtually all subsequent Western and Middle Eastern philosophy, especially Aristotelianism including Averroism, Avicennism, Literary Neo-Aristotelianism, Maimonideanism, Objectivism, Peripatetics, Scholasticism (Llullism, Neo, Scotism, Second, Thomism, etc), School of Brentano, additionally Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism as well as significant amounts of subsequent science especially protoscience.
See: List of writers influenced by Aristotle, Commentaries on Aristotle, Pseudo-Aristotle
Aristotle (/ˈærɪstɒtəl/; Greek: Ἀριστοτέλης Aristotélēs, pronounced [aristotélɛːs]; 384–322 BC) was a Greek philosopher and polymath during the Classical period in Ancient Greece.
Taught by Plato, he was the founder of the Peripatetic school of philosophy within the Lyceum and the wider Aristotelian tradition.
His writings cover many subjects including physics, biology, zoology, metaphysics, logic, ethics, aesthetics, poetry, theatre, music, rhetoric, psychology, linguistics, economics, politics, meteorology, geology, and government.
Aristotle provided a complex synthesis of the various philosophies existing prior to him.
It was above all from his teachings that the West inherited its intellectual lexicon, as well as problems and methods of inquiry.
As a result, his philosophy has exerted a unique influence on almost every form of knowledge in the West and it continues to be a subject of contemporary philosophical discussion.
Little is known about his life.
Aristotle was born in the city of Stagira in Northern Greece.
His father, Nicomachus, died when Aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian.
At seventeen or eighteen years of age he joined Plato's Academy in Athens and remained there until the age of thirty-seven (c. 347 BC). Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip II of Macedon, tutored Alexander the Great beginning in 343 BC. He established a library in the Lyceum which helped him to produce many of his hundreds of books on papyrus scrolls.
Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues for publication, only around a third of his original output has survived, none of it intended for publication.
Aristotle's views profoundly shaped medieval scholarship.
The influence of physical science extended from Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages into the Renaissance, and were not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics were developed.
Some of Aristotle's zoological observations found in his biology, such as on the hectocotyl (reproductive) arm of the octopus, were disbelieved until the 19th century.
He also influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophies during the Middle Ages, as well as Christian theology, especially the Neoplatonism of the Early Church and the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church.
Aristotle was revered among medieval Muslim scholars as "The First Teacher", and among medieval Christians like Thomas Aquinas as simply "The Philosopher", while the poet Dante called him "the master of those who know". His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, and were studied by medieval scholars such as Peter Abelard and John Buridan.
Aristotle's influence on logic continued well into the 19th century.
In addition, his ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics.
Aristotle has been called the father of logic, biology, political science, zoology, embryology, natural law, scientific method, rhetoric, psychology, realism, criticism, individualism, teleology, and meteorology.
Contents
Life
School of Aristotle in Mieza, Macedonia, Greece
In general, the details of Aristotle's life are not well-established.
The biographies written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.[B]
Aristotle was born in 384 BC in Stagira, Chalcidice, about 55 km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki.
His father, Nicomachus, was the personal physician to King Amyntas of Macedon.
While he was young, Aristotle learned about biology and medical information, which was taught by his father.
Both of Aristotle's parents died when he was about thirteen, and Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian.
Although little information about Aristotle's childhood has survived, he probably spent some time within the Macedonian palace, making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy.
At the age of seventeen or eighteen, Aristotle moved to Athens to continue his education at Plato's Academy.
He probably experienced the Eleusinian Mysteries as he wrote when describing the sights one viewed at the Eleusinian Mysteries, "to experience is to learn" [παθείν μαθεĩν]. Aristotle remained in Athens for nearly twenty years before leaving in 348/47 BC. The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the Academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus, although it is possible that he feared the anti-Macedonian sentiments in Athens at that time and left before Plato died.
Aristotle then accompanied Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor.
After the death of Hermias, Aristotle travelled with his pupil Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos, where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island and its sheltered lagoon.
While in Lesbos, Aristotle married Pythias, either Hermias's adoptive daughter or niece.
She bore him a daughter, whom they also named Pythias.
In 343 BC, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander.
Portrait bust of Aristotle; an Imperial Roman (1st or 2nd century AD) copy of a lost bronze sculpture made by Lysippos
Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon.
During Aristotle's time in the Macedonian court, he gave lessons not only to Alexander but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander.
Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and Aristotle's own attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric.
In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants". By 335 BC, Aristotle had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum.
Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years.
While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira, who bore him a son whom he named after his father, Nicomachus.
If the Suda – an uncritical compilation from the Middle Ages – is accurate, he may also have had an erômenos, Palaephatus of Abydus.
This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works.
He wrote many dialogues, of which only fragments have survived.
Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students.
His most important treatises include Physics, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, Politics, On the Soul and Poetics.
Aristotle studied and made significant contributions to "logic, metaphysics, mathematics, physics, biology, botany, ethics, politics, agriculture, medicine, dance, and theatre."
Near the end of his life, Alexander and Aristotle became estranged over Alexander's relationship with Persia and Persians.
A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but the only evidence of this is an unlikely claim made some six years after the death.
Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled.
In 322 BC, Demophilus and Eurymedon the Hierophant reportedly denounced Aristotle for impiety, prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, on Euboea, at which occasion he was said to have stated: "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy" – a reference to Athens's trial and execution of Socrates.
He died on Euboea of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and leaving a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife.
Speculative philosophy
Logic
Main article: Term logic
Further information: Non-Aristotelian logic
With the Prior Analytics, Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th-century advances in mathematical logic.
Kant stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that with Aristotle logic reached its completion.
Organon
Main article: Organon
One of Aristotle's types of syllogism[C]
In words
In terms[D]
In equations[E]
All men are mortal.    All Greeks are men.∴ All Greeks are mortal.
M a PS a MS a P
What is today called Aristotelian logic with its types of syllogism (methods of logical argument), Aristotle himself would have labelled "analytics". The term "logic" he reserved to mean dialectics.
Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers.
The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into a set of six books called the Organon around 40 BC by Andronicus of Rhodes or others among his followers.
The books are:
Categories
On Interpretation
Prior Analytics
Posterior Analytics
Topics
On Sophistical Refutations
Plato (left) and Aristotle in Raphael's 1509 fresco, The School of Athens.
Aristotle holds his Nicomachean Ethics and gestures to the earth, representing his view in immanent realism, whilst Plato gestures to the heavens, indicating his Theory of Forms, and holds his Timaeus.
The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings.
It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation, to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the Analytics) and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu: the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning.
The Rhetoric is not conventionally included, but it states that it relies on the Topics.
Metaphysics
Main article: Metaphysics (Aristotle)
The word "metaphysics" appears to have been coined by the first century AD editor who assembled various small selections of Aristotle's works to the treatise we know by the name Metaphysics.
Aristotle called it "first philosophy", and distinguished it from mathematics and natural science (physics) as the contemplative (theoretikē) philosophy which is "theological" and studies the divine.
He wrote in his Metaphysics (1026a16):
if there were no other independent things besides the composite natural ones, the study of nature would be the primary kind of knowledge; but if there is some motionless independent thing, the knowledge of this precedes it and is first philosophy, and it is universal in just this way, because it is first.
And it belongs to this sort of philosophy to study being as being, both what it is and what belongs to it just by virtue of being.
Substance
Further information: Hylomorphism
Aristotle examines the concepts of substance (ousia) and essence (to ti ên einai, "the what it was to be") in his Metaphysics (Book VII), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form, a philosophical theory called hylomorphism.
In Book VIII, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum, or the stuff of which it is composed.
For example, the matter of a house is the bricks, stones, timbers, etc., or whatever constitutes the potential house, while the form of the substance is the actual house, namely 'covering for bodies and chattels' or any other differentia that let us define something as a house.
The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form.
Immanent realism
Main article: Aristotle's theory of universals
Plato's forms exist as universals, like the ideal form of an apple.
For Aristotle, both matter and form belong to the individual thing (hylomorphism).
Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal.
Aristotle's ontology places the universal (katholou) in particulars (kath' hekaston), things in the world, whereas for Plato the universal is a separately existing form which actual things imitate.
For Aristotle, "form" is still what phenomena are based on, but is "instantiated" in a particular substance.
Plato argued that all things have a universal form, which could be either a property or a relation to other things.
When one looks at an apple, for example, one sees an apple, and one can also analyse a form of an apple.
In this distinction, there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple.
Moreover, one can place an apple next to a book, so that one can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other.
Plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things.
For example, it is possible that there is no particular good in existence, but "good" is still a proper universal form.
Aristotle disagreed with Plato on this point, arguing that all universals are instantiated at some period of time, and that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things.
In addition, Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals.
Where Plato spoke of the forms as existing separately from the things that participate in them, Aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated.
So, according to Aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.
Potentiality and actuality
Further information: Potentiality and actuality (Aristotle)
With regard to the change (kinesis) and its causes now, as he defines in his Physics and On Generation and Corruption 319b–320a, he distinguishes the coming to be from:
growth and diminution, which is change in quantity;
locomotion, which is change in space; and
alteration, which is change in quality.
Aristotle argued that a capability like playing the flute could be acquired – the potential made actual – by learning.
The coming to be is a change where nothing persists of which the resultant is a property.
In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality (dynamis) and actuality (entelecheia) in association with the matter and the form.
Referring to potentiality, this is what a thing is capable of doing or being acted upon if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else.
For example, the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially (dynamei) a plant, and if it is not prevented by something, it will become a plant.
Potentially beings can either 'act' (poiein) or 'be acted upon' (paschein), which can be either innate or learned.
For example, the eyes possess the potentiality of sight (innate – being acted upon), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning (exercise – acting). Actuality is the fulfilment of the end of the potentiality.
Because the end (telos) is the principle of every change, and for the sake of the end exists potentiality, therefore actuality is the end.
Referring then to the previous example, it can be said that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.
For that for the sake of which (to hou heneka) a thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired.
For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see.
In summary, the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities, which is also a final cause or end.
Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality.
With this definition of the particular substance (i.e., matter and form), Aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings, for example, "what is it that makes a man one"? Since, according to Plato there are two Ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity? However, according to Aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same.
Epistemology
Aristotle's immanent realism means his epistemology is based on the study of things that exist or happen in the world, and rises to knowledge of the universal, whereas for Plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal Forms (or ideas) and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these.
Aristotle uses induction from examples alongside deduction, whereas Plato relies on deduction from a priori principles.
Natural philosophy
Aristotle's "natural philosophy" spans a wide range of natural phenomena including those now covered by physics, biology and other natural sciences.
In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences.
Aristotle's work encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry.
Aristotle makes philosophy in the broad sense coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science". However, his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method". For Aristotle, "all science (dianoia) is either practical, poetical or theoretical" (Metaphysics 1025b25). His practical science includes ethics and politics; his poetical science means the study of fine arts including poetry; his theoretical science covers physics, mathematics and metaphysics.
Physics
The four classical elements (fire, air, water, earth) of Empedocles and Aristotle illustrated with a burning log.
The log releases all four elements as it is destroyed.
Main article: Aristotelian physics
Five elements
Main article: Classical element
In his On Generation and Corruption, Aristotle related each of the four elements proposed earlier by Empedocles, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, to two of the four sensible qualities, hot, cold, wet, and dry.
In the Empedoclean scheme, all matter was made of the four elements, in differing proportions.
Aristotle's scheme added the heavenly Aether, the divine substance of the heavenly spheres, stars and planets.
Aristotle's elements
Element
Hot/Cold
Wet/Dry
Motion
Modern stateof matter
Earth
Cold
Dry
Down
Solid
Water
Cold
Wet
Down
Liquid
Air
Hot
Wet
Up
Gas
Fire
Hot
Dry
Up
Plasma
Aether
(divinesubstance)
—
Circular(in heavens)
—
Motion
Further information: History of classical mechanics
Aristotle describes two kinds of motion: "violent" or "unnatural motion", such as that of a thrown stone, in the Physics (254b10), and "natural motion", such as of a falling object, in On the Heavens (300a20). In violent motion, as soon as the agent stops causing it, the motion stops also: in other words, the natural state of an object is to be at rest,[F] since Aristotle does not address friction.
With this understanding, it can be observed that, as Aristotle stated, heavy objects (on the ground, say) require more force to make them move; and objects pushed with greater force move faster.[G] This would imply the equation
=
,
incorrect in modern physics.
Natural motion depends on the element concerned: the aether naturally moves in a circle around the heavens,[H] while the 4 Empedoclean elements move vertically up (like fire, as is observed) or down (like earth) towards their natural resting places.[I]
Aristotle's laws of motion.
In Physics he states that objects fall at a speed proportional to their weight and inversely proportional to the density of the fluid they are immersed in.
This is a correct approximation for objects in Earth's gravitational field moving in air or water.
In the Physics (215a25), Aristotle effectively states a quantitative law, that the speed, v, of a falling body is proportional (say, with constant c) to its weight, W, and inversely proportional to the density,[J] ρ, of the fluid in which it is falling:;
=
Aristotle implies that in a vacuum the speed of fall would become infinite, and concludes from this apparent absurdity that a vacuum is not possible.
Opinions have varied on whether Aristotle intended to state quantitative laws.
Henri Carteron held the "extreme view" that Aristotle's concept of force was basically qualitative, but other authors reject this.
Archimedes corrected Aristotle's theory that bodies move towards their natural resting places; metal boats can float if they displace enough water; floating depends in Archimedes' scheme on the mass and volume of the object, not, as Aristotle thought, its elementary composition.
Aristotle's writings on motion remained influential until the Early Modern period.
John Philoponus (in the Middle Ages) and Galileo are said to have shown by experiment that Aristotle's claim that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect.
A contrary opinion is given by Carlo Rovelli, who argues that Aristotle's physics of motion is correct within its domain of validity, that of objects in the Earth's gravitational field immersed in a fluid such as air.
In this system, heavy bodies in steady fall indeed travel faster than light ones (whether friction is ignored, or not), and they do fall more slowly in a denser medium.[K]
Newton's "forced" motion corresponds to Aristotle's "violent" motion with its external agent, but Aristotle's assumption that the agent's effect stops immediately it stops acting (e.g., the ball leaves the thrower's hand) has awkward consequences: he has to suppose that surrounding fluid helps to push the ball along to make it continue to rise even though the hand is no longer acting on it, resulting in the Medieval theory of impetus.
Four causes
Main article: Four causes
Aristotle argued by analogy with woodwork that a thing takes its form from four causes: in the case of a table, the wood used (material cause), its design (formal cause), the tools and techniques used (efficient cause), and its decorative or practical purpose (final cause).
Aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active factors.
His term aitia is traditionally translated as "cause", but it does not always refer to temporal sequence; it might be better translated as "explanation", but the traditional rendering will be employed here.
Material cause describes the material out of which something is composed.
Thus the material cause of a table is wood.
It is not about action.
It does not mean that one domino knocks over another domino.
The formal cause is its form, i.e., the arrangement of that matter.
It tells one what a thing is, that a thing is determined by the definition, form, pattern, essence, whole, synthesis or archetype.
It embraces the account of causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws, as the whole (i.e., macrostructure) is the cause of its parts, a relationship known as the whole-part causation.
Plainly put, the formal cause is the idea in the mind of the sculptor that brings the sculpture into being.
A simple example of the formal cause is the mental image or idea that allows an artist, architect, or engineer to create a drawing.
The efficient cause is "the primary source", or that from which the change under consideration proceeds.
It identifies 'what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed' and so suggests all sorts of agents, non-living or living, acting as the sources of change or movement or rest.
Representing the current understanding of causality as the relation of cause and effect, this covers the modern definitions of "cause" as either the agent or agency or particular events or states of affairs.
In the case of two dominoes, when the first is knocked over it causes the second also to fall over.
In the case of animals, this agency is a combination of how it develops from the egg, and how its body functions.
The final cause (telos) is its purpose, the reason why a thing exists or is done, including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities.
The final cause is the purpose or function that something is supposed to serve.
This covers modern ideas of motivating causes, such as volition.
In the case of living things, it implies adaptation to a particular way of life.
Optics
Further information: History of optics
Aristotle describes experiments in optics using a camera obscura in Problems, book 15. The apparatus consisted of a dark chamber with a small aperture that let light in.
With it, he saw that whatever shape he made the hole, the sun's image always remained circular.
He also noted that increasing the distance between the aperture and the image surface magnified the image.
Chance and spontaneity
Further information: Accident (philosophy)
According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause such as simple necessity.
Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things, "from what is spontaneous". There is also more a specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that only applies to people's moral choices.
Astronomy
Further information: History of astronomy
In astronomy, Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out correctly that if "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them."
Geology/Natural Sciences
Further information: History of geology
Aristotle noted that the ground level of the Aeolian islands changed before a volcanic eruption.
Aristotle was one of the first people to record any geological observations.
He stated that geological change was too slow to be observed in one person's lifetime.
The geologist Charles Lyell noted that Aristotle described such change, including "lakes that had dried up" and "deserts that had become watered by rivers", giving as examples the growth of the Nile delta since the time of Homer, and "the upheaving of one of the Aeolian islands, previous to a volcanic eruption."'
Aristotle also made many observations about the hydrologic cycle and meteorology (including his major writings "Meteorologica"). For example, he made some of the earliest observations about desalination: he observed early – and correctly – that when seawater is heated, freshwater evaporates and that the oceans are then replenished by the cycle of rainfall and river runoff ("I have proved by experiment that salt water evaporated forms fresh and the vapor does not when it condenses condense into sea water again.")
Biology
Main article: Aristotle's biology
Among many pioneering zoological observations, Aristotle described the reproductive hectocotyl arm of the octopus (bottom left).
Empirical research
Aristotle was the first person to study biology systematically, and biology forms a large part of his writings.
He spent two years observing and describing the zoology of Lesbos and the surrounding seas, including in particular the Pyrrha lagoon in the centre of Lesbos.
His data in History of Animals, Generation of Animals, Movement of Animals, and Parts of Animals are assembled from his own observations, statements given by people with specialized knowledge such as beekeepers and fishermen, and less accurate accounts provided by travellers from overseas.
His apparent emphasis on animals rather than plants is a historical accident: his works on botany have been lost, but two books on plants by his pupil Theophrastus have survived.
Aristotle reports on the sea-life visible from observation on Lesbos and the catches of fishermen.
He describes the catfish, electric ray, and frogfish in detail, as well as cephalopods such as the octopus and paper nautilus.
His description of the hectocotyl arm of cephalopods, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until the 19th century.
He gives accurate descriptions of the four-chambered fore-stomachs of ruminants, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark.
He notes that an animal's structure is well matched to function, so, among birds, the heron, which lives in marshes with soft mud and lives by catching fish, has a long neck and long legs, and a sharp spear-like beak, whereas ducks that swim have short legs and webbed feet.
Darwin, too, noted these sorts of differences between similar kinds of animal, but unlike Aristotle used the data to come to the theory of evolution.
Aristotle's writings can seem to modern readers close to implying evolution, but while Aristotle was aware that new mutations or hybridizations could occur, he saw these as rare accidents.
For Aristotle, accidents, like heat waves in winter, must be considered distinct from natural causes.
He was thus critical of Empedocles's materialist theory of a "survival of the fittest" origin of living things and their organs, and ridiculed the idea that accidents could lead to orderly results.
To put his views into modern terms, he nowhere says that different species can have a common ancestor, or that one kind can change into another, or that kinds can become extinct.
Scientific style
Aristotle inferred growth laws from his observations on animals, including that brood size decreases with body mass, whereas gestation period increases.
He was correct in these predictions, at least for mammals: data are shown for mouse and elephant.
Aristotle did not do experiments in the modern sense.
He used the ancient Greek term pepeiramenoi to mean observations, or at most investigative procedures like dissection.
In Generation of Animals, he finds a fertilized hen's egg of a suitable stage and opens it to see the embryo's heart beating inside.
Instead, he practiced a different style of science: systematically gathering data, discovering patterns common to whole groups of animals, and inferring possible causal explanations from these.; This style is common in modern biology when large amounts of data become available in a new field, such as genomics.
It does not result in the same certainty as experimental science, but it sets out testable hypotheses and constructs a narrative explanation of what is observed.
In this sense, Aristotle's biology is scientific.
From the data he collected and documented, Aristotle inferred quite a number of rules relating the life-history features of the live-bearing tetrapods (terrestrial placental mammals) that he studied.
Among these correct predictions are the following.
Brood size decreases with (adult) body mass, so that an elephant has fewer young (usually just one) per brood than a mouse.
Lifespan increases with gestation period, and also with body mass, so that elephants live longer than mice, have a longer period of gestation, and are heavier.
As a final example, fecundity decreases with lifespan, so long-lived kinds like elephants have fewer young in total than short-lived kinds like mice.
Classification of living things
Further information: Scala naturae
Aristotle recorded that the embryo of a dogfish was attached by a cord to a kind of placenta (the yolk sac), like a higher animal; this formed an exception to the linear scale from highest to lowest.
Aristotle distinguished about 500 species of animals, arranging these in the History of Animals in a graded scale of perfection, a nonreligious version of the scala naturae, with man at the top.
His system had eleven grades of animal, from highest potential to lowest, expressed in their form at birth: the highest gave live birth to hot and wet creatures, the lowest laid cold, dry mineral-like eggs.
Animals came above plants, and these in turn were above minerals. see also: He grouped what the modern zoologist would call vertebrates as the hotter "animals with blood", and below them the colder invertebrates as "animals without blood". Those with blood were divided into the live-bearing (mammals), and the egg-laying (birds, reptiles, fish). Those without blood were insects, crustacea (non-shelled – cephalopods, and shelled) and the hard-shelled molluscs (bivalves and gastropods). He recognised that animals did not exactly fit into a linear scale, and noted various exceptions, such as that sharks had a placenta like the tetrapods.
To a modern biologist, the explanation, not available to Aristotle, is convergent evolution.
Philosophers of science have generally concluded that Aristotle was not interested in taxonomy, but zoologists who studied this question recently think otherwise.
He believed that purposive final causes guided all natural processes; this teleological view justified his observed data as an expression of formal design.
Aristotle's Scala naturae (highest to lowest)
Group
Examples(given by Aristotle)
Blood
Legs
Souls(Rational,Sensitive,Vegetative)
Qualities(Hot–Cold,Wet–Dry)
Man
Man
with blood
R, S, V
Hot, Wet
Live-bearing tetrapods
Cat, hare
with blood
S, V
Hot, Wet
Cetaceans
Dolphin, whale
with blood
none
S, V
Hot, Wet
Birds
Bee-eater, nightjar
with blood
S, V
Hot, Wet, except Dry eggs
Egg-laying tetrapods
Chameleon, crocodile
with blood
S, V
Cold, Wet except scales, eggs
Snakes
Water snake, Ottoman viper
with blood
none
S, V
Cold, Wet except scales, eggs
Egg-laying fishes
Sea bass, parrotfish
with blood
none
S, V
Cold, Wet, including eggs
(Among the egg-laying fishes):placental selachians
Shark, skate
with blood
none
S, V
Cold, Wet, but placenta like tetrapods
Crustaceans
Shrimp, crab
without
many legs
S, V
Cold, Wet except shell
Cephalopods
Squid, octopus
without
tentacles
S, V
Cold, Wet
Hard-shelled animals
Cockle, trumpet snail
without
none
S, V
Cold, Dry (mineral shell)
Larva-bearing insects
Ant, cicada
without
S, V
Cold, Dry
Spontaneously generating
Sponges, worms
without
none
S, V
Cold, Wet or Dry, from earth
Plants
Fig
without
none
Cold, Dry
Minerals
Iron
without
none
none
Cold, Dry
Psychology
Soul
Further information: On the Soul
Aristotle proposed a three-part structure for souls of plants, animals, and humans, making humans unique in having all three types of soul.
Aristotle's psychology, given in his treatise On the Soul (peri psychēs), posits three kinds of soul ("psyches"): the vegetative soul, the sensitive soul, and the rational soul.
Humans have a rational soul.
The human soul incorporates the powers of the other kinds: Like the vegetative soul it can grow and nourish itself; like the sensitive soul it can experience sensations and move locally.
The unique part of the human, rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and to compare them using the nous (intellect) and logos (reason).
For Aristotle, the soul is the form of a living being.
Because all beings are composites of form and matter, the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings, e.g. the ability to initiate movement (or in the case of plants, growth and chemical transformations, which Aristotle considers types of movement). In contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the Egyptians, he placed the rational soul in the heart, rather than the brain.
Notable is Aristotle's division of sensation and thought, which generally differed from the concepts of previous philosophers, with the exception of Alcmaeon.
In On the Soul, Aristotle famously criticizes Plato's theory of the soul and develops his own in response to Plato's.
The first criticism is against Plato's view of the soul in the Timaeus that the soul takes up space and is able to come into physical contact with bodies. 20th-century scholarship overwhelmingly opposed Aristotle's interpretation of Plato and maintained that he had misunderstood Plato.
Today's scholars have tended to re-assess Aristotle's interpretation and have warmed up to it.
Aristotle's other criticism is that Plato's view of reincarnation entails that it is possible for a soul and its body to be mis-matched; in principle, Aristotle alleges, any soul can go with any body.
Aristotle's claim that the soul is the form of a living being is meant to eliminate that possibility.
Memory
According to Aristotle in On the Soul, memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in the mind and to distinguish between the internal "appearance" and an occurrence in the past.
In other words, a memory is a mental picture (phantasm) that can be recovered.
Aristotle believed an impression is left on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory.
A memory occurs when stimuli such as sights or sounds are so complex that the nervous system cannot receive all the impressions at once.
These changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation, Aristotelian 'common sense', and thinking.
Aristotle uses the term 'memory' for the actual retaining of an experience in the impression that can develop from sensation, and for the intellectual anxiety that comes with the impression because it is formed at a particular time and processing specific contents.
Memory is of the past, prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present.
Retrieval of impressions cannot be performed suddenly.
A transitional channel is needed and located in past experiences, both for previous experience and present experience.
Because Aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and perceive them as impressions, people are continually weaving together new impressions of experiences.
To search for these impressions, people search the memory itself.
Within the memory, if one experience is offered instead of a specific memory, that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for.
Recollection occurs when one retrieved experience naturally follows another.
If the chain of "images" is needed, one memory will stimulate the next.
When people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they reach the one that is needed.
Recollection is thus the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory impression.
Only humans can remember impressions of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words.
Animals that have perception of time can retrieve memories of their past observations.
Remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed.
Senses, perception, memory, dreams, action in Aristotle's psychology.
Impressions are stored in the sensorium (the heart), linked by his laws of association (similarity, contrast, and contiguity).
Aristotle believed the chain of thought, which ends in recollection of certain impressions, was connected systematically in relationships such as similarity, contrast, and contiguity, described in his laws of association.
Aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within the mind.
A force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience.
According to Aristotle, association is the power innate in a mental state, which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences, allowing them to rise and be recalled.
Dreams
Further information: Dream § Other
Aristotle describes sleep in On Sleep and Wakefulness.
Sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion, so it is vital to the body.
While a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function as they do during wakefulness.
Since a person cannot sense during sleep they cannot have desire, which is the result of sensation.
However, the senses are able to work during sleep, albeit differently, unless they are weary.
Dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus.
In dreams, sensation is still involved, but in an altered manner.
Aristotle explains that when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water, and then looks away, the next thing they look at appears to have a wavelike motion.
When a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression.
When the body is awake and the senses are functioning properly, a person constantly encounters new stimuli to sense and so the impressions of previously perceived stimuli are ignored.
However, during sleep the impressions made throughout the day are noticed as there are no new distracting sensory experiences.
So, dreams result from these lasting impressions.
Since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli, dreams do not resemble the actual waking experience.
During sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind.
Aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus.
For example, a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere because they are so overtaken by their feelings.
Since a person sleeping is in a suggestible state and unable to make judgements, they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams, like the infatuated person.
This leads the person to believe the dream is real, even when the dreams are absurd in nature.
In De Anima iii 3, Aristotle ascribes the ability to create, to store, and to recall images in the absence of perception to the faculty of imagination, phantasia.
One component of Aristotle's theory of dreams disagrees with previously held beliefs.
He claimed that dreams are not foretelling and not sent by a divine being.
Aristotle reasoned naturalistically that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are simply coincidences.
Aristotle claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it.
If a person had an image appear for a moment after waking up or if they see something in the dark it is not considered a dream because they were awake when it occurred.
Secondly, any sensory experience that is perceived while a person is asleep does not qualify as part of a dream.
For example, if, while a person is sleeping, a door shuts and in their dream they hear a door is shut, this sensory experience is not part of the dream.
Lastly, the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of waking sensory experiences.
Practical philosophy
Aristotle's practical philosophy covers areas such as ethics, politics, economics, and rhetoric.
Virtues and their accompanying vices
Too little
Virtuous mean
Too much
Humbleness
High-mindedness
Vainglory
Lack of purpose
Right ambition
Over-ambition
Spiritlessness
Good temper
Irascibility
Rudeness
Civility
Obsequiousness
Cowardice
Courage
Rashness
Insensibility
Self-control
Intemperance
Sarcasm
Sincerity
Boastfulness
Boorishness
Wit
Buffoonery
Shamelessness
Modesty
Shyness
Callousness
Just resentment
Spitefulness
Pettiness
Generosity
Vulgarity
Meanness
Liberality
Wastefulness
Ethics
Main article: Aristotelian ethics
Aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study, i.e., one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake.
He wrote several treatises on ethics, including most notably, the Nicomachean Ethics.
Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function (ergon) of a thing.
An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see, because the proper function of an eye is sight.
Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans, and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē (soul) in accordance with reason (logos). Aristotle identified such an optimum activity (the virtuous mean, between the accompanying vices of excess or deficiency) of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action, eudaimonia, generally translated as "happiness" or sometimes "well-being". To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character (ēthikē aretē), often translated as moral or ethical virtue or excellence.
Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately, but by teachers, and experience, leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things.
When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom (phronesis) and their intellect (nous) can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue, the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker, or in other words, a philosopher.
Politics
Main article: Politics (Aristotle)
In addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics.
Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community.
Moreover, he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family which in turn is prior to the individual, "for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part". He famously stated that "man is by nature a political animal" and argued that humanity's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality.
Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine, and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others.
Aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner.
Aristotle's classifications of political constitutions
The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from Aristotle's understanding.
Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires, the natural community according to Aristotle was the city (polis) which functions as a political "community" or "partnership" (koinōnia). The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability, but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life, and to perform beautiful acts: "The political partnership must be regarded, therefore, as being for the sake of noble actions, not for the sake of living together." This is distinguished from modern approaches, beginning with social contract theory, according to which individuals leave the state of nature because of "fear of violent death" or its "inconveniences".[L]
In Protrepticus, the character 'Aristotle' states:
For we all agree that the most excellent man should rule, i.e., the supreme by nature, and that the law rules and alone is authoritative; but the law is a kind of intelligence, i.e. a discourse based on intelligence.
And again, what standard do we have, what criterion of good things, that is more precise than the intelligent man? For all that this man will choose, if the choice is based on his knowledge, are good things and their contraries are bad.
And since everybody chooses most of all what conforms to their own proper dispositions (a just man choosing to live justly, a man with bravery to live bravely, likewise a self-controlled man to live with self-control), it is clear that the intelligent man will choose most of all to be intelligent; for this is the function of that capacity.
Hence it's evident that, according to the most authoritative judgment, intelligence is supreme among goods.
As Plato's disciple Aristotle was rather critical concerning democracy and, following the outline of certain ideas from Plato's Statesman, he developed a coherent theory of integrating various forms of power into a so-called mixed state:
It is … constitutional to take … from oligarchy that offices are to be elected, and from democracy that this is not to be on a property-qualification.
This then is the mode of the mixture; and the mark of a good mixture of democracy and oligarchy is when it is possible to speak of the same constitution as a democracy and as an oligarchy. — Aristotle.
Politics, Book 4, 1294b.10–18
To illustrate this approach, Aristotle proposed a first-of-its-kind mathematical model of voting, albeit textually described, where the democratic principle of "one voter–one vote" is combined with the oligarchic "merit-weighted voting"; for relevant quotes and their translation into mathematical formulas see.
Economics
Main article: Politics (Aristotle)
Aristotle made substantial contributions to economic thought, especially to thought in the Middle Ages.
In Politics, Aristotle addresses the city, property, and trade.
His response to criticisms of private property, in Lionel Robbins's view, anticipated later proponents of private property among philosophers and economists, as it related to the overall utility of social arrangements.
Aristotle believed that although communal arrangements may seem beneficial to society, and that although private property is often blamed for social strife, such evils in fact come from human nature.
In Politics, Aristotle offers one of the earliest accounts of the origin of money.
Money came into use because people became dependent on one another, importing what they needed and exporting the surplus.
For the sake of convenience, people then agreed to deal in something that is intrinsically useful and easily applicable, such as iron or silver.
Aristotle's discussions on retail and interest was a major influence on economic thought in the Middle Ages.
He had a low opinion of retail, believing that contrary to using money to procure things one needs in managing the household, retail trade seeks to make a profit.
It thus uses goods as a means to an end, rather than as an end unto itself.
He believed that retail trade was in this way unnatural.
Similarly, Aristotle considered making a profit through interest unnatural, as it makes a gain out of the money itself, and not from its use.
Aristotle gave a summary of the function of money that was perhaps remarkably precocious for his time.
He wrote that because it is impossible to determine the value of every good through a count of the number of other goods it is worth, the necessity arises of a single universal standard of measurement.
Money thus allows for the association of different goods and makes them "commensurable". He goes on to state that money is also useful for future exchange, making it a sort of security.
That is, "if we do not want a thing now, we shall be able to get it when we do want it".
Rhetoric and poetics
Main articles: Rhetoric (Aristotle) and Poetics (Aristotle)
The Blind Oedipus Commending his Children to the Gods (1784) by Bénigne Gagneraux.
In his Poetics, Aristotle uses the tragedy Oedipus Tyrannus by Sophocles as an example of how the perfect tragedy should be structured, with a generally good protagonist who starts the play prosperous, but loses everything through some hamartia (fault).
Aristotle's Rhetoric proposes that a speaker can use three basic kinds of appeals to persuade his audience: ethos (an appeal to the speaker's character), pathos (an appeal to the audience's emotion), and logos (an appeal to logical reasoning). He also categorizes rhetoric into three genres: epideictic (ceremonial speeches dealing with praise or blame), forensic (judicial speeches over guilt or innocence), and deliberative (speeches calling on an audience to make a decision on an issue). Aristotle also outlines two kinds of rhetorical proofs: enthymeme (proof by syllogism) and paradeigma (proof by example).
Aristotle writes in his Poetics that epic poetry, tragedy, comedy, dithyrambic poetry, painting, sculpture, music, and dance are all fundamentally acts of mimesis ("imitation"), each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner.
He applies the term mimesis both as a property of a work of art and also as the product of the artist's intention and contends that the audience's realisation of the mimesis is vital to understanding the work itself.
Aristotle states that mimesis is a natural instinct of humanity that separates humans from animals and that all human artistry "follows the pattern of nature". Because of this, Aristotle believed that each of the mimetic arts possesses what Stephen Halliwell calls "highly structured procedures for the achievement of their purposes." For example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language.
The forms also differ in their object of imitation.
Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average.
Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama.
While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics originally comprised two books – one on comedy and one on tragedy – only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived.
Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry.
The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy.
Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions.
Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis.
He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic, possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music, is more unified, and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope, it can be considered superior to epic.
Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles, folklore, and proverbs; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop.
Views on women
Main article: Aristotle's views on women
Further information: Aristotle's biology § Inheritance
Aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive female element.
The biological differences are a result of the fact that the female body is well-suited for reproduction, which changes her body temperature, which in turn makes her, in Aristotle's view, incapable of participating in political life.
On this ground, proponents of feminist metaphysics have accused Aristotle of misogyny and sexism.
However, Aristotle gave equal weight to women's happiness as he did to men's, and commented in his Rhetoric that the things that lead to happiness need to be in women as well as men.[M]
Influence
Further information: List of writers influenced by Aristotle
More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived.
He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and he was the founder of many new fields.
According to the philosopher Bryan Magee, "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did". Among countless other achievements, Aristotle was the founder of formal logic, pioneered the study of zoology, and left every future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific method.
Taneli Kukkonen, writing in The Classical Tradition, observes that his achievement in founding two sciences is unmatched, and his reach in influencing "every branch of intellectual enterprise" including Western ethical and political theory, theology, rhetoric and literary analysis is equally long.
As a result, Kukkonen argues, any analysis of reality today "will almost certainly carry Aristotelian overtones ... evidence of an exceptionally forceful mind." Jonathan Barnes wrote that "an account of Aristotle's intellectual afterlife would be little less than a history of European thought".
On his successor, Theophrastus
Main articles: Theophrastus and Historia Plantarum (Theophrastus)
Frontispiece to a 1644 version of Theophrastus's Historia Plantarum, originally written around 300 BC
Aristotle's pupil and successor, Theophrastus, wrote the History of Plants, a pioneering work in botany.
Some of his technical terms remain in use, such as carpel from carpos, fruit, and pericarp, from pericarpion, seed chamber.
Theophrastus was much less concerned with formal causes than Aristotle was, instead pragmatically describing how plants functioned.
On later Greek philosophers
Further information: Peripatetic school
The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school.
Aristotle's students included Aristoxenus, Dicaearchus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Eudemos of Rhodes, Harpalus, Hephaestion, Mnason of Phocis, Nicomachus, and Theophrastus.
Aristotle's influence over Alexander the Great is seen in the latter's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists, botanists, and researchers.
He had also learned a great deal about Persian customs and traditions from his teacher.
Although his respect for Aristotle was diminished as his travels made it clear that much of Aristotle's geography was clearly wrong, when the old philosopher released his works to the public, Alexander complained "Thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic doctrines; for in what shall I surpass other men if those doctrines wherein I have been trained are to be all men's common property?"
On Hellenistic science
Further information: Ancient Greek medicine
After Theophrastus, the Lyceum failed to produce any original work.
Though interest in Aristotle's ideas survived, they were generally taken unquestioningly.
It is not until the age of Alexandria under the Ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found.
The first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon, corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation.
Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not.
Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of Aristotelian ideas about life, teleology (and after the rise of Christianity, natural theology) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries.
Ernst Mayr states that there was "nothing of any real consequence in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance."
On Byzantine scholars
See also: Commentaries on Aristotle and Byzantine Aristotelianism
Greek Christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of Aristotle by copying all the extant Greek language manuscripts of the corpus.
The first Greek Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were Philoponus, Elias, and David in the sixth century, and Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century.
John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought.
Philoponus questioned Aristotle's teaching of physics, noting its flaws and introducing the theory of impetus to explain his observations.
After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappeared in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena.
On the medieval Islamic world
Further information: Logic in Islamic philosophy and Transmission of the Greek Classics
Islamic portrayal of Aristotle, c. 1220
Aristotle was one of the most revered Western thinkers in early Islamic theology.
Most of the still extant works of Aristotle, as well as a number of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists and scholars.
Averroes, Avicenna and Alpharabius, who wrote on Aristotle in great depth, also influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers.
Alkindus greatly admired Aristotle's philosophy, and Averroes spoke of Aristotle as the "exemplar" for all future philosophers.
Medieval Muslim scholars regularly described Aristotle as the "First Teacher". The title was later used by Western philosophers (as in the famous poem of Dante) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy.
On medieval Europe
Woodcut of Aristotle ridden by Phyllis by Hans Baldung, 1515
Further information: Aristotelianism and Syllogism § Medieval
With the loss of the study of ancient Greek in the early medieval Latin West, Aristotle was practically unknown there from c.
AD 600 to c. 1100 except through the Latin translation of the Organon made by Boethius.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, interest in Aristotle revived and Latin Christians had translations made, both from Arabic translations, such as those by Gerard of Cremona, and from the original Greek, such as those by James of Venice and William of Moerbeke.
After the Scholastic Thomas Aquinas wrote his Summa Theologica, working from Moerbeke's translations and calling Aristotle "The Philosopher", the demand for Aristotle's writings grew, and the Greek manuscripts returned to the West, stimulating a revival of Aristotelianism in Europe that continued into the Renaissance.
These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages.
Scholars such as Boethius, Peter Abelard, and John Buridan worked on Aristotelian logic.
The medieval English poet Chaucer describes his student as being happy by having
at his beddes heed
Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed,
Of aristotle and his philosophie,
A cautionary medieval tale held that Aristotle advised his pupil Alexander to avoid the king's seductive mistress, Phyllis, but was himself captivated by her, and allowed her to ride him.
Phyllis had secretly told Alexander what to expect, and he witnessed Phyllis proving that a woman's charms could overcome even the greatest philosopher's male intellect.
Artists such as Hans Baldung produced a series of illustrations of the popular theme.
The Italian poet Dante says of Aristotle in The Divine Comedy:
DanteL'Inferno, Canto IV. 131–135
TranslationHell
vidi 'l maestro di color che sanno
seder tra filosofica famiglia.
Tutti lo miran, tutti onor li fanno:
quivi vid'ïo Socrate e Platone
che 'nnanzi a li altri più presso li stanno;
I saw the Master there of those who know,
Amid the philosophic family,
By all admired, and by all reverenced;
There Plato too I saw, and Socrates,
Who stood beside him closer than the rest.
Besides Dante's fellow poets, the classical figure that most influenced the Comedy is Aristotle.
Dante built up the philosophy of the Comedy with the works of Aristotle as a foundation, just as the scholastics used Aristotle as the basis for their thinking.
Dante knew Aristotle directly from Latin translations of his works and indirectly through quotations in the works of Albert Magnus.
Dante even acknowledges Aristotle's influence explicitly in the poem, specifically when Virgil justifies the Inferno's structure by citing the Nicomachean Ethics.
On medieval Judaism
Moses Maimonides (considered to be the foremost intellectual figure of medieval Judaism) adopted Aristotelianism from the Islamic scholars and based his Guide for the Perplexed on it and that became the basis of Jewish scholastic philosophy.
Maimonides also considered Aristotle to be the greatest philosopher that ever lived, and styled him as the "chief of the philosophers". Also, in his letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon, Maimonides observes that there is no need for Samuel to study the writings of philosophers who preceded Aristotle because the works of the latter are "sufficient by themselves and [superior] to all that were written before them.
His intellect, Aristotle's is the extreme limit of human intellect, apart from him upon whom the divine emanation has flowed forth to such an extent that they reach the level of prophecy, there being no level higher".
On Early Modern scientists
William Harvey's De Motu Cordis, 1628, showed that the blood circulated, contrary to classical era thinking.
In the Early Modern period, scientists such as William Harvey in England and Galileo Galilei in Italy reacted against the theories of Aristotle and other classical era thinkers like Galen, establishing new theories based to some degree on observation and experiment.
Harvey demonstrated the circulation of the blood, establishing that the heart functioned as a pump rather than being the seat of the soul and the controller of the body's heat, as Aristotle thought.
Galileo used more doubtful arguments to displace Aristotle's physics, proposing that bodies all fall at the same speed whatever their weight.
On 18th/19th-century thinkers
The 19th-century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche has been said to have taken nearly all of his political philosophy from Aristotle.
Aristotle rigidly separated action from production, and argued for the deserved subservience of some people ("natural slaves"), and the natural superiority (virtue, arete) of others.
It was Martin Heidegger, not Nietzsche, who elaborated a new interpretation of Aristotle, intended to warrant his deconstruction of scholastic and philosophical tradition.
The English mathematician George Boole fully accepted Aristotle's logic, but decided "to go under, over, and beyond" it with his system of algebraic logic in his 1854 book The Laws of Thought.
This gives logic a mathematical foundation with equations, enables it to solve equations as well as check validity, and allows it to handle a wider class of problems by expanding propositions of any number of terms, not just two.
Charles Darwin regarded Aristotle as the most important contributor to the subject of biology.
In an 1882 letter he wrote that "Linnaeus and Cuvier have been my two gods, though in very different ways, but they were mere schoolboys to old Aristotle". Also, in later editions of the book "On the Origin of Species', Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle; the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles.
James Joyce's favoured philosopher was Aristotle, whom he considered to be "the greatest thinker of all times". Samuel Taylor Coleridge said: Everybody is born either a Platonist or an Aristotelian.
Ayn Rand acknowledged Aristotle as her greatest influence and remarked that in the history of philosophy she could only recommend "three A's"—Aristotle, Aquinas, and Ayn Rand.
She also regarded Aristotle as the greatest of all philosophers.
Karl Marx considered Aristotle to be the "greatest thinker of antiquity", and called him a "giant thinker", a "genius", and "the great scholar".
Modern rejection and rehabilitation
"That most enduring of romantic images, Aristotle tutoring the future conqueror Alexander". Illustration by Charles Laplante [fr], 1866
During the 20th century, Aristotle's work was widely criticized.
The philosopher Bertrand Russell
argued that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine". Russell called Aristotle's ethics "repulsive", and labelled his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy". Russell stated that these errors made it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembered what an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.
The Dutch historian of science Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis wrote that Aristotle and his predecessors showed the difficulty of science by "proceed[ing] so readily to frame a theory of such a general character" on limited evidence from their senses.
In 1985, the biologist Peter Medawar could still state in "pure seventeenth century" tones that Aristotle had assembled "a strange and generally speaking rather tiresome farrago of hearsay, imperfect observation, wishful thinking and credulity amounting to downright gullibility".
By the start of the 21st century, however, Aristotle was taken more seriously: Kukkonen noted that "In the best 20th-century scholarship Aristotle comes alive as a thinker wrestling with the full weight of the Greek philosophical tradition." Alasdair MacIntyre has attempted to reform what he calls the Aristotelian tradition in a way that is anti-elitist and capable of disputing the claims of both liberals and Nietzscheans.
Kukkonen observed, too, that "that most enduring of romantic images, Aristotle tutoring the future conqueror Alexander" remained current, as in the 2004 film Alexander, while the "firm rules" of Aristotle's theory of drama have ensured a role for the Poetics in Hollywood.
Biologists continue to be interested in Aristotle's thinking.
Armand Marie Leroi has reconstructed Aristotle's biology, while Niko Tinbergen's four questions, based on Aristotle's four causes, are used to analyse animal behaviour; they examine function, phylogeny, mechanism, and ontogeny.
Surviving works
Corpus Aristotelicum
Main article: Corpus Aristotelicum
First page of a 1566 edition of the Nicomachean Ethics in Greek and Latin
The works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are collected in the Corpus Aristotelicum.
These texts, as opposed to Aristotle's lost works, are technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school.
Reference to them is made according to the organization of Immanuel Bekker's Royal Prussian Academy edition (Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica, Berlin, 1831–1870), which in turn is based on ancient classifications of these works.
Loss and preservation
Further information: Recovery of Aristotle
Aristotle wrote his works on papyrus scrolls, the common writing medium of that era.[N] His writings are divisible into two groups: the "exoteric", intended for the public, and the "esoteric", for use within the Lyceum school.[O] Aristotle's "lost" works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving Aristotelian corpus.
Whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with a view to subsequent publication, the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes not intended for publication.
Cicero's description of Aristotle's literary style as "a river of gold" must have applied to the published works, not the surviving notes.[P] A major question in the history of Aristotle's works is how the exoteric writings were all lost, and how the ones now possessed came to be found.
The consensus is that Andronicus of Rhodes collected the esoteric works of Aristotle's school which existed in the form of smaller, separate works, distinguished them from those of Theophrastus and other Peripatetics, edited them, and finally compiled them into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.
Legacy
Depictions
Paintings
Aristotle has been depicted by major artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder, Justus van Gent, Raphael, Paolo Veronese, Jusepe de Ribera, Rembrandt, and Francesco Hayez over the centuries.
Among the best-known depictions is Raphael's fresco The School of Athens, in the Vatican's Apostolic Palace, where the figures of Plato and Aristotle are central to the image, at the architectural vanishing point, reflecting their importance.
Rembrandt's Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, too, is a celebrated work, showing the knowing philosopher and the blind Homer from an earlier age: as the art critic Jonathan Jones writes, "this painting will remain one of the greatest and most mysterious in the world, ensnaring us in its musty, glowing, pitch-black, terrible knowledge of time."
Nuremberg Chronicle anachronistically shows Aristotle in a medieval scholar's clothing.
Ink and watercolour on paper, 1493
Aristotle by Justus van Gent.
Oil on panel, c. 1476
Phyllis and Aristotle by Lucas Cranach the Elder.
Oil on panel, 1530
Aristotle by Paolo Veronese, Biblioteka Marciana.
Oil on canvas, 1560s
Aristotle and Campaspe,[Q] Alessandro Turchi (attrib.) Oil on canvas, 1713
Aristotle by Jusepe de Ribera.
Oil on canvas, 1637
Aristotle with a Bust of Homer by Rembrandt.
Oil on canvas, 1653
Aristotle by Johann Jakob Dorner the Elder.
Oil on canvas, by 1813
Aristotle by Francesco Hayez.
Oil on canvas, 1811
Sculptures
Roman copy of 1st or 2nd century from original bronze by Lysippos.
Louvre Museum
Roman copy of 117-138 AD of Greek original.
Palermo Regional Archeology Museum
Relief of Aristotle and Plato by Luca della Robbia, Florence Cathedral, 1437–1439
Stone statue in niche, Gladstone's Library, Hawarden, Wales, 1899
Bronze statue, University of Freiburg, Germany, 1915
Eponyms
The Aristotle Mountains in Antarctica are named after Aristotle.
He was the first person known to conjecture, in his book Meteorology, the existence of a landmass in the southern high-latitude region and called it Antarctica.
Aristoteles is a crater on the Moon bearing the classical form of Aristotle's name.
See also
Aristotelian Society
Aristotle's Biology
Conimbricenses
Perfectionism
References
Notes
That these dates (the first half of the Olympiad year 384/383 BC, and in 322 shortly before the death of Demosthenes) are correct was shown by August Boeckh (Kleine Schriften VI 195); for further discussion, see Felix Jacoby on FGrHist 244 F 38. Ingemar Düring, Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition, Göteborg, 1957, p. 253
See Shields 2012, pp. 3–16; Düring 1957 covers ancient biographies of Aristotle.
This type of syllogism, with all three terms in 'a', is known by the traditional (medieval) mnemonic Barbara.
M is the Middle (here, Men), S is the Subject (Greeks), P is the Predicate (mortal).
The first equation can be read as 'It is not true that there exists an x such that x is a man and that x is not mortal.'
Rhett Allain notes that Newton's First Law is "essentially a direct reply to Aristotle, that the natural state is not to change motion.
Leonard Susskind comments that Aristotle had clearly never gone ice skating or he would have seen that it takes force to stop an object.
For heavenly bodies like the Sun, Moon, and stars, the observed motions are "to a very good approximation" circular around the Earth's centre, (for example, the apparent rotation of the sky because of the rotation of the Earth, and the rotation of the moon around the Earth) as Aristotle stated.
Drabkin quotes numerous passages from Physics and On the Heavens (De Caelo) which state Aristotle's laws of motion.
Drabkin agrees that density is treated quantitatively in this passage, but without a sharp definition of density as weight per unit volume.
Philoponus and Galileo correctly objected that for the transient phase (still increasing in speed) with heavy objects falling a short distance, the law does not apply: Galileo used balls on a short incline to show this.
Rovelli notes that "Two heavy balls with the same shape and different weight do fall at different speeds from an aeroplane, confirming Aristotle's theory, not Galileo's."
For a different reading of social and economic processes in the Nicomachean Ethics and Politics see Polanyi, Karl (1957) "Aristotle Discovers the Economy" in Primitive, Archaic and Modern Economies: Essays of Karl Polanyi ed. G. Dalton, Boston 1971, 78–115.
"Where, as among the Lacedaemonians, the state of women is bad, almost half of human life is spoilt."
"When the Roman dictator Sulla invaded Athens in 86 BC, he brought back to Rome a fantastic prize – Aristotle's library.
Books then were papyrus rolls, from 10 to 20 feet long, and since Aristotle's death in 322 BC, worms and damp had done their worst.
The rolls needed repairing, and the texts clarifying and copying on to new papyrus (imported from Egypt – Moses' bulrushes). The man in Rome who put Aristotle's library in order was a Greek scholar, Tyrannio."
Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics 1102a26–27. Aristotle himself never uses the term "esoteric" or "acroamatic". For other passages where Aristotle speaks of exōterikoi logoi, see W.D. Ross, Aristotle's Metaphysics (1953), vol. 2 pp= 408–410. Ross defends an interpretation according to which the phrase, at least in Aristotle's own works, usually refers generally to "discussions not peculiar to the Peripatetic school", rather than to specific works of Aristotle's own.
"veniet flumen orationis aureum fundens Aristoteles", (Google translation: "Aristotle will come pouring forth a golden stream of eloquence").
Compare the medieval tale of Phyllis and Alexander above.
Citations
"Aristotle | Biography, Works, Quotes, Philosophy, Ethics, & Facts". Britannica.
Kantor 1963, p. 116.
On the Soul.
Collins English Dictionary.
a b c d Humphreys 2009.
a b c d Russell 1972.
Barnes 1995, p. 9.
Leroi 2015, p. 352.
* "the father of logic": Wentzel Van Huyssteen, Encyclopedia of Science and Religion: A-I, p. 27
"the father of biology": S. C. Datt, S. B. Srivastava, Science and society, p. 93.
"the father of political science": N. Jayapalan, Aristotle, p. 12, Jonathan Wolff, Lectures on the History of Moral and Political Philosophy, p. 48.
the "father of zoology": Josef Rudolf Winkler, A Book of Beetles, p. 12
"the father of embryology": D.R. Khanna, Text Book Of Embryology, p. 2
"the father of natural law": Shellens, Max Solomon (1959). "Aristotle on Natural Law". Natural Law Forum. 4 (1): 72–100. doi:10.1093/ajj/4.1.72.
"the father of scientific method": Shuttleworth, Martyn. "History of the Scientific Method". Explorable., Riccardo Pozzo (2004) The impact of Aristotelianism on modern philosophy.
CUA Press. p. 41. ISBN 0-8132-1347-9
"the father of rhetoric": "Aristotle". History., Bizzell, P. and Bruce Herzberg. (2000). The Rhetorical Tradition: Readings from Classical Times to the Present.
NY: Bedford/St.
Martin's. p. 3.
"the father of psychology": Margot Esther Borden, Psychology in the Light of the East, p. 4
"the father of realism": Russell L. Hamm, Philosophy and Education: Alternatives in Theory and Practice, p. 58
"the father of criticism": Nagendra Prasad, Personal Bias in Literary Criticism: Dr.
Johnson, Matthew Arnold, T.S. Eliot, p. 70. Lord Henry Home Kames, Elements of Criticism, p. 237.
"the father of meteorology":"What is meteorology?". Meteorological Office."94.05.01: Meteorology". Archived from the original on 21 July 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2015.
"the father of individualism": Allan Gotthelf, Gregory Salmieri, A Companion to Ayn Rand, p. 325.
"the father of teleology": Malcolm Owen Slavin, Daniel H. Kriegman, The Adaptive Design of the Human Psyche: Psychoanalysis, Evolutionary Biology, and the Therapeutic Process, p. 292.
McLeisch 1999, p. 5.
Aristoteles-Park in Stagira.
Borchers, Timothy A.; Hundley, Heather (2018). Rhetorical theory : an introduction (Second ed.). Long Grove, Illinois.
ISBN 978-1-4786-3580-2. OCLC 1031145493.
Hall 2018, p. 14.
Anagnostopoulos 2013, p. 4.
Blits 1999, pp. 58–63.
Evans 2006.
Aristotle 1984, pp. Introduction.
a b c Shields 2016.
a b Green 1991, pp. 58–59.
Smith 2007, p. 88.
Green 1991, p. 460.
Filonik 2013, pp. 72–73.
Jones 1980, p. 216.
Gigon 2017, p. 41.
Düring 1957, p. T44a-e.
Haase 1992, p. 3862.
Degnan 1994, pp. 81–89.
Corcoran 2009, pp. 1–20.
Kant 1787, pp. Preface.
a b c Lagerlund 2016.
Predicate Logic.
Pickover 2009, p. 52.
School of Athens.
Stewart 2019.
Prior Analytics, pp. 24b18–20.
Bobzien 2015.
a b c Smith 2017.
a b c d e f Cohen 2000.
Aristotle 1999, p. 111.
Metaphysics, p. VIII 1043a 10–30.
Lloyd 1968, pp. 43–47.
Metaphysics, p. IX 1050a 5–10.
Metaphysics, p. VIII 1045a–b.
a b c d Wildberg 2016.
a b Lloyd 1968, pp. 133–139, 166–169.
a b Allain 2016.
a b c d e f g h i Drabkin 1938, pp. 60–84.
a b c d e Susskind 2011.
a b c d e f g h i Rovelli 2015, pp. 23–40.
Carteron 1923, pp. 1–32 and passim.
Leroi 2015, pp. 88–90.
a b c d e Lloyd 1996, pp. 96–100, 106–107.
Hankinson 1998, p. 159.
a b Leroi 2015, pp. 91–92, 369–373.
Lahanas.
Physics, p. 2.6.
Miller 1973, pp. 204–213.
Meteorology, p. 1. 8.
Moore 1956, p. 13.
Meteorology, p. Book 1, Part 14.
Lyell 1832, p. 17.
Aristotle (1952). Meteorologica, Chapter II. Translated by Lee, H.D.P. (Loeb Classical Library ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 156. Retrieved 22 January 2021.
Leroi 2015, p. 7.
Leroi 2015, p. 14.
Thompson 1910, p. Prefatory Note.
"Darwin's Ghosts, By Rebecca Stott". independent.co.uk. 2 June 2012. Retrieved 19 June 2012.
Leroi 2015, pp. 196, 248.
Day 2013, pp. 5805–5816.
Leroi 2015, pp. 66–74, 137.
Leroi 2015, pp. 118–119.
Leroi 2015, p. 73.
Leroi 2015, pp. 135–136.
Leroi 2015, p. 206.
Sedley 2007, p. 189.
Leroi 2015, p. 273.
Taylor 1922, p. 42.
Leroi 2015, pp. 361–365.
Leroi 2011.
Leroi 2015, pp. 197–200.
a b Leroi 2015, pp. 365–368.
Taylor 1922, p. 49.
Leroi 2015, p. 408.
Leroi 2015, pp. 72–74.
Bergstrom & Dugatkin 2012, p. 35.
Rhodes 1974, p. 7.
Mayr 1982, pp. 201–202.
Lovejoy 1976.
Leroi 2015, pp. 111–119.
Lennox, James G. (2001). Aristotle's philosophy of biology : studies in the origins of life science.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 346. ISBN 0-521-65976-0.
Sandford, Stella (3 December 2019). "From Aristotle to Contemporary Biological Classification: What Kind of Category is "Sex"?". Redescriptions: Political Thought, Conceptual History and Feminist Theory. 22 (1): 4–17. doi:10.33134/rds.314. ISSN 2308-0914. S2CID 210140121.
Voultsiadou, Eleni; Vafidis, Dimitris (1 January 2007). "Marine invertebrate diversity in Aristotle's zoology". Contributions to Zoology. 76 (2): 103–120. doi:10.1163/18759866-07602004. ISSN 1875-9866. S2CID 55152069.
von Lieven, Alexander Fürst; Humar, Marcel (2008). "A Cladistic Analysis of Aristotle's Animal Groups in the "Historia animalium"". History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences. 30 (2): 227–262. ISSN 0391-9714. JSTOR 23334371. PMID 19203017.
Laurin, Michel; Humar, Marcel (2022). "Phylogenetic signal in characters from Aristotle's History of Animals". Comptes Rendus Palevol (in French). 21 (1): 1–16. doi:10.5852/cr-palevol2022v21a1. S2CID 245863171.
Mason 1979, pp. 43–44.
Leroi 2015, pp. 156–163.
Mason 1979, p. 45.
Guthrie 2010, p. 348.
On the Soul I.3 406b26-407a10. For some scholarship, see Carter, Jason W. 2017. ‘Aristotle’s Criticism of Timaean Psychology’ Rhizomata 5: 51-78 and Douglas R. Campbell. 2022. "Located in Space: Plato’s Theory of Psychic Motion" Ancient Philosophy 42 (2): 419-442.
For instance, W.D. Ross argued that Aristotle "may well be criticized as having taken [Plato's] myth as if it were sober prose." See Ross, William D. ed. 1961. Aristotle: De Anima.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The quotation is from page 189.
See, e.g., Douglas R. Campbell, "Located in Space: Plato's Theory of Psychic Motion," Ancient Philosophy 42 (2): 419-442. 2022.
On the Soul I.3.407b14–27. Christopher Shields summarizes it thus: "We might think that an old leather-bound edition of Machiavelli’s The Prince could come to bear the departed soul of Richard Nixon.
Aristotle regards this sort of view as worthy of ridicule.” See Shields, C. 2016. Aristotle: De Anima.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The quotation is from page 133.
There's a large scholarly discussion of this dialectic between Plato and Aristotle here: Douglas R. Campbell, "The Soul’s Tool: Plato on the Usefulness of the Body," Elenchos 43 (1): 7-27. 2022.
Bloch 2007, p. 12.
Bloch 2007, p. 61.
Carruthers 2007, p. 16.
Bloch 2007, p. 25.
Warren 1921, p. 30.
Warren 1921, p. 25.
Carruthers 2007, p. 19.
Warren 1921, p. 296.
Warren 1921, p. 259.
Sorabji 2006, p. 54.
a b c d e f Holowchak 1996, pp. 405–423.
a b c d e Shute 1941, pp. 115–118.
Holowchak 1996, pp. 405–23.
Shute 1941, pp. 115–18.
a b Modrak 2009, pp. 169–181.
Webb 1990, pp. 174–184.
Kraut 2001.
Nicomachean Ethics Book I. See for example chapter 7.
Nicomachean Ethics, p. Book VI.
Politics, pp. 1253a19–124.
Aristotle 2009, pp. 320–321.
Ebenstein & Ebenstein 2002, p. 59.
a b Hutchinson & Johnson 2015, p. 22.
Tangian 2020, pp. 35–38.
a b c Robbins 2000, pp. 20–24.
a b c d Aristotle 1948, pp. 16–28.
Kaufmann 1968, pp. 56–60.
Garver 1994, pp. 109–110.
Rorty 1996, pp. 3–7.
Grimaldi 1998, p. 71.
a b c d e Halliwell 2002, pp. 152–159.
Poetics, p. I 1447a.
Poetics, p. IV.
Halliwell 2002, pp. 152–59.
Poetics, p. III.
Poetics, p. VI.
Poetics, p. XXVI.
Aesop 1998, pp. Introduction, xi–xii.
See Marguerite Deslauriers, "Sexual Difference in Aristotle's Politics and His Biology," Classical World 102 3 (2009): 215-231.
Freeland 1998.
Morsink 1979, pp. 83–112.
Rhetoric, p. Book I, Chapter 5.
Leroi 2015, p. 8.
Aristotle's Influence 2018.
Garner., Dwight (14 March 2014). "Who's More Famous Than Jesus?". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 1 April 2021.
Magee 2010, p. 34.
Guthrie 1990, p. 156.
Aristotle (Greek philosopher).
Durant 2006, p. 92.
a b c d e Kukkonen 2010, pp. 70–77.
Barnes 1982, p. 86.
Hooker 1831, p. 219.
Mayr 1982, pp. 90–91.
Mason 1979, p. 46.
Plutarch 1919, p. Part 1, 7:7.
Annas 2001, p. 252.
Mason 1979, p. 56.
Mayr 1985, pp. 90–94.
Sorabji 1990, pp. 20, 28, 35–36.
Sorabji 1990, pp. 233–724.
Lindberg 1992, p. 162.
Sorabji 1990, pp. 20–21, 28–29, 393–406, 407–408.
a b Kennedy-Day 1998.
Staley 1989.
Averroes 1953, p. III, 2, 43.
Nasr 1996, pp. 59–60.
a b Phyllis and Aristotle.
Hasse 2014.
Aquinas 2013.
Kuhn 2018.
Lagerlund.
Allen & Fisher 2011, p. 17.
Aristotle Phyllis.
Lafferty, Roger. "The Philosophy of Dante", pg. 4
Inferno, Canto XI, lines 70-115, Mandelbaum translation.
"Moses Maimonides". Britannica.
Levi ben Gershom, The Wars of the Lord: Book one, Immortality of the soul, p. 35.
Leon Simon, Aspects Of The Hebrew Genius: A Volume Of Essays On Jewish Literature And Thought (1910), p. 127.
Herbert A. Davidson, Herbert A. |q (Herbert Alan) Davidson, Professor of Hebrew Emeritus Herbert Davidson, Moses Maimonides: The Man and His Works, p. 98.
Menachem Kellner, Maimonides on Judaism and the Jewish People, p. 77.
Aird 2011, pp. 118–29.
Machamer 2017.
Durant 2006, p. 86.
Deslauriers & Destrée 2013, pp. 102, 106–107.
Sikka 1997, p. 265.
Boole 2003.
Wilkins, John (2009). Species: a history of the idea.
Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-520-27139-5. OCLC 314379168.
Pasipoularides, Ares (2010). The heart's vortex: intracardiac blood flow phenomena.
Shelton, Connecticut: People's Medical Publishing House. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-60795-033-2. OCLC 680621287.
Darwin 1872, p. xiii
Aristotle, Physics, translated by Hardie, R. P. and Gayle, R. K. and hosted by MIT's Internet Classics Archive, retrieved 23 April 2009
O'Rourke, F. (2009). Philosophy.
In J. McCourt (Ed.), James Joyce in Context (Literature in Context, pp. 320-331). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511576072.029
William Robert Wians, Aristotle's Philosophical Development: Problems and Prospects, p. 1.
Burns 2009, p. 2.
Sciabarra 1995, p. 12.
James P. Sterba, From Rationality to Equality, p. 94.
F. Novotny, The Posthumous Life of Plato, p. 573
Matt Vidal, Tony Smith, Tomás Rotta, Paul Prew, The Oxford Handbook of Karl Marx, p. 215.
Judith A. Swanson, C. David Corbin, Aristotle's 'Politics': A Reader's Guide, p. 146.
Dijksterhuis 1969, p. 72.
a b Leroi 2015, p. 353.
Medawar & Medawar 1984, p. 28.
Knight 2007, pp. passim.
Leroi 2015.
MacDougall-Shackleton 2011, pp. 2076–2085.
Hladký & Havlíček 2013.
Aristotelis Opera.
When libraries were 2001.
a b Barnes 1995, p. 12.
House 1956, p. 35.
Irwin & Fine 1996, pp. xi–xii.
Cicero 1874.
Barnes & Griffin 1999, pp. 1–69.
Anagnostopoulos 2013, p. 16.
Barnes 1995, pp. 10–15.
Lucas Cranach the Elder.
Lee & Robinson 2005.
Aristotle with Bust 2002.
Phelan 2002.
Held 1969.
Jones 2002.
Aristotle Mountains.
Aristoteles.
Sources
Aesop (1998). The Complete Fables By Aesop.
Translated by Temple, Olivia; Temple, Robert.
Penguin Classics.
ISBN 978-0-14-044649-4.
Aird, W. C. (2011). "Discovery of the cardiovascular system: from Galen to William Harvey". Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. 9: 118–129. doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04312.x.
PMID 21781247. S2CID 12092592.
Allain, Rhett (21 March 2016). "I'm So Totally Over Newton's Laws of Motion". Wired.
Retrieved 11 May 2018.
Allen, Mark; Fisher, John H. (2011). The Complete Poetry and Prose of Geoffrey Chaucer.
Cengage Learning.
ISBN 978-0-15-506041-8.
Anagnostopoulos, Georgios (2013). A Companion to Aristotle.
Wiley-Blackwell.
ISBN 978-1-118-59243-4.
Annas, Julia (2001). Classical Greek Philosophy.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-285357-8.
Aquinas, Thomas (2013). Summa Theologica. e-artnow.
ISBN 978-80-7484-292-4.
Aristoteles (31 January 2019) .  Bekker, Immanuel (ed.). "Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica Aristoteles graece". apud Georgium Reimerum.
Retrieved 31 January 2019 – via Internet Archive.
"Aristoteles". Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature.
United States Geological Survey.
Retrieved 19 March 2018.
"Aristoteles-Park in Stagira". Dimos Aristoteli.
Retrieved 20 March 2018.
Humphreys, Justin (2009). "Aristotle (384–322 B.C.E.)". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Aristotle (Greek philosopher)". Britannica.com.
Britannica Online Encyclopedia.
Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 26 April 2009.
Aristotle. "Metaphysics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 30 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Meteorology". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 30 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Nicomachean Ethics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Aristotle. "On the Soul". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 30 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Physics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 31 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Poetics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 30 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Politics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Retrieved 30 January 2019.
Aristotle. "Prior Analytics". classics.mit.edu.
The Internet Classics Archive.
Aristotle. "Rhetoric". Translated by Roberts, W. Rhys.
Archived from the original on 13 February 2015.
"Aristotle Mountains". SCAR Composite Antarctic Gazetteer.
Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide.
Department of the Environment and Energy, Australian Antarctic Division, Australian Government.
Retrieved 1 March 2018.
Aristotle (1948).  Monroe, Arthur E. (ed.). Politics-Ethics, In Early Economic Thought: Selections from Economic Literature Prior to Adam Smith.
Harvard University Press.
Aristotle (1984).  Lord, Carnes (ed.). The Politics.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-92184-6.
Aristotle (2009) . Politics.
Translated by Ernest Barker and revised with introduction and notes by R.F. Stalley (1st ed.). Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-953873-7.
Aristotle (1999). Aristotle's Metaphysics.
Translated by Sachs, Joe.
Green Lion Press.
"Aristotle and Phyllis". Art Institute Chicago.
Retrieved 22 March 2018.
"Aristotle definition and meaning". 
"Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, Rembrandt (1653)". The Guardian. 27 July 2002. Retrieved 23 March 2018.
Averroes (1953).  Crawford, F. Stuart (ed.). Commentarium Magnum in Aristotelis De Anima Libros.
Mediaeval Academy of America.
OCLC 611422373.
Barnes, Jonathan (1982). Aristotle: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-285408-7.
Barnes, Jonathan (1995). "Life and Work". The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-42294-9.
Barnes, Jonathan; Griffin, Miriam Tamara (1999). Philosophia Togata: Plato and Aristotle at Rome.
II. Clarendon Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-815222-4.
Bergstrom, Carl T.; Dugatkin, Lee Alan (2012). Evolution.
Norton.
ISBN 978-0-393-92592-0.
Blits, Kathleen C. (15 April 1999). "Aristotle: Form, function, and comparative anatomy". The Anatomical Record. 257 (2): 58–63. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0185(19990415)257:2<58::AID-AR6>3.0.CO;2-I. PMID 10321433.
Bloch, David (2007). Aristotle on Memory and Recollection.
ISBN 978-90-04-16046-0.
Bobzien, Susanne (2015). "Ancient Logic".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Boole, George (2003) . The Laws of Thought.
Prometheus Books.
ISBN 978-1-59102-089-9.
Campbell, Michael. "Behind the Name: Meaning, Origin and History of the Name "Aristotle"". Behind the Name.
Retrieved 6 April 2012.
Carruthers, Mary (2007). The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture.
ISBN 978-0-521-42973-3.
Carteron, Henri (1923). Notion de Force dans le Systeme d'Aristote (in French). J. Vrin.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (1874). "Book II, chapter XXXVIII, § 119".  In Reid, James S. (ed.). The Academica of Cicero 106–43 BC. Macmillan.
Cohen, S. Marc (8 October 2000). "Aristotle's Metaphysics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Retrieved 14 November 2018.
Corcoran, John (2009). "Aristotle's Demonstrative Logic". History and Philosophy of Logic. 30: 1–20. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.650.463. doi:10.1080/01445340802228362. S2CID 8514675.
Day, J. (2013). "Botany meets archaeology: people and plants in the past". Journal of Experimental Botany. 64 (18): 5805–5816. doi:10.1093/jxb/ert068. PMID 23669575.
Degnan, Michael (1994). "Recent Work in Aristotle's Logic". Philosophical Books. 35 (2 (April 1994)): 81–89. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0149.1994.tb02858.x.
Deslauriers, Marguerite; Destrée, Pierre (2013). The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle's Politics.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-1-107-00468-9.
Dijksterhuis, Eduard Jan (1969). The Mechanization of the World Picture.
Translated by C. Dikshoorn.
Princeton University Press.
Drabkin, Israel E. (1938). "Notes on the Laws of Motion in Aristotle". The American Journal of Philology. 59 (1): 60–84. doi:10.2307/290584. JSTOR 90584.
Durant, Will (2006) . The Story of Philosophy.
Simon & Schuster.
ISBN 978-0-671-73916-4.
Düring, Ingemar (1957). Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition.
By Ingemar Düring.
Almqvist & Wiksell in Komm.
Ebenstein, Alan; Ebenstein, William (2002). Introduction to Political Thinkers.
Wadsworth Group.
Evans, Nancy (2006). "Diotima and Demeter as Mystagogues in Plato's Symposium". Hypatia. 21 (2): 1–27. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2006.tb01091.x.
ISSN 1527-2001. S2CID 143750010.
Filonik, Jakub (2013). "Athenian impiety trials: a reappraisal". Dike. 16 (16): 72–73. doi:10.13130/1128-8221/4290.
Freeland, Cynthia A. (1998). Feminist Interpretations of Aristotle.
Penn State University Press.
ISBN 978-0-271-01730-3.
Garver, Eugene (1994). Aristotle's Rhetoric: An Art of Character.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-28425-5.
Gigon, Olof (2017) . Vita Aristotelis Marciana.
Walter de Gruyter.
ISBN 978-3-11-082017-1.
Green, Peter (1991). Alexander of Macedon.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-27586-7.
Grimaldi, William M. A. (1998). "Studies in the Philosophy of Aristotle's Rhetoric".  In Enos, Richard Leo; Agnew, Lois Peters (eds.). Landmark Essays on Aristotelian Rhetoric.
Landmark Essays.
Vol. 14. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. p. 71. ISBN 978-1-880393-32-1.
Guthrie, W. (2010). A History of Greek Philosophy Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-29420-1.
Guthrie, W. (1990). A history of Greek philosophy Vol. 6: Aristotle: An Encounter.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-38760-6.
Haase, Wolfgang (1992). Philosophie, Wissenschaften, Technik.
Philosophie (Doxographica [Forts. ]). Walter de Gruyter.
ISBN 978-3-11-013699-9.
Hall, Edith (2018). Aristotle's Way: How Ancient Wisdom Can Change Your Life.
The Bodley Head.
ISBN 978-1-84792-407-0.
Halliwell, Stephen (2002). "Inside and Outside the Work of Art". The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems.
Princeton University Press. pp. 152–59. ISBN 978-0-691-09258-4.
Hankinson, R.J. (1998). Cause and Explanation in Ancient Greek Thought.
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0199246564.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-823745-7.
Hasse, Dag Nikolaus (2014). "Influence of Arabic and Islamic Philosophy on the Latin West".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Held, Julius (1969). Rembrandt's Aristotle and Other Rembrandt Studies.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-03862-9.
Hladký, V.; Havlíček, J (2013). "Was Tinbergen an Aristotelian? Comparison of Tinbergen's Four Whys and Aristotle's Four Causes" (PDF). Human Ethology Bulletin. 28 (4): 3–11.
Holowchak, Mark (1996). "Aristotle on Dreaming: What Goes on in Sleep when the 'Big Fire' goes out". Ancient Philosophy. 16 (2): 405–423. doi:10.5840/ancientphil199616244.
Hooker, Sir William Jackson (1831). The British Flora: Comprising the Phaenogamous, Or Flowering Plants, and the Ferns.
Longman.
OCLC 17317293.
House, Humphry (1956). Aristotle's Poetics.
Rupert Hart-Davis.
Hutchinson, D. S.; Johnson, Monte Ransome (2015). "Exhortation to Philosophy" (PDF). Protrepticus. p. 22.
Irwin, Terence; Fine, Gail, eds. (1996). Aristotle: Introductory Readings.
Hackett Pub.
ISBN 978-0-87220-339-6.
Jones, Jonathan (27 July 2002). "Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, Rembrandt (1653)". The Guardian.
Retrieved 23 March 2018.
Jones, W. T. (1980). The Classical Mind: A History of Western Philosophy.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
ISBN 978-0-15-538312-8.
Kant, Immanuel (1787). Critique of Pure Reason (Second ed.). OCLC 2323615.
Kantor, J. R. (1963). The Scientific Evolution of Psychology, Volume I. Principia Press.
ISBN 978-0-911188-25-7.
Kaufmann, Walter Arnold (1968). Tragedy and Philosophy.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-02005-1.
Kennedy-Day, Kiki (1998). "Aristotelianism in Islamic philosophy". Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Taylor and Francis. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-H002-1. ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6.
Knight, Kelvin (2007). Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics & Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre.
Polity Press.
ISBN 978-0-7456-1977-4.
Kraut, Richard (1 May 2001). "Aristotle's Ethics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 19 March 2018.
Kuhn, Heinrich (2018). "Aristotelianism in the Renaissance".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Kukkonen, Taneli (2010).  Grafton, Anthony;  et al. (eds.). The classical tradition.
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-03572-0.
Lagerlund, Henrik (2016). "Medieval Theories of the Syllogism".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Lagerlund, Henrik. "Medieval Theories of the Syllogism".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Lahanas, Michael. "Optics and ancient Greeks". Mlahanas.de.
Archived from the original on 11 April 2009. Retrieved 26 April 2009.
Lee, Ellen Wardwell; Robinson, Anne (2005). Indianapolis Museum of Art: Highlights of the Collection.
Indianapolis Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-0-936260-77-8.
Leroi, Armand Marie (Presenter) (3 May 2011). "Aristotle's Lagoon: Embryo Inside a Chicken's Egg". BBC. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
Leroi, Armand Marie (2015). The Lagoon: How Aristotle Invented Science.
Bloomsbury.
ISBN 978-1-4088-3622-4.
Lindberg, David (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-48205-7.
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1968). The critic of Plato.
Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of His Thought.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-09456-6.
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1996). Causes and correlations.
Adversaries and Authorities: Investigations into ancient Greek and Chinese science.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-55695-8.
Lovejoy, Arthur O. (31 January 1976). The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-36153-9.
"Lucas Cranach the Elder| Phyllis and Aristotle". Sotheby's. 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2018.
Lyell, Charles (1832). Principles of Geology. J. Murray, 1832. OCLC 609586345.
MacDougall-Shackleton, Scott A. (27 July 2011). "The levels of analysis revisited". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 366 (1574): 2076–2085. doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0363. PMC 3130367. PMID 21690126.
Machamer, Peter (2017). "Galileo Galilei".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Magee, Bryan (2010). The Story of Philosophy.
Dorling Kindersley.
ISBN 978-0-241-24126-4.
Mason, Stephen F. (1979). A History of the Sciences.
Collier Books.
ISBN 978-0-02-093400-4. OCLC 924760574.
Mayr, Ernst (1982). The Growth of Biological Thought.
Belknap Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-36446-2.
Mayr, Ernst (1985). The Growth of Biological Thought.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-36446-2.
McLeisch, Kenneth Cole (1999). Aristotle: The Great Philosophers.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-92392-7.
Medawar, Peter B.; Medawar, J. S. (1984). Aristotle to Zoos: a philosophical dictionary of biology.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-283043-2.
Miller, Willard M. (1973). "Aristotle on Necessity, Chance, and Spontaneity". New Scholasticism. 47 (2): 204–213. doi:10.5840/newscholas197347237.
Modrak, Deborah (2009). "Dreams and Method in Aristotle". Skepsis: A Journal for Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Research. 20: 169–181.
Moore, Ruth (1956). The Earth We Live On.
Alfred A. Knopf.
OCLC 1024467091.
Morsink, Johannes (Spring 1979). "Was Aristotle's Biology Sexist?". Journal of the History of Biology. 12 (1): 83–112. doi:10.1007/bf00128136. JSTOR 4330727. PMID 11615776. S2CID 6090923.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1996). The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia.
Curzon Press.
ISBN 978-0-7007-0314-2.
Phelan, Joseph (September 2002). "The Philosopher as Hero: Raphael's The School of Athens". ArtCyclopedia.
Retrieved 23 March 2018.
"Phyllis and Aristotle". 1 February 2019 – via Musee du Louvre.
Pickover, Clifford A. (2009). The Math Book: From Pythagoras to the 57th Dimension, 250 Milestones in the History of Mathematics.
Sterling.
ISBN 978-1-4027-5796-9.
"Plutarch – Life of Alexander (Part 1 of 7)". penelope.uchicago.edu.
Loeb Classical Library. 1919. Retrieved 31 January 2019.
"Predicate Logic" (PDF). University of Texas.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2018.
Rhodes, Frank Harold Trevor (1974). Evolution.
Golden Press.
ISBN 978-0-307-64360-5.
Robbins, Lionel (2000).  Medema, Steven G.; Samuels, Warren J. (eds.). A History of Economic Thought: The LSE Lectures.
Princeton University Press.
Rorty, Amélie Oksenberg (1996). "Structuring Rhetoric".  In Rorty, Amélie Oksenberg (ed.). Essays on Aristotle's Rhetoric.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20227-6.
Rovelli, Carlo (2015). "Aristotle's Physics: A Physicist's Look". Journal of the American Philosophical Association. 1 (1): 23–40. arXiv:1312.4057. doi:10.1017/apa.2014.11. S2CID 44193681.
Russell, Bertrand (1972). A history of western philosophy.
Simon and Schuster.
ISBN 978-0-671-31400-2.
Sedley, David (2007). Creationism and Its Critics in Antiquity.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-25364-3.
Shields, Christopher (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Aristotle.
OUP USA. ISBN 978-0-19-518748-9.
Shields, Christopher (2016). "Aristotle's Psychology".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.).
Shute, Clarence (1941). The Psychology of Aristotle: An Analysis of the Living Being.
Columbia University Press.
OCLC 936606202.
Sikka, Sonya (1997). Forms of Transcendence: Heidegger and Medieval Mystical Theology.
SUNY Press.
ISBN 978-0-7914-3345-4.
Smith, Robin (2017). "Aristotle's Logic".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Smith, William George (2007) . Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. J. Walton.
Retrieved 30 January 2019 – via Internet Archive.
Sorabji, R. (2006). Aristotle on Memory (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 54. And this is exactly why we hunt for the successor, starting in our thoughts from the present or from something else, and from something similar, or opposite, or neighbouring.
By this means recollection occurs...
Sorabji, Richard (1990). Aristotle Transformed.
Duckworth.
ISBN 978-0-7156-2254-4.
Staley, Kevin (1989). "Al-Kindi on Creation: Aristotle's Challenge to Islam". Journal of the History of Ideas. 50 (3): 355–370. doi:10.2307/2709566. JSTOR 2709566.
Susskind, Leonard (3 October 2011). "Classical Mechanics, Lectures 2, 3". The Theoretical Minimum.
Retrieved 11 May 2018.
Taylor, Henry Osborn (1922). "Chapter 3: Aristotle's Biology". Greek Biology and Medicine.
Archived from the original on 27 March 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
"The School of Athens by Raphael". Visual Arts Cork.
Retrieved 22 March 2018.
Stewart, Jessica (2019). "The Story Behind Raphael's Masterpiece 'The School of Athens'". My Modern Met.
Retrieved 29 March 2019. Plato's gesture toward the sky is thought to indicate his Theory of Forms. ... Conversely, Aristotle's hand is a visual representation of his belief that knowledge comes from experience.
Empiricism, as it is known, theorizes that humans must have concrete evidence to support their ideas
Tangian, Andranik (2020). Analytical theory of democracy.
Vols. 1 and 2. Studies in Choice and Welfare.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39691-6. ISBN 978-3-030-39690-9. S2CID 216190330.
Thompson, D'Arcy (1910).  Ross, W. D.; Smith, J. A. (eds.). Historia animalium.
The works of Aristotle translated into English.
Clarendon Press.
OCLC 39273217. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
Warren, Howard C. (1921). A History of the Association of Psychology.
ISBN 978-0-598-91975-5. OCLC 21010604.
Webb, Wilse (1990). Dreamtime and dreamwork: Decoding the language of the night.
Jeremy P. Tarcher.
ISBN 978-0-87477-594-5.
"When libraries were on a roll". The Telegraph. 19 May 2001. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2017.
Wildberg (2016). "John Philoponus".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Zalta, Edward N., ed. (2018). "Aristotle's Influence". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2018 ed.).
Darwin, Charles (1872), The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life (6th ed.), London: John Murray, retrieved 9 January 2009
Burns, Jennifer (2009). Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right.
New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-532487-7.
Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (1995). Ayn Rand: The Russian Radical.
University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.
ISBN 978-0-271-01440-1.
Further reading
The secondary literature on Aristotle is vast.
The following is only a small selection.
Ackrill, J. L. (1997). Essays on Plato and Aristotle, Oxford University Press.
Ackrill, J.L. (1981). Aristotle the Philosopher.
Oxford University Press.
Adler, Mortimer J. (1978). Aristotle for Everybody.
Macmillan.
Ammonius (1991).  Cohen, S. Marc; Matthews, Gareth B (eds.). On Aristotle's Categories.
Cornell University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8014-2688-9.
Aristotle (1908–1952). The Works of Aristotle Translated into English Under the Editorship of W.D. Ross, 12 vols.
Clarendon Press.
These translations are available in several places online; see External links.
Bakalis, Nikolaos. (2005). Handbook of Greek Philosophy: From Thales to the Stoics Analysis and Fragments, Trafford Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4120-4843-9.
Bocheński, I. M. (1951). Ancient Formal Logic.
North-Holland.
Bolotin, David (1998). An Approach to Aristotle's Physics: With Particular Attention to the Role of His Manner of Writing.
Albany: SUNY Press.
A contribution to our understanding of how to read Aristotle's scientific works.
Burnyeat, Myles F. et al. (1979). Notes on Book Zeta of Aristotle's Metaphysics.
Oxford: Sub-faculty of Philosophy.
Cantor, Norman F.; Klein, Peter L., eds. (1969). Ancient Thought: Plato and Aristotle.
Monuments of Western Thought.
Vol. 1. Blaisdell.
Chappell, V. (1973). "Aristotle's Conception of Matter". Journal of Philosophy. 70 (19): 679–696. doi:10.2307/2025076. JSTOR 2025076.
Code, Alan (1995). Potentiality in Aristotle's Science and Metaphysics, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 76.
Cohen, S. Marc; Reeve, C. D. C. (21 November 2020). "Aristotle's Metaphysics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2020 ed.).
Ferguson, John (1972). Aristotle.
Twayne Publishers.
ISBN 978-0-8057-2064-8.
De Groot, Jean (2014). Aristotle's Empiricism: Experience and Mechanics in the 4th century BC, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-83-4.
Frede, Michael (1987). Essays in Ancient Philosophy.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Fuller, B.A.G. (1923). Aristotle.
History of Greek Philosophy.
Vol. 3. Cape.
Gendlin, Eugene T. (2012). Line by Line Commentary on Aristotle's De Anima Archived 27 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Volume 1: Books I & II; Volume 2: Book III. The Focusing Institute.
Gill, Mary Louise (1989). Aristotle on Substance: The Paradox of Unity.
Princeton University Press.
Guthrie, W.K.C. (1981). A History of Greek Philosophy.
Vol. 6. Cambridge University Press.
Halper, Edward C. (2009). One and Many in Aristotle's Metaphysics, Volume 1: Books Alpha – Delta.
Parmenides Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-930972-21-6.
Halper, Edward C. (2005). One and Many in Aristotle's Metaphysics, Volume 2: The Central Books.
Parmenides Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-930972-05-6.
Irwin, Terence H. (1988). Aristotle's First Principles (PDF). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
ISBN 0-19-824290-5.
Jaeger, Werner (1948).  Robinson, Richard (ed.). Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of His Development (2nd ed.). Clarendon Press.
Jori, Alberto (2003). Aristotele, Bruno Mondadori (Prize 2003 of the "International Academy of the History of Science"), ISBN 978-88-424-9737-0.
Kiernan, Thomas P., ed. (1962). Aristotle Dictionary.
Philosophical Library.
Knight, Kelvin (2007). Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics and Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre, Polity Press.
Lewis, Frank A. (1991). Substance and Predication in Aristotle.
Cambridge University Press.
Lord, Carnes (1984). Introduction to The Politics, by Aristotle.
Chicago University Press.
Loux, Michael J. (1991). Primary Ousia: An Essay on Aristotle's Metaphysics Ζ and Η. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Maso, Stefano (Ed.), Natali, Carlo (Ed.), Seel, Gerhard (Ed.) (2012) Reading Aristotle: Physics VII. 3: What is Alteration? Proceedings of the International ESAP-HYELE Conference, Parmenides Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-930972-73-5.
McKeon, Richard (1973). Introduction to Aristotle (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.
Miller, Frank (2008). "Aristotle (382–322 B.C.)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 18–19. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n12. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Owen, G. E. L. (1965c). "The Platonism of Aristotle". Proceedings of the British Academy. 50: 125–150. [Reprinted in J. Barnes, M. Schofield, and R.R.K. Sorabji, eds.(1975). Articles on Aristotle Vol 1. Science.
London: Duckworth 14–34.]
Pangle, Lorraine Smith (2002). Aristotle and the Philosophy of Friendship. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511498282. ISBN 978-0-511-49828-2.
Plato (1979).  Allen, Harold Joseph; Wilbur, James B (eds.). The Worlds of Plato and Aristotle.
Prometheus Books.
Reeve, C. D. C. (2000). Substantial Knowledge: Aristotle's Metaphysics.
Hackett.
Rose, Lynn E. (1968). Aristotle's Syllogistic.
Charles C Thomas.
Ross, Sir David (1995). Aristotle (6th ed.). Routledge.
Scaltsas, T. (1994). Substances and Universals in Aristotle's Metaphysics.
Cornell University Press.
Strauss, Leo (1964). "On Aristotle's Politics", in The City and Man, Rand McNally.
Swanson, Judith (1992). The Public and the Private in Aristotle's Political Philosophy.
Cornell University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8014-2319-2.
Veatch, Henry B. (1974). Aristotle: A Contemporary Appreciation.
Indiana University Press.
Woods, M. J. (1991b). "Universals and Particular Forms in Aristotle's Metaphysics". Aristotle and the Later Tradition.
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy.
Vol. Suppl. pp. 41–56.
External links
Aristotle  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceResources from Wikiversity
Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Ἀριστοτέλης 
Library resources about  Aristotle 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Aristotle
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Aristotle at PhilPapers
At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
Aristotle (general article)BiologyEthicsLogicMetaphysicsMotion and its Place in NaturePoeticsPolitics
At the Internet Classics Archive
From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
Aristotle (general article)Aristotle in the RenaissanceBiologyCausalityCommentators on AristotleEthicsLogicMathematicsMetaphysicsNatural philosophyNon-contradictionPolitical theoryPsychologyRhetoric
Turner, William (1907). "Aristotle" . Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 1.
Laërtius, Diogenes (1925). "The Peripatetics: Aristotle" . Lives of the Eminent Philosophers.
Vol. 1:5. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.
Collections of works
Works by Aristotle in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
At Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Works by Aristotle at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Aristotle at Internet Archive
Works by Aristotle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Aristotle at Open Library
(in English and Greek) Perseus Project at Tufts University
At the University of Adelaide Archived 15 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine
(in Greek and French) P. Remacle
The 11-volume 1837 Bekker edition of Aristotle's Works in Greek (PDF · DJVU)
AristotelianismOverview
Aristotle
Lyceum
Peripatetic school
Physics
Biology
Ethics
Logic
Theology (unmoved mover)
Ideas and interests
Active intellect
Antiperistasis
Arete
Category of being
Catharsis
Classical unities
Correspondence theory of truth
Essence–accident
Eudaimonia
Four causes
Future contingents
Genus–differentia
Hexis
Hylomorphism
Intromission theory of vision
Ignoratio elenchi
Lexis
Magnanimity
Mimesis
Minima naturalia
Moderate realism
Aristotle's theory of universals (substantial form)
Mythos
Philosophy of nature (sublunary sphere)
Philia
Plenism
Rational animal
Phronesis
Potentiality and actuality
Sensus communis
Substance theory (hypokeimenon, ousia)
Syllogism
Telos
Temporal finitism
To ti en einai/to ti esti
Use value/exchange value
Virtue ethics
mathematical realism
Corpus Aristotelicum
Physics
Organon
Nicomachean Ethics
Politics
Metaphysics
On the Soul
Rhetoric
Poetics
Followers
Alexander the Great
Lyceum
Aristoxenus
Clearchus of Soli
Dicaearchus
Eudemus of Rhodes
Theophrastus
Strato of Lampsacus
Lyco of Troas
Aristo of Ceos
Critolaus
Diodorus of Tyre
Erymneus
Andronicus of Rhodes
Islamic Golden Age
Al-Kindi
Al-Farabi
Avicenna
Averroes
Jewish
Maimonides
Scholastics
Peter Lombard
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Duns Scotus
Peter of Spain
Jacopo Zabarella
Pietro Pomponazzi
Cesar Cremonini
Modern
Newman
Trendelenburg
Brentano
Adler
Foot
MacIntyre
Smith
Hursthouse
Nussbaum
Rand
Related topics
Platonism
Plato
Commentaries on Aristotle
Renaissance commentators
Recovery of Aristotle
Scholasticism
Thomism
Conimbricenses
Pseudo-Aristotle
Views on women
Aristotle's wheel paradox
Aristotle's razor
Metabasis paradox
Category
Philosophy portal
Links to related articles
Peripatetic philosophersGreek era
Aristotle
Eudemus
Theophrastus
Aristoxenus
Chamaeleon
Phaenias
Praxiphanes
Dicaearchus
Nicomachus
Demetrius of Phalerum
Strato of Lampsacus
Clearchus
Hieronymus of Rhodes
Lyco of Troas
Aristo of Ceos
Satyrus
Critolaus
Diodorus of Tyre
Roman era
Cratippus
Andronicus of Rhodes
Boethus of Sidon
Aristocles of Messene
Aspasius
Adrastus
Alexander of Aphrodisias
Themistius
Olympiodorus the Elder
MetaphysicsMetaphysicians
Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Christian Wolff
Bernard Bolzano
Hermann Lotze
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
G. E. Moore
Gilles Deleuze
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
W. V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
D. M. Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Héctor-Neri Castañeda
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
Alexius Meinong
Ernst Mally
Edward N. Zalta
more ...
Theories
Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Platonic realism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Truthmaker theory
Type theory
Concepts
Abstract object
Anima mundi
Category of being
Causality
Causal closure
Choice
Cogito, ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Nature
Necessity
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical object
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Relation
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...
Related topics
Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Mereology
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Category
Philosophy portal
EthicsNormative ethics
Consequentialism
Utilitarianism
Deontology
Kantian ethics
Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics
Eudaimonia
Applied ethics
Animal ethics
Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Engineering ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Machine ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of artificial intelligence
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology
Ethics of terraforming
Ethics of uncertain sentience
Meta-ethics
Cognitivism
Moral realism
Ethical naturalism
Ethical non-naturalism
Ethical subjectivism
Ideal observer theory
Divine command theory
Error theory
Non-cognitivism
Emotivism
Expressivism
Quasi-realism
Universal prescriptivism
Moral universalism
Value monism – Value pluralism
Moral constructivism
Moral relativism
Moral nihilism
Moral rationalism
Ethical intuitionism
Moral skepticism
Concepts  (index)
Autonomy
Axiology
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Free will
Good and evil
Good
Evil
Happiness
Ideal
Immorality
Justice
Liberty
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
Ethicist philosophers
Laozi
Socrates
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
Related articles
Casuistry
Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Moral psychology
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Population ethics
Social philosophy
Suffering-focused ethics
Category
Natural historyPioneeringnaturalistsClassicalantiquity
Aristotle (History of Animals)
Theophrastus (Historia Plantarum)
Aelian (De Natura Animalium)
Pliny the Elder (Natural History)
Dioscorides (De Materia Medica)
Renaissance
Ulisse Aldrovandi
Gaspard Bauhin (Pinax theatri botanici)
Otto Brunfels
Hieronymus Bock
Andrea Cesalpino
Valerius Cordus
Leonhart Fuchs
Conrad Gessner (Historia animalium)
Frederik Ruysch
William Turner (Avium Praecipuarum, New Herball)
John Gerard (Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes)
Enlightenment
Robert Hooke (Micrographia)
Marcello Malpighi
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
William Derham
Hans Sloane
Jan Swammerdam
Carl Linnaeus (Systema Naturae)
Georg Steller
Joseph Banks
Johan Christian Fabricius
James Hutton
John Ray (Historia Plantarum)
Comte de Buffon (Histoire Naturelle)
Bernard Germain de Lacépède
Gilbert White (The Natural History of Selborne)
Thomas Bewick (A History of British Birds)
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (Philosophie zoologique)
George Montagu (Ornithological Dictionary)
Georges Cuvier (Le Règne Animal)
William Smith
Charles Darwin (On the Origin of Species)
Alfred Russel Wallace (The Malay Archipelago)
Henry Walter Bates (The Naturalist on the River Amazons)
Alexander von Humboldt
John James Audubon (The Birds of America)
William Buckland
Charles Lyell
Mary Anning
Jean-Henri Fabre
Louis Agassiz
Philip Henry Gosse
Asa Gray
William Jackson Hooker
Joseph Dalton Hooker
William Jardine (The Naturalist's Library)
Ernst Haeckel (Kunstformen der Natur)
Richard Lydekker (The Royal Natural History)
Abbott Thayer (Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom)
Hugh B. Cott (Adaptive Coloration in Animals)
Niko Tinbergen (The Study of Instinct)
Konrad Lorenz (On Aggression)
Karl von Frisch (The Dancing Bees)
Ronald Lockley (Shearwaters)
Topics
Natural history museums (List)
Parson-naturalists (List)
Natural History Societies
List of natural history dealers
History of biologyFields,disciplines
Agricultural science
Anatomy
Biochemistry
Biotechnology
Botany
Ecology
Evolutionary thought
Genetics
Geology
Immunology
Medicine
Model organisms
Molecular biology
Molecular evolution
Paleontology
Phycology
Plant systematics
RNA biology
Zoology (since 1859)
Zoology (through 1859)
Institutions
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Marine Biological Laboratory
Max Planck Society
Pasteur Institute
Rockefeller University
Rothamsted Research
Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute
Theories,concepts
Germ theory of disease
Central dogma of molecular biology
Darwinism
Great chain of being
Hierarchy of life
Lamarckism
One gene–one enzyme hypothesis
Protocell
RNA world
Sequence hypothesis
Spontaneous generation
HistoryClassicalantiquity
Aristotle
Aristotle's biology
On Generation and Corruption
History of Animals
Theophrastus
Historia Plantarum
Dioscorides
De materia medica
Galen
Renaissance,early modern
Conrad Gessner
Historia animalium
Andreas Vesalius
De humani corporis fabrica
William Harvey
De Motu Cordis
Frederik Ruysch
Jan Swammerdam
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Regnier de Graaf
Marcello Malpighi
Robert Hooke
Micrographia
Francesco Redi
Evolution19thcentury
Linnaeus
Systema Naturae
Buffon
Histoire Naturelle
Lamarck
Philosophie Zoologique
Humboldt
Charles Lyell
Principles of Geology
Charles Darwin
On the Origin of Species
The Descent of Man
Gregor Mendel
Alfred Russel Wallace
Henry Walter Bates
Modernsynthesis
William Bateson
Theodosius Dobzhansky
Genetics and the Origin of Species
R. A. Fisher
E. B. Ford
J. B. S. Haldane
Ernst Mayr
Thomas Hunt Morgan
George Gaylord Simpson
Hugo de Vries
Sewall Wright
Recent
Stephen Jay Gould
W. D. Hamilton
Lynn Margulis
Aleksandr Oparin
George C. Williams
Carl Woese
Microbiology
Ferdinand Cohn
Alexander Fleming
Felix d'Herelle
Robert Koch
Louis Pasteur
Martinus Beijerinck
Lazzaro Spallanzani
Sergei Winogradsky
Develop. biol.,evo-devo
Karl Ernst von Baer
Gavin de Beer
Sean B. Carroll
Scott F. Gilbert
Walter Gehring
Ernst Haeckel
François Jacob
Edward B. Lewis
Jacques Monod
Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard
Eric Wieschaus
E. B. Wilson
Genetics,molecularbiologyExperiments
Griffith's (1928)
Luria–Delbrück (1943)
Avery–MacLeod–McCarty (1944)
Miller–Urey (1952)
Hershey–Chase (1952)
Meselson–Stahl (1958)
Crick, Brenner et al. (1961)
Nirenberg–Matthaei (1961)
Nirenberg–Leder (1964)
People
Barbara McClintock
George Beadle
Seymour Benzer
Rosalind Franklin
Photo 51
James D. Watson and Francis Crick
"Molecular structure of Nucleic Acids"
Linus Pauling
"Sickle Cell Anemia, a Molecular Disease"
Fred Sanger
Max Perutz
John Kendrew
Sydney Brenner
Joshua Lederberg
Walter Gilbert
Kary Mullis
Emmanuelle Charpentier
Jennifer Doudna
Ecology
Rachel Carson
Frederic Clements
Charles Elton
Henry Gleason
Arthur Tansley
Eugenius Warming
Ethology
Niko Tinbergen
Karl von Frisch
Konrad Lorenz
Frans de Waal
Jane Goodall
Ivan Pavlov
Related
History of science
Philosophy of biology
Teleology
Ethnobotany
Eugenics
History of the creation-evolution controversy
Human Genome Project
Humboldtian science
Natural history
Natural philosophy
Natural theology
Relationship between religion and science
Timeline of biology and organic chemistry
Category
Philosophy of scienceConcepts
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Functional contextualism
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific pluralism
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science
Metatheoryof science
Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism
Rationalism / Empiricism
Received view / Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism
Philosophy of
Physics
thermal and statistical
Motion
Chemistry
Biology
Geography
Social science
Technology
Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time
Related topics
Alchemy
Criticism of science
Descriptive science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
Hard and soft science
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Normative science
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Science studies
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance
Philosophers of science by eraAncient
Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans
Epicurus
Medieval
Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby
Early modern
Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume
Late modern
Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson
Contemporary
Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett
Category
Philosophy portal
Science portal
Philosophy of languageIndex of language articlesPhilosophers
Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida
Of Grammatology
Limited Inc
Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
Robert Stalnaker
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick
Richard Montague
Barbara Partee
Theories
Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivism
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Dynamic semantics
Expressivism
Inquisitive semantics
Linguistic determinism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Situation semantics
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions (Definite description)
Theory of language
Unilalianism
Verification theory
Concepts
Ambiguity
Cant
Linguistic relativity
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Family resemblance
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Modality (natural language)
Presupposition
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Sentence
Statement
more...
Related articles
Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics
Category
Task Force
Discussion
Jurisprudence
Index
Legal theory
Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Economic analysis
Legal norms
International legal theory
Legal history
Philosophy of law
Sociology of law
Philosophers
Alexy
Allan
Aquinas
Aristotle
Austin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Betti
Bickel
Blackstone
Bobbio
Bork
Brożek
Cardozo
Castanheira Neves
Chafee
Coleman
Del Vecchio
Diniz
Durkheim
Dworkin
Ehrlich
Feinberg
Fineman
Finnis
Frank
Fuller
Gardner
George
Green
Grisez
Grotius
Gurvitch
Habermas
Han
Hart
Hegel
Hobbes
Hohfeld
Hägerström
Jellinek
Jhering
Kant
Kelsen
Köchler
Kramer
Leoni
Llewellyn
Lombardía
Luhmann
Lundstedt
Lyons
MacCormick
Marx
Nussbaum
Olivecrona
Pashukanis
Perelman
Petrażycki
Pontes de Miranda
Posner
Pound
Puchta
Pufendorf
Radbruch
Rawls
Raz
Reale
Reinach
Renner
Ross
Rumi
Savigny
Scaevola
Schauer
Schmitt
Shang
Simmonds
Somló
Suárez
Tribe
Unger
Voegelin
Waldron
Walzer
Weber
Wronkowska
Ziembiński
Znamierowski
Theories
Analytical jurisprudence
Deontological ethics
Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law
Interpretivism
Legalism
Legal moralism
Legal positivism
Legal realism
Libertarian theories of law
Natural law
Paternalism
Utilitarianism
Virtue jurisprudence
Concepts
Dharma
Fa
Judicial interpretation
Justice
Legal system
Li
Question of law
Rational-legal authority
Usul al-Fiqh
Category
Law portal
Philosophy portal
WikiProject Law
WikiProject Philosophy
changes
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Literary criticismLiterary theory
Archetypal criticism
Biographical criticism
Chicago school
Cultural materialism
Darwinian criticism
Deconstruction
Descriptive poetics
Ecocriticism
Feminist criticism
Formalism
Geocriticism
Marxist criticism
New Criticism
New historicism
Postcolonial criticism
Postcritique
Psychoanalytic criticism
Reader-response criticism
Russian formalism
Semiotic criticism
Sociological criticism
Source criticism
Thing theory
Theorists and critics
Plato
Aristotle
Horace
Longinus
Plotinus
St.
Augustine
Boethius
Aquinas
Dante
Boccaccio
Christine de Pizan
Bharata Muni
Rajashekhara
Valmiki
Anandavardhana
Cao Pi
Lu Ji
Liu Xie
Wang Changling
Lodovico Castelvetro
Philip Sidney
Jacopo Mazzoni
Torquato Tasso
Francis Bacon
Henry Reynolds
Thomas Hobbes
Pierre Corneille
John Dryden
Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux
John Locke
John Dennis
Alexander Pope
Joseph Addison
Giambattista Vico
Edmund Burke
David Hume
Samuel Johnson
Edward Young
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Joshua Reynolds
Denis Diderot
Immanuel Kant
Mary Wollstonecraft
William Blake
Friedrich Schiller
Friedrich Schlegel
William Wordsworth
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Wilhelm von Humboldt
John Keats
Arthur Schopenhauer
Thomas Love Peacock
Percy Bysshe Shelley
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Giacomo Leopardi
Francesco De Sanctis
Thomas Carlyle
John Stuart Mill
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve
James Russell Lowell
Edgar Allan Poe
Matthew Arnold
Hippolyte Taine
Charles Baudelaire
Karl Marx
Søren Kierkegaard
Friedrich Nietzsche
Walter Pater
Émile Zola
Anatole France
Oscar Wilde
Stéphane Mallarmé
Leo Tolstoy
Benedetto Croce
Antonio Gramsci
Umberto Eco
A. C. Bradley
Sigmund Freud
Ferdinand de Saussure
Claude Lévi-Strauss
T. E. Hulme
Walter Benjamin
Viktor Shklovsky
T. S. Eliot
Irving Babbitt
Carl Jung
Leon Trotsky
Boris Eikhenbaum
Virginia Woolf
I. A. Richards
Mikhail Bakhtin
Georges Bataille
John Crowe Ransom
R. P. Blackmur
Jacques Lacan
György Lukács
Paul Valéry
Kenneth Burke
Ernst Cassirer
W. K. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley
Cleanth Brooks
Jan Mukařovský
Jean-Paul Sartre
Simone de Beauvoir
Ronald Crane
Philip Wheelwright
Theodor Adorno
Roman Jakobson
Northrop Frye
Gaston Bachelard
Ernst Gombrich
Martin Heidegger
E. D. Hirsch, Jr.
Noam Chomsky
Jacques Derrida
Roland Barthes
Michel Foucault
Hans Robert Jauss
Georges Poulet
Raymond Williams
Lionel Trilling
Julia Kristeva
Paul de Man
Harold Bloom
Chinua Achebe
Stanley Fish
Edward Said
Elaine Showalter
Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar
Murray Krieger
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari
René Girard
Hélène Cixous
Jonathan Culler
Geoffrey Hartman
Wolfgang Iser
Hayden White
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Paul Ricoeur
Peter Szondi
M. H. Abrams
J. Hillis Miller
Clifford Geertz
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti
Tristan Tzara
André Breton
Mina Loy
Yokomitsu Riichi
Oswald de Andrade
Hu Shih
Octavio Paz
Ancient Greece
Timeline
HistoryGeographyPeriods
Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece
Geography
Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Crete
Cyrenaica
Cyprus
Doris
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Peloponnesus
Pontus
Taurica
Ancient Greek colonies
City statesPoliticsMilitaryCity states
Argos
Athens
Byzantion
Chalcis
Corinth
Ephesus
Miletus
Pergamon
Eretria
Kerkyra
Larissa
Megalopolis
Thebes
Megara
Rhodes
Samos
Sparta
Alexandria
Antioch
Lissus (Crete)
Kingdoms
Epirus (ancient state)
Macedonia (ancient kingdom)
Ptolemaic Kingdom
Seleucid Empire
Greco-Bactrian Kingdom
Indo-Greek Kingdom
Federations/Confederations
Doric Hexapolis (c. 1100–560 BC)
Italiote League (c. 800–389 BC)
Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC)
Peloponnesian League (c. 550–366 BC)
Amphictyonic League (c. 595–279 BC)
Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC)
Hellenic League (499–449 BC)
Delian League (478–404 BC)
Chalcidian League (430–348 BC)
Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC)
Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC)
Second Athenian League (378–355 BC)
Thessalian League (374–196 BC)
Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC)
Epirote League (370–168 BC)
League of Corinth (338–322 BC)
Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD)
Achaean League (280–146 BC)
Politics
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Tagus
Tyrant
Athenian
Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphe paranomon
Heliaia
Ostracism
Spartan
Ekklesia
Ephor
Gerousia
Macedon
Synedrion
Koinon
Military
Wars
Athenian military
Scythian archers
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Strategos
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston
PeopleList of ancient GreeksRulers
Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse
Philosophers
Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno
Authors
Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Panyassis
Philocles
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon
Others
Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles
Groups
Geographers
Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants
By culture
Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians
SocietyCultureSociety
Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Folklore
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine
Arts and science
Architecture
Greek Revival architecture
Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music
Musical system
Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre
Greco-Buddhist art
Religion
Funeral and burial practices
Mythology
mythological figures
Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld
Greco-Buddhism
Greco-Buddhist monasticism
Sacred places
Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dion
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia
Structures
Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos
Temples
Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera, Olympia
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus, Olympia
Language
Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects
Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Epirote
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian
Koine
Writing
Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals
Greek colonisationSouth Italy
Alision
Brentesion
Caulonia
Chone
Croton
Cumae
Elea
Heraclea Lucania
Hipponion
Hydrus
Krimisa
Laüs
Locri
Medma
Metapontion
Neápolis
Pandosia (Lucania)
Poseidonia
Pixous
Rhegion
Scylletium
Siris
Sybaris
Sybaris on the Traeis
Taras
Terina
Thurii
Sicily
Akragas
Akrai
Akrillai
Apollonia
Calacte
Casmenae
Catana
Gela
Helorus
Henna
Heraclea Minoa
Himera
Hybla Gereatis
Hybla Heraea
Kamarina
Leontinoi
Megara Hyblaea
Messana
Naxos
Segesta
Selinous
Syracuse
Tauromenion
Thermae
Tyndaris
Aeolian Islands
Didyme
Euonymos
Ereikousa
Hycesia
Lipara/Meligounis
Phoenicusa
Strongyle
Therassía
Cyrenaica
Balagrae
Barca
Berenice
Cyrene (Apollonia)
Ptolemais
Iberian Peninsula
Akra Leuke
Alonis
Emporion
Helike
Hemeroscopion
Kalathousa
Kypsela
Mainake
Menestheus's Limin
Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus
Rhode
Salauris
Zacynthos
Illyria
Aspalathos
Apollonia
Aulon
Epidamnos
Epidauros
Issa
Melaina Korkyra
Nymphaion
Orikon
Pharos
Tragurion
Thronion
Black Seanorth coast
Borysthenes
Charax
Chersonesus
Dioscurias
Eupatoria
Gorgippia
Hermonassa
Kepoi
Kimmerikon
Myrmekion
Nikonion
Nymphaion
Olbia
Panticapaion
Phanagoria
Pityus
Tanais
Theodosia
Tyras
Tyritake
Akra
Black Seasouth coast
Dionysopolis
Odessos
Anchialos
Mesambria
Apollonia
Salmydessus
Heraclea
Tium
Sesamus
Cytorus
Abonoteichos
Sinope
Zaliche
Amisos
Oinòe
Polemonion
Thèrmae
Cotyora
Kerasous
Tripolis
Trapezous
Rhizos
Athina
Bathus
Phasis
Lists
Cities
in Epirus
People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres
Category
Portal
Outline
Portals: Physics Biology Earth science Psychology Philosophy Politics Economics Literature Biography Ancient Greece History of science
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
MathSciNet
zbMATH
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
RISM (France)
RERO (Switzerland)
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 27 September 2022, at 05:19 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
