Civilization - Wikipedia
Civilization
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Complex society
For other uses, see Civilization (disambiguation).
Ancient Egypt provides a canonical example of an early culture considered a civilization.
A civilization (or civilisation) is any complex society characterized by the development of the state, social stratification,  urbanization, and symbolic systems of communication beyond natural spoken language (namely, a writing system).
The Acropolis of Athens: Greece is widely referred to by many as the cradle of Western civilization and the birthplace of democracy.
Civilizations are intimately associated with additional characteristics such as centralization, the domestication of plant and animal species (including humans), specialization of labour, culturally-ingrained ideologies of progress, monumental architecture, taxation, societal dependence upon farming, and expansionism.
Historically, a civilization has often been understood as a larger and "more advanced" culture, in implied contrast to smaller, supposedly less advanced cultures.
In this broad sense, a civilization contrasts with non-centralized tribal societies, including the cultures of nomadic pastoralists, Neolithic societies or hunter-gatherers; however, sometimes it also contrasts with the cultures found within civilizations themselves.
Civilizations are organized densely-populated settlements divided into hierarchical social classes with a ruling elite and subordinate urban and rural populations, which engage in intensive agriculture, mining, small-scale manufacture and trade.
Civilization concentrates power, extending human control over the rest of nature, including over other human beings.
Civilization, as its etymology (see below) suggests, is a concept originally associated with towns and cities.
The earliest emergence of civilizations is generally connected with the final stages of the Neolithic Revolution in West Asia, culminating in the relatively rapid process of urban revolution and state-formation, a political development associated with the appearance of a governing elite.
Contents
History of the concept
The English word civilization comes from the 16th-century French civilisé ("civilized"), from Latin civilis ("civil"), related to civis ("citizen") and civitas ("city"). The fundamental treatise is Norbert Elias's The Civilizing Process (1939), which traces social mores from medieval courtly society to the Early Modern period.
In The Philosophy of Civilization (1923), Albert Schweitzer outlines two opinions: one purely material and the other material and ethical.
He said that the world crisis was from humanity losing the ethical idea of civilization, "the sum total of all progress made by man in every sphere of action and from every point of view in so far as the progress helps towards the spiritual perfecting of individuals as the progress of all progress".
Related words like "civility" developed in the mid-16th century.
The abstract noun "civilization", meaning "civilized condition", came in the 1760s, again from French.
The first known use in French is in 1757, by Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau, and the first use in English is attributed to Adam Ferguson, who in his 1767 Essay on the History of Civil Society wrote, "Not only the individual advances from infancy to manhood but the species itself from rudeness to civilisation". The word was therefore opposed to barbarism or rudeness, in the active pursuit of progress characteristic of the Age of Enlightenment.
In the late 1700s and early 1800s, during the French Revolution, "civilization" was used in the singular, never in the plural, and meant the progress of humanity as a whole.
This is still the case in French.
The use of "civilizations" as a countable noun was in occasional use in the 19th century, but has become much more common in the later 20th century, sometimes just meaning culture (itself in origin an uncountable noun, made countable in the context of ethnography). Only in this generalized sense does it become possible to speak of a "medieval civilization", which in Elias's sense would have been an oxymoron.
Already in the 18th century, civilization was not always seen as an improvement.
One historically important distinction between culture and civilization is from the writings of Rousseau, particularly his work about education, Emile.
Here, civilization, being more rational and socially driven, is not fully in accord with human nature, and "human wholeness is achievable only through the recovery of or approximation to an original discursive or prerational natural unity" (see noble savage). From this, a new approach was developed, especially in Germany, first by Johann Gottfried Herder and later by philosophers such as Kierkegaard and Nietzsche.
This sees cultures as natural organisms, not defined by "conscious, rational, deliberative acts", but a kind of pre-rational "folk spirit". Civilization, in contrast, though more rational and more successful in material progress, is unnatural and leads to "vices of social life" such as guile, hypocrisy, envy and avarice.
In World War II, Leo Strauss, having fled Germany, argued in New York that this opinion of civilization was behind Nazism and German militarism and nihilism.
Characteristics
The End of Dinner by Jules-Alexandre Grün (1913). The emergence of table manners and other forms of etiquette and self-restraint are presented as a characteristic of civilized society by Norbert Elias in his book The Civilizing Process (1939).
Social scientists such as V. Gordon Childe have named a number of traits that distinguish a civilization from other kinds of society.
Civilizations have been distinguished by their means of subsistence, types of livelihood, settlement patterns, forms of government, social stratification, economic systems, literacy and other cultural traits.
Andrew Nikiforuk argues that "civilizations relied on shackled human muscle.
It took the energy of slaves to plant crops, clothe emperors, and build cities" and considers slavery to be a common feature of pre-modern civilizations.
All civilizations have depended on agriculture for subsistence, with the possible exception of some early civilizations in Peru which may have depended upon maritime resources.
The traditional "surplus model" postulates that cereal farming results in accumulated storage and a surplus of food, particularly when people use intensive agricultural techniques such as artificial fertilization, irrigation and crop rotation.
It is possible but more difficult to accumulate horticultural production, and so civilizations based on horticultural gardening have been very rare.
Grain surpluses have been especially important because grain can be stored for a long time. 
A research from the Journal of Political Economy contradicts the surplus model.
It postulates that horticultural gardening was more productive than cereal farming.
However, only cereal farming produced civilization because of the appropriability of yearly harvest.
Rural populations that could only grow cereals could be taxed allowing for a taxing elite and urban development.
This also had a negative effect on rural population, increasing relative agricultural output per farmer.
Farming efficiency created food surplus and sustained the food surplus through decreasing rural population growth in favour of urban growth.
Suitability of highly productive roots and tubers was in fact a curse of plenty, which prevented the emergence of states and impeded economic development. 
A surplus of food permits some people to do things besides producing food for a living: early civilizations included soldiers, artisans, priests and priestesses, and other people with specialized careers.
A surplus of food results in a division of labour and a more diverse range of human activity, a defining trait of civilizations.
However, in some places hunter-gatherers have had access to food surpluses, such as among some of the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest and perhaps during the Mesolithic Natufian culture.
It is possible that food surpluses and relatively large scale social organization and division of labour predates plant and animal domestication.
Civilizations have distinctly different settlement patterns from other societies.
The word "civilization" is sometimes simply defined as "'living in cities'". Non-farmers tend to gather in cities to work and to trade.
Compared with other societies, civilizations have a more complex political structure, namely the state.
State societies are more stratified than other societies; there is a greater difference among the social classes.
The ruling class, normally concentrated in the cities, has control over much of the surplus and exercises its will through the actions of a government or bureaucracy.
Morton Fried, a conflict theorist and Elman Service, an integration theorist, have classified human cultures based on political systems and social inequality.
This system of classification contains four categories
Hunter-gatherer bands, which are generally egalitarian.
Horticultural/pastoral societies in which there are generally two inherited social classes; chief and commoner.
Highly stratified structures, or chiefdoms, with several inherited social classes: king, noble, freemen, serf and slave.
Civilizations, with complex social hierarchies and organized, institutional governments.
Economically, civilizations display more complex patterns of ownership and exchange than less organized societies.
Living in one place allows people to accumulate more personal possessions than nomadic people.
Some people also acquire landed property, or private ownership of the land.
Because a percentage of people in civilizations do not grow their own food, they must trade their goods and services for food in a market system, or receive food through the levy of tribute, redistributive taxation, tariffs or tithes from the food producing segment of the population.
Early human cultures functioned through a gift economy supplemented by limited barter systems.
By the early Iron Age, contemporary civilizations developed money as a medium of exchange for increasingly complex transactions.
In a village, the potter makes a pot for the brewer and the brewer compensates the potter by giving him a certain amount of beer.
In a city, the potter may need a new roof, the roofer may need new shoes, the cobbler may need new horseshoes, the blacksmith may need a new coat and the tanner may need a new pot.
These people may not be personally acquainted with one another and their needs may not occur all at the same time.
A monetary system is a way of organizing these obligations to ensure that they are fulfilled.
From the days of the earliest monetarized civilizations, monopolistic controls of monetary systems have benefited the social and political elites.
The transition from simpler to more complex economies does not necessarily mean an improvement in the living standards of the populace.
For example, although the Middle Ages is often portrayed as an era of decline from the Roman Empire, studies have shown that the average stature of males in the Middle Ages (c. 500 to 1500 CE) was greater than it was for males during the preceding Roman Empire and the succeeding Early Modern Period (c. 1500 to 1800 CE). Also, the Plains Indians of North America in the 19th century were taller than their "civilized" American and European counterparts.
The average stature of a population is a good measurement of the adequacy of its access to necessities, especially food, and its freedom from disease.
Writing, developed first by people in Sumer, is considered a hallmark of civilization and "appears to accompany the rise of complex administrative bureaucracies or the conquest state". Traders and bureaucrats relied on writing to keep accurate records.
Like money, the writing was necessitated by the size of the population of a city and the complexity of its commerce among people who are not all personally acquainted with each other.
However, writing is not always necessary for civilization, as shown by the Inca civilization of the Andes, which did not use writing at all but except for a complex recording system consisting of knotted strings of different lengths and colors: the "Quipus", and still functioned as a civilized society.
Ancient Greek philosopher and scientist Aristotle
Aided by their division of labour and central government planning, civilizations have developed many other diverse cultural traits.
These include organized religion, development in the arts, and countless new advances in science and technology.
Throughout history, successful civilizations have spread, taking over more and more territory, and assimilating more and more previously uncivilized people.
Nevertheless, some tribes or people remain uncivilized even to this day.
These cultures are called by some "primitive", a term that is regarded by others as pejorative. "Primitive" implies in some way that a culture is "first" (Latin = primus), that it has not changed since the dawn of humanity, though this has been demonstrated not to be true.
Specifically, as all of today's cultures are contemporaries, today's so-called primitive cultures are in no way antecedent to those we consider civilized.
Anthropologists today use the term "non-literate" to describe these peoples.
Civilization has been spread by colonization, invasion, religious conversion, the extension of bureaucratic control and trade, and by introducing agriculture and writing to non-literate peoples.
Some non-civilized people may willingly adapt to civilized behaviour.
But civilization is also spread by the technical, material and social dominance that civilization engenders.
Assessments of what level of civilization a polity has reached are based on comparisons of the relative importance of agricultural as opposed to trading or manufacturing capacities, the territorial extensions of its power, the complexity of its division of labour, and the carrying capacity of its urban centres.
Secondary elements include a developed transportation system, writing, standardized measurement, currency, contractual and tort-based legal systems, art, architecture, mathematics, scientific understanding, metallurgy, political structures, and organized religion.
Traditionally, polities that managed to achieve notable military, ideological and economic power defined themselves as "civilized" as opposed to other societies or human groupings outside their sphere of influence – calling the latter barbarians, savages, and primitives.
Cultural identity
Further information: Cultural area and culture
"Civilization" can also refer to the culture of a complex society, not just the society itself.
Every society, civilization or not, has a specific set of ideas and customs, and a certain set of manufactures and arts that make it unique.
Civilizations tend to develop intricate cultures, including a state-based decision making apparatus, a literature, professional art, architecture, organized religion and complex customs of education, coercion and control associated with maintaining the elite.
The intricate culture associated with civilization has a tendency to spread to and influence other cultures, sometimes assimilating them into the civilization (a classic example being Chinese civilization and its influence on nearby civilizations such as Korea, Japan and Vietnam). Many civilizations are actually large cultural spheres containing many nations and regions.
The civilization in which someone lives is that person's broadest cultural identity.[citation needed]
A Blue Shield International mission in Libya during the war in 2011 to protect the cultural assets there.
It is precisely the protection of this cultural identity that is becoming increasingly important nationally and internationally.
According to international law, the United Nations and UNESCO try to set up and enforce relevant rules.
The aim is to preserve the cultural heritage of humanity and also the cultural identity, especially in the case of war and armed conflict.
According to Karl von Habsburg, President of Blue Shield International, the destruction of cultural assets is also part of psychological warfare.
The target of the attack is often the opponent's cultural identity, which is why symbolic cultural assets become a main target.
It is also intended to destroy the particularly sensitive cultural memory (museums, archives, monuments, etc.), the grown cultural diversity, and the economic basis (such as tourism) of a state, region or community.
Many historians have focused on these broad cultural spheres and have treated civilizations as discrete units.
Early twentieth-century philosopher Oswald Spengler, uses the German word Kultur, "culture", for what many call a "civilization". Spengler believed a civilization's coherence is based on a single primary cultural symbol.
Cultures experience cycles of birth, life, decline, and death, often supplanted by a potent new culture, formed around a compelling new cultural symbol.
Spengler states civilization is the beginning of the decline of a culture as "the most external and artificial states of which a species of developed humanity is capable".
This "unified culture" concept of civilization also influenced the theories of historian Arnold J. Toynbee in the mid-twentieth century.
Toynbee explored civilization processes in his multi-volume A Study of History, which traced the rise and, in most cases, the decline of 21 civilizations and five "arrested civilizations". Civilizations generally declined and fell, according to Toynbee, because of the failure of a "creative minority", through moral or religious decline, to meet some important challenge, rather than mere economic or environmental causes.
Samuel P. Huntington defines civilization as "the highest cultural grouping of people and the broadest level of cultural identity people have short of that which distinguishes humans from other species". Huntington's theories about civilizations are discussed below.
Complex systems
Depiction of united Medes and Persians at the Apadana, Persepolis.
Another group of theorists, making use of systems theory, looks at a civilization as a complex system, i.e., a framework by which a group of objects can be analysed that work in concert to produce some result.
Civilizations can be seen as networks of cities that emerge from pre-urban cultures and are defined by the economic, political, military, diplomatic, social and cultural interactions among them.
Any organization is a complex social system and a civilization is a large organization.
Systems theory helps guard against superficial and misleading analogies in the study and description of civilizations.
Systems theorists look at many types of relations between cities, including economic relations, cultural exchanges and political/diplomatic/military relations.
These spheres often occur on different scales.
For example, trade networks were, until the nineteenth century, much larger than either cultural spheres or political spheres.
Extensive trade routes, including the Silk Road through Central Asia and Indian Ocean sea routes linking the Roman Empire, Persian Empire, India and China, were well established 2000 years ago when these civilizations scarcely shared any political, diplomatic, military, or cultural relations.
The first evidence of such long-distance trade is in the ancient world.
During the Uruk period, Guillermo Algaze has argued that trade relations connected Egypt, Mesopotamia, Iran and Afghanistan.
Resin found later in the Royal Cemetery at Ur is suggested was traded northwards from Mozambique.
Many theorists argue that the entire world has already become integrated into a single "world system", a process known as globalization.
Different civilizations and societies all over the globe are economically, politically, and even culturally interdependent in many ways.
There is debate over when this integration began, and what sort of integration – cultural, technological, economic, political, or military-diplomatic – is the key indicator in determining the extent of a civilization.
David Wilkinson has proposed that economic and military-diplomatic integration of the Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations resulted in the creation of what he calls the "Central Civilization" around 1500 BCE. Central Civilization later expanded to include the entire Middle East and Europe, and then expanded to a global scale with European colonization, integrating the Americas, Australia, China and Japan by the nineteenth century.
According to Wilkinson, civilizations can be culturally heterogeneous, like the Central Civilization, or homogeneous, like the Japanese civilization.
What Huntington calls the "clash of civilizations" might be characterized by Wilkinson as a clash of cultural spheres within a single global civilization.
Others point to the Crusading movement as the first step in globalization.
The more conventional viewpoint is that networks of societies have expanded and shrunk since ancient times, and that the current globalized economy and culture is a product of recent European colonialism.[citation needed]
History
See also: History of the world
The notion of world history as a succession of "civilizations" is an entirely modern one.
In the European Age of Discovery, emerging Modernity was put into stark contrast with the Neolithic and Mesolithic  stage of the cultures of many of the peoples they encountered.
The term "civilization" as it is now most commonly understood, a complex state with centralization,  social stratification and specialization of labour, corresponds to early empires that arise in the Fertile Crescent in the Early Bronze Age, around roughly 3000 BC.
Gordon Childe defined the emergence of civilization as the result of two successive revolutions: the Neolithic Revolution, triggering the development of settled communities, and the Urban Revolution.
Urban Revolution
Main articles: Neolithic, Bronze Age, and Cradle of civilization
At first, the Neolithic was associated with shifting subsistence cultivation, where continuous farming led to the depletion of soil fertility resulting in the requirement to cultivate fields further and further removed from the settlement, eventually compelling the settlement itself to move.
In major semi-arid river valleys, annual flooding renewed soil fertility every year, with the result that population densities could rise significantly.
This encouraged a secondary products revolution in which people used domesticated animals not just for meat, but also for milk, wool, manure and pulling ploughs and carts – a development that spread through the Eurasian Oecumene.[definition needed]
The earlier neolithic technology and lifestyle were established first in Western Asia (for example at Göbekli Tepe, from about 9,130 BCE), and later in the Yellow River and Yangtze basins in China (for example the Peiligang and Pengtoushan cultures), and later spread.
Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BCE, with civilizations developing from 7,400 years ago.
This area has been identified as having "inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops, the building of the earliest cities and the development of the written cursive script".
Similar pre-civilized "neolithic revolutions" also began independently from 7,000 BCE in northwestern South America (the Norte Chico civilization) and Mesoamerica.
The Black Sea area is a cradle of the European civilization.
The site of Solnitsata (5500 BC - 4200 BC) is believed to be the oldest town in Europe - prehistoric fortified (walled) stone settlement (prehistoric city). The first gold artifacts in the world appear from the 4th millennium BC, such as those found in a burial site from 4569 to 4340 BC and one of the most important archaeological sites in world prehistory – the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna in Bulgaria, thought to be the earliest "well-dated" find of gold artifacts.
The 8.2 Kiloyear Arid Event and the 5.9 Kiloyear Interpluvial saw the drying out of semiarid regions and a major spread of deserts.  This climate change shifted the cost-benefit ratio of endemic violence between communities, which saw the abandonment of unwalled village communities and the appearance of walled cities, associated with the first civilizations.
The ruins of Mesoamerican city Teotihuacan
This "urban revolution" marked the beginning of the accumulation of transferable surpluses, which helped economies and cities develop.
It was associated with the state monopoly of violence, the appearance of a soldier class and endemic warfare, the rapid development of hierarchies, and the appearance of human sacrifice.
The civilized urban revolution in turn was dependent upon the development of sedentism, the domestication of grains, plants and animals, the permanence of settlements and development of lifestyles that facilitated economies of scale and accumulation of surplus production by certain social sectors.  The transition from complex cultures to civilizations, while still disputed, seems to be associated with the development of state structures, in which power was further monopolized by an elite ruling class who practiced human sacrifice.
Towards the end of the Neolithic period, various elitist Chalcolithic civilizations began to rise in various "cradles" from around 3600 BCE beginning with Mesopotamia, expanding into large-scale kingdoms and empires in the course of the Bronze Age (Akkadian Empire, Old Kingdom of Egypt, Neo-Sumerian Empire, Old Assyrian Empire, Babylonian Empire, Hittite Empire, and to some degree the territorial expansions of the Elamites, Hurrians, Amorites and Ebla).
A later development took place independently in the Pre-Columbian Americas.
Urbanization in the Norte Chico civilization in coastal Peru emerged about 3200 BCE; the oldest known Mayan city, located in Guatemala, dates to about 750 BCE. and Teotihuacan in Mexico was one of the largest cities in the world in 350 CE with a population of about 125,000.
Axial Age
Main article: Axial Age
Further information: Iron Age, Hinduism, Christianization, Spread of Buddhism, and Spread of Islam
The Bronze Age collapse was followed by the Iron Age around 1200 BCE, during which a number of new civilizations emerged, culminating in a period from the 8th to the 3rd century BCE which Karl Jaspers termed the Axial Age, presented as a critical transitional phase leading to classical civilization.
Modernity
Main article: Modernity
Further information: Middle Ages, Early modern period, Great Divergence, and Age of Discovery
See also: Culture, Major religious groups, World language, and Clash of Civilizations
A major technological and cultural transition to modernity began approximately 1500 CE in Western Europe, and from this beginning new approaches to science and law spread rapidly around the world, incorporating earlier cultures into the technological and industrial society of the present.
Fall of civilizations
Main article: Societal collapse
Civilizations are traditionally understood as ending in one of two ways; either through incorporation into another expanding civilization (e.g.
As Ancient Egypt was incorporated into Hellenistic Greek, and subsequently Roman civilizations), or by collapsing and reverting to a simpler form of living, as happens in so-called Dark Ages.
There have been many explanations put forward for the collapse of civilization.
Some focus on historical examples, and others on general theory.
Ibn Khaldūn's Muqaddimah influenced theories of the analysis, growth and decline of the Islamic civilization.
He suggested repeated invasions from nomadic peoples limited development and led to social collapse.
Barbarian invasions played an important role in the fall of the Roman Empire.
Edward Gibbon's work The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire is a well-known and detailed analysis of the fall of Roman civilization.
Gibbon suggested the final act of the collapse of Rome was the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 CE. For Gibbon, "The decline of Rome was the natural and inevitable effect of immoderate greatness.
Prosperity ripened the principle of decay; the cause of the destruction multiplied with the extent of conquest; and, as soon as time or accident had removed the artificial supports, the stupendous fabric yielded to the pressure of its own weight.
The story of the ruin is simple and obvious; and instead of inquiring why the Roman Empire was destroyed, we should rather be surprised that it has subsisted for so long".
Theodor Mommsen in his History of Rome suggested Rome collapsed with the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE and he also tended towards a biological analogy of "genesis", "growth", "senescence", "collapse" and "decay".
Oswald Spengler, in his Decline of the West rejected Petrarch's chronological division, and suggested that there had been only eight "mature civilizations". Growing cultures, he argued, tend to develop into imperialistic civilizations, which expand and ultimately collapse, with democratic forms of government ushering in plutocracy and ultimately imperialism.
Arnold J. Toynbee in his A Study of History suggested that there had been a much larger number of civilizations, including a small number of arrested civilizations, and that all civilizations tended to go through the cycle identified by Mommsen.
The cause of the fall of a civilization occurred when a cultural elite became a parasitic elite, leading to the rise of internal and external proletariats.
Joseph Tainter in The Collapse of Complex Societies suggested that there were diminishing returns to complexity, due to which, as states achieved a maximum permissible complexity, they would decline when further increases actually produced a negative return.
Tainter suggested that Rome achieved this figure in the 2nd century CE.
Jared Diamond in his 2005 book Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed suggests five major reasons for the collapse of 41 studied cultures: environmental damage, such as deforestation and soil erosion; climate change; dependence upon long-distance trade for needed resources; increasing levels of internal and external violence, such as war or invasion; and societal responses to internal and environmental problems.
Peter Turchin in his Historical Dynamics and Andrey Korotayev et al. in their Introduction to Social Macrodynamics, Secular Cycles, and Millennial Trends suggest a number of mathematical models describing collapse of agrarian civilizations.
For example, the basic logic of Turchin's "fiscal-demographic" model can be outlined as follows: during the initial phase of a sociodemographic cycle we observe relatively high levels of per capita production and consumption, which leads not only to relatively high population growth rates, but also to relatively high rates of surplus production.
As a result, during this phase the population can afford to pay taxes without great problems, the taxes are quite easily collectible, and the population growth is accompanied by the growth of state revenues.
During the intermediate phase, the increasing population growth leads to the decrease of per capita production and consumption levels, it becomes more and more difficult to collect taxes, and state revenues stop growing, whereas the state expenditures grow due to the growth of the population controlled by the state.
As a result, during this phase the state starts experiencing considerable fiscal problems.
During the final pre-collapse phases the overpopulation leads to further decrease of per capita production, the surplus production further decreases, state revenues shrink, but the state needs more and more resources to control the growing (though with lower and lower rates) population.
Eventually this leads to famines, epidemics, state breakdown, and demographic and civilization collapse (Peter Turchin.
Historical Dynamics.
Princeton University Press, 2003:121–127; Andrey Korotayev et al.
Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends.
Moscow: Russian Academy of Sciences, 2006).
Peter Heather argues in his book The Fall of the Roman Empire: a New History of Rome and the Barbarians that this civilization did not end for moral or economic reasons, but because centuries of contact with barbarians across the frontier generated its own nemesis by making them a more sophisticated and dangerous adversary.
The fact that Rome needed to generate ever greater revenues to equip and re-equip armies that were for the first time repeatedly defeated in the field, led to the dismemberment of the Empire.
Although this argument is specific to Rome, it can also be applied to the Asiatic Empire of the Egyptians, to the Han and Tang dynasties of China, to the Muslim Abbasid Caliphate and others.
Bryan Ward-Perkins, in his book The Fall of Rome and the End of Civilization, argues from mostly archaeological evidence that the collapse of Roman civilization in western Europe had deleterious impacts on the living standards of the population, unlike some historians who downplay this.
The collapse of complex society meant that even basic plumbing for the elite disappeared from the continent for 1,000 years.
Similar impacts have been postulated for the Dark Age after the Late Bronze Age collapse in the Eastern Mediterranean, the collapse of the Maya, on Easter Island and elsewhere.
Arthur Demarest argues in Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, using a holistic perspective to the most recent evidence from archeology, paleoecology, and epigraphy, that no one explanation is sufficient but that a series of erratic, complex events, including loss of soil fertility, drought and rising levels of internal and external violence led to the disintegration of the courts of Mayan kingdoms, which began a spiral of decline and decay.
He argues that the collapse of the Maya has lessons for civilization today.
Jeffrey A. McNeely has recently suggested that "a review of historical evidence shows that past civilizations have tended to over-exploit their forests, and that such abuse of important resources has been a significant factor in the decline of the over-exploiting society".
Thomas Homer-Dixon in The Upside of Down: Catastrophe, Creativity, and the Renewal of Civilization, where he considers that the fall in the energy return on investments.
The energy expended to energy yield ratio is central to limiting the survival of civilizations.
The degree of social complexity is associated strongly, he suggests, with the amount of disposable energy environmental, economic and technological systems allow.
When this amount decreases civilizations either have to access new energy sources or they will collapse.
Feliks Koneczny in his work "On the Plurality of Civilizations"  calls his study the science on civilizations.
He asserts that civilizations fall not because they must or there exist some cyclical or a "biological" life span and that there stil exist two ancient civilizations – Brahmin-Hindu and Chinese – which are not ready to fall any time soon.
Koneczny claimed that civilizations cannot be mixed into hybrids, an inferior civilization when given equal rights within a highly developed civilization will overcome it.
One of Koneczny's claims in his study on civilizations is that "a person cannot be civilized in two or more ways" without falling into what he calls an "abcivilized state" (as in abnormal). He also stated that when two or more civilizations exist next to one another and as long as they are vital, they will be in an existential combat imposing its own "method of organizing social life" upon the other.
Absorbing alien "method of organizing social life" that is civilization and giving it equal rights yields a process of decay and decomposition.
Future
See also: Global catastrophic risk
A world map of major civilizations according to the political hypothesis Clash of Civilizations by Samuel P. Huntington.
Political scientist Samuel Huntington has argued that the defining characteristic of the 21st century will be a clash of civilizations.
According to Huntington, conflicts between civilizations will supplant the conflicts between nation-states and ideologies that characterized the 19th and 20th centuries.
These views have been strongly challenged by others like Edward Said, Muhammed Asadi and Amartya Sen.
Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris have argued that the "true clash of civilizations" between the Muslim world and the West is caused by the Muslim rejection of the West's more liberal sexual values, rather than a difference in political ideology, although they note that this lack of tolerance is likely to lead to an eventual rejection of (true) democracy.
In Identity and Violence Sen questions if people should be divided along the lines of a supposed "civilization", defined by religion and culture only.
He argues that this ignores the many others identities that make up people and leads to a focus on differences.
Cultural Historian Morris Berman suggests in Dark Ages America: the End of Empire that in the corporate consumerist United States, the very factors that once propelled it to greatness―extreme individualism, territorial and economic expansion, and the pursuit of material wealth―have pushed the United States across a critical threshold where collapse is inevitable.
Politically associated with over-reach, and as a result of the environmental exhaustion and polarization of wealth between rich and poor, he concludes the current system is fast arriving at a situation where continuation of the existing system saddled with huge deficits and a hollowed-out economy is physically, socially, economically and politically impossible.  Although developed in much more depth, Berman's thesis is similar in some ways to that of Urban Planner, Jane Jacobs who argues that the five pillars of United States culture are in serious decay: community and family; higher education; the effective practice of science; taxation and government; and the self-regulation of the learned professions.
The corrosion of these pillars, Jacobs argues, is linked to societal ills such as environmental crisis, racism and the growing gulf between rich and poor.
Cultural critic and author Derrick Jensen argues that modern civilization is directed towards the domination of the environment and humanity itself in an intrinsically harmful, unsustainable, and self-destructive fashion.
Defending his definition both linguistically and historically, he defines civilization as "a culture... that both leads to and emerges from the growth of cities", with "cities" defined as "people living more or less permanently in one place in densities high enough to require the routine importation of food and other necessities of life". This need for civilizations to import ever more resources, he argues, stems from their over-exploitation and diminution of their own local resources.
Therefore, civilizations inherently adopt imperialist and expansionist policies and, to maintain these, highly militarized, hierarchically structured, and coercion-based cultures and lifestyles.
The Kardashev scale classifies civilizations based on their level of technological advancement, specifically measured by the amount of energy a civilization is able to harness.
The scale is only hypothetical, but it puts energy consumption in a cosmic perspective.
The Kardashev scale makes provisions for civilizations far more technologically advanced than any currently known to exist.
Examples of civilizations
The pyramids of Giza are among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of ancient Egypt.
The Acropolis in Greece, directly influencing architecture and engineering in Western, Islamic and Eastern civilizations up to the present day, 2400 years after construction.
The Persepolis in Iran: Pictures of the Gate of All Nations, the main entrance for all representatives of other nations and states.
Persepolis appears to have been a grand ceremonial complex, that it was especially used for celebrating Nowruz, the Persian New Year, in 515 BC.
The Temples of Baalbek in Lebanon show us the religious and architectural styles of some of the world's most influential civilizations including the Phoenicians, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines and Arabs.
The Roman Forum in Rome, Italy, the political, economic, cultural and religious center of the Ancient Rome civilization, during the Republic and later Empire, its ruins still visible today in modern-day Rome.
The Ziggurat of Ur in Iraq.
Ziggurats are iconic monuments of ancient Mesopotamian civilization, which developed the first true cities in the world and influenced numerous kingdoms and empires in the Near East and the Mediterranean in domains such as architecture, religion, trade, artisanry, writing, law, and mathematics.
While the Great Wall of China was built to protect Ancient Chinese states and empires against the raids and invasions of nomadic groups, over thousands of years the region of China was also home to many influential civilizations.
Virupaksha Temple at Hampi in India.
The region of India is home and center to major religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism and has influenced other cultures and civilizations, particularly in Asia.
Machu Picchu in Peru is the most recognizable symbol of the Inca civilization in the Andean mountains.
One of the New 7 Wonders of the World.
El Castillo, at Chichen Itza.
The Maya civilization is noted for its logosyllabic script—the most sophisticated and highly developed writing system in pre-Columbian Americas—as well as for its art, architecture, mathematics, calendar, and astronomical system.
Notre-Dame de Paris in Paris, France is among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of Christendom.
Western civilization is most strongly influenced by the Greco-Roman and Christian cultures.
Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization.
Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Turkey.
An architectural and cultural icon of Byzantine and Eastern Orthodox civilization.
Its influence, both architecturally and liturgically, was widespread and enduring in the Eastern Christianity, Western Christianity, and Ottoman architecture.
Represents the legacy of the Byzantine Empire one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in Europe, noted for its art, architecture, science, medicine, and law.
The Round city of Baghdad was founded by caliph Al-Mansur in 762–766 CE as the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, setting the stage for the Islamic Golden Age beginning with the subsequent construction of the House of Wisdom.
It is the fabled city in One Thousand and One Nights.
Borobudur in Indonesia is the world's largest Buddhist monument and represents the Javanese empire of Mataram kingdom, a prominent seaborne civilization and center of scholarship whose religious, cultural, political, and economic influence spread throughout Southeast Asia and into China, India, Tibet, and Korea.
Saint Basil's Cathedral in Moscow; the most popular icon of Russian civilization.
Russian civilization has had a considerable influence on global culture, it also has a rich material culture and a tradition in science and technology.
Angkor Wat in Cambodia is the largest religious structure ever constructed in human history and represents the legacy of the Khmer Empire, one of the most influential civilizations of Southeast Asia and home to the world's biggest preindustrial city by area.
Nineveh was an ancient Assyrian city of Upper Mesopotamia, the Assyrian civilization noted for its sculpture, architecture, literature, law and astronomy.
Modern Assyrians are Syriac Christians who claim descent from Assyria, one of the oldest civilizations in the world, dating back to 2500 BC in ancient Mesopotamia.
Lalibela churches; among the most popular icon of Ethiopia, and represents the legacy of the Kingdom of Aksum, a Classical African civilization.
Non-human civilizations
The current scientific consensus is that human beings are the only animal species with the cognitive ability to create civilizations that has emerged on Earth.
A recent thought experiment, the silurian hypothesis, however, considers whether it would "be possible to detect an industrial civilization in the geological record" given the paucity of geological information about eras before the quaternary.
Astronomers speculate about the existence of communicating intelligent civilizations within and beyond the Milky Way galaxy, usually using variants of the Drake equation.
They also conduct searches for such intelligences – such as for technological traces, called "technosignatures". The proposed proto-scientific field "xenoarchaeology" is concerned with the study of artifact remains of non-human civilizations to reconstruct and interpret past lives of alien societies if such get discovered and confirmed scientifically.
See also
Civilizations portal
Anarcho-primitivism
Barbarian
Christendom
Civilizing mission
Civilization state
Colony
Cradle of civilization
Culture
Future Shock
Human history
Intermediate Region
Kardashev scale
Law of Life
List of medieval great powers
Manichaeism
Muslim world
New Tribalism
Outline of culture
Role of Christianity in civilization
Search for extraterrestrial intelligence
Sedentism
Society
Western culture
World population
Zoroastrianism
References
"Chronology". Digital Egypt for Universities.
University College London. 2000. Archived from the original on 16 March 2008.
a b Adams, Robert McCormick (1966). The Evolution of Urban Society.
Transaction Publishers. p. 13. ISBN 9780202365947. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
a b Haviland, William;  et al. (2013). Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge.
Cengage Learning. p. 250. ISBN 978-1285675305. Archived from the original on 13 July 2019. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
a b c Wright, Ronald (2004). A Short History anthropological.
ISBN 9780887847066.
a b c Llobera, Josep (2003). An Invitation to Anthropology.
Berghahn Books. pp. 136–137. ISBN 9781571815972. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (2001). Civilizations: Culture, Ambition, and the Transformation of Nature.
Simon & Schuster.
ISBN 9780743216500. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
a b Boyden, Stephen Vickers (2004). The Biology of Civilisation.
UNSW Press. pp. 7–8. ISBN 9780868407661. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
a b Solms-Laubach, Franz (2007). Nietzsche and Early German and Austrian Sociology.
Walter de Gruyter. pp. 115, 117, and 212. ISBN 9783110181098. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
a b AbdelRahim, Layla (2015). Children's literature, domestication and social foundation : narratives of civilization and wilderness.
New York. p. 8. ISBN 9780415661102. OCLC 897810261.
"Athens". Archived from the original on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2008. Ancient Greek Athenai, historic city and capital of Greece.
Many of classical civilization's intellectual and artistic ideas originated there, and the city is generally considered to be the birthplace of Western civilization
Brown, Thomas J. (1975). "The Athenian furies : observations on the major factors effecting politics in modern Greece, 1973-1974". Virtual Press.
Greece is a picturesque country on the southern tip of the Balkan Peninsula straddling the always-blue Agean, Ionian and Adriatic Seas.
Considered by many to be the cradle of Western Civilization and the birthplace of democracy, her ancient past has long been the source and inspiration of Western thought.
Bolesti, Maria (2013). Barbarism and Its Discontents.
Stanford University Press.
ISBN 9780804785372. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
Mann, Michael (1986). The Sources of Social Power.
Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 34–41.
Sullivan, Larry E. (2009). The SAGE Glossary of the Social and Behavioral Sciences.
SAGE Publications. p. 73. ISBN 9781412951432. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
It remains the most influential sociological study of the topic, spawning its own body of secondary literature.
Notably, Hans Peter Duerr attacked it in a major work (3,500 pages in five volumes, published 1988–2002). Elias, at the time a nonagenarian, was still able to respond to the criticism the year before his death.
In 2002, Duerr was himself criticized by Michael Hinz's Der Zivilisationsprozeß: Mythos oder Realität (2002), saying that his criticism amounted to hateful defamation of Elias, through excessive standards of political correctness.  Der Spiegel 40/2002 Archived 28 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Albert Schweitzer.
The Philosophy of Civilization, trans. C.T. Campion (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1987), p. 91.
Cited after Émile Benveniste, Civilisation.
Contribution à l'histoire du mot (Civilisation.
Contribution to the history of the word), 1954, published in Problèmes de linguistique générale, Éditions Gallimard, 1966, pp. 336–345 (translated by Mary Elizabeth Meek as Problems in general linguistics, 2 vols., 1971).
a b Velkley, Richard (2002), "The Tension in the Beautiful: On Culture and Civilization in Rousseau and German Philosophy", Being after Rousseau: Philosophy and Culture in Question, The University of Chicago Press, pp. 11–30
E.g. in the title A narrative of the loss of the Winterton East Indiaman wrecked on the coast of Madagascar in 1792; and of the sufferings connected with that event.
To which is subjoined a short account of the natives of Madagascar, with suggestions as to their civilizations by J. Hatchard, L.B. Seeley and T. Hamilton, London, 1820.
"Civilization" (1974), Encyclopædia Britannica 15th ed.
Vol.
II, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 956. Retrieved 25 August 2007. Using the terms "civilization" and "culture" as equivalents are controversial[clarification needed] and generally rejected so that for example some types of culture are not normally described as civilizations.
"On German Nihilism" (1999, originally a 1941 lecture), Interpretation 26, no. 3 edited by David Janssens and Daniel Tanguay.
Gordon Childe, V., What Happened in History (Penguin, 1942) and Man Makes Himself (Harmondsworth, 1951).
Nikiforuk, Andrew (2012). The Energy of Slaves: Oil and the new servitude.
Greystone Books.
Moseley, Michael. "The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: An Evolving Hypothesis". The Hall of Ma'at.
Archived from the original on 18 August 2015. Retrieved 13 June 2008.
Moseley, Michael (1975). The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization.
Menlo Park: Cummings.
ISBN 978-0-8465-4800-3.
Hadjikoumis; Angelos, Robinson; and Sarah Viner-Daniels (Eds) (2011), "Dynamics of Neolithisation in Europe: Studies in honour of Andrew Sherratt" (Oxbow Books)
Kiggins, Sheila. "Study sheds new light on the origin of civilization". Phys.org.
Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022.
Mayshar, Joram; Moav, Omer; Pascali, Luigi (2022). "The Origin of the State: Land Productivity or Appropriability?". Journal of Political Economy. 130 (4): 1091–1144. doi:10.1086/718372. S2CID 244818703. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022.
Mann, Charles C. (June 2011). "Göbekli Tepe". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2011.
Tom Standage (2005), A History of the World in 6 Glasses, Walker & Company, 25.
Grinin, Leonid E (Ed) et al. (2004), "The Early State and its Alternatives and Analogues" (Ichitel)
Bondarenko, Dmitri et al. (2004), "Alternatives to Social Evolution" in Grinin op cit.
Bogucki, Peter (1999), "The Origins of Human Society" (Wiley Blackwell)
DeVore, Irven, and Lee, Richard (1999) "Man the Hunter" (Aldine)
Beck, Roger B.; Linda Black; Larry S. Krieger; Phillip C. Naylor; Dahia Ibo Shabaka (1999). World History: Patterns of Interaction.
Evanston, Ill.: McDougal Littell.
ISBN 978-0-395-87274-1.
Steckel, Richard H. (4 January 2016). "New Light on the 'Dark Ages'". Social Science History. 28 (2): 211–229. doi:10.1017/S0145553200013134. S2CID 143128051.
Koepke, Nikola; Baten, Joerg (1 April 2005). "The biological standard of living in Europe during the last two millennia". European Review of Economic History. 9 (1): 61–95. doi:10.1017/S1361491604001388. hdl:10419/47594. JSTOR 41378413.
Leutwyler, Kristen. "American Plains Indians had Health and Height". Scientific American.
Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 20 April 2021.
Pauketat, Timothy R. (2004). Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians.
Cambridge University Press. p. 169. ISBN 9780521520669.
Corine Wegener, Marjan Otter: Cultural Property at War: Protecting Heritage during Armed Conflict.
In: The Getty Conservation Institute, Newsletter 23.1, Spring 2008.
Eden Stiffman: Cultural Preservation in Disasters, War Zones.
Presents Big Challenges.
In: The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, 11 May 2015.
Hans Haider Missbrauch von Kulturgütern ist strafbar.
In: Wiener Zeitung, 29 June 2012.
"Karl von Habsburg auf Mission im Libanon" (in German). 28 April 2019. Archived from the original on 26 May 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2020.
"The ICRC and the Blue Shield signed a Memorandum of Understanding, 26 February 2020". 26 February 2020. Archived from the original on 22 March 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2020.
Friedrich Schipper: "Bildersturm: Die globalen Normen zum Schutz von Kulturgut greifen nicht" (German – The global norms for the protection of cultural property do not apply), In: Der Standard, 6 March 2015.
a b Spengler, Oswald, Decline of the West: Perspectives of World History (1919)
Huntington, Samuel P. (1997). The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order.
Simon and Schuster. p. 43. ISBN 9781416561248. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
Algaze, Guillermo, The Uruk World System: The Dynamics of Expansion of Early Mesopotamian Civilization (Second Edition, 2004) (ISBN 978-0-226-01382-4)
Wilkinson, David (Fall 1987). "Central Civilization". Comparative Civilizations Review.
Vol. 17. pp. 31–59. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014.
"Explicit theories of the origin of the state are relatively modern [...] the age of exploration, by making Europeans aware that many peoples throughout the world lived, not in states, but in independent villages or tribes, made the state seem less natural, and thus more in need of explanation."
"A Theory of the Origin of the State". Archived from the original on 30 May 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014.
Milton-Edwards, Beverley (May 2003). "Iraq, past, present and future: a thoroughly-modern mandate?". History & Policy.
United Kingdom: History & Policy.
Archived from the original on 8 December 2010. Retrieved 9 December 2010.
Haas, Jonathan; Creamer, Winifred; Ruiz, Alvaro (December 2004). "Dating the Late Archaic occupation of the Norte Chico region in Peru". Nature. 432 (7020): 1020–1023. Bibcode:2004Natur.432.1020H. doi:10.1038/nature03146. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 15616561. S2CID 4426545.
Kennett, Douglas J.; Winterhalder, Bruce (2006). Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture.
University of California Press. pp. 121–. ISBN 978-0-520-24647-8. Retrieved 27 December 2010.
Maugh II, Thomas H. (1 November 2012). "Bulgarians find oldest European town, a salt production center". The Los Angeles Times.
Retrieved 1 November 2012.
Survival of Information: the earliest prehistoric town in Europe 
Squires, Nick (31 October 2012). "Archaeologists find Europe's most prehistoric town". The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved 1 November 2012.
Nikolov, Vassil. "Salt, early complex society, urbanization: Provadia-Solnitsata (5500-4200 BC) (Abstract)" (PDF). Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
Retrieved 1 November 2012.
La Niece, Susan (senior metallurgist in the British Museum Department of Conservation and Scientific Research) (15 December 2009). Gold.
Harvard University Press. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-674-03590-4. Retrieved 10 April 2012.
De Meo, James (2nd Edition), "Saharasia"
"Ritual human sacrifice promoted and sustained the evolution of stratified societies" op cit[clarification needed]
Carniero, R.L. (Ed) (1967), "The Evolution of Society: Selections from Herbert Spencer's Principles of Sociology", (Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1967), pp. 32–47, 63–96, 153–165.
a b Watts, Joseph; Sheehan, Oliver; Atkinson, Quentin D.; Bulbulia, Joseph; Gray, Russell D. (4 April 2016). "Ritual human sacrifice promoted and sustained the evolution of stratified societies". Nature. 532 (7598): 228–231. Bibcode:2016Natur.532..228W. doi:10.1038/nature17159. PMID 27042932. S2CID 4450246.
Mann, Charles C. (2006) . 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus.
Vintage Books. pp. 199–212. ISBN 1-4000-3205-9.
Olmedo Vera, Bertina (1997). A. Arellano Hernández; et al. (eds.). The Mayas of the Classic Period.
Mexico City, Mexico: Consejo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes (CONACULTA). p. 26 ISBN 978-970-18-3005-5.
Sanders, William T.; Webster, David (1988). "The Mesoamerican Urban Tradition". American Anthropologist. 90 (3): 521–546. doi:10.1525/aa.1988.90.3.02a00010. ISSN 0002-7294. JSTOR 678222.
Tarnas, Richard (1993). The Passion of the Western Mind: Understanding the Ideas that Have Shaped Our World View (Ballantine Books)
Ferguson, Niall (2011), Civilization
Toynbee, Arnold (1965) "A Study of History" (OUP)
Massimo Campanini (2005), Studies on Ibn Khaldûn Archived 28 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Polimetrica s.a.s., p. 75
Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 2nd ed., vol. 4, ed. by J. B. Bury (London, 1909), pp. 173–174. Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.
Part VI. General Observations On The Fall Of The Roman Empire In The West.
Peter J. Heather (1 December 2005). The Fall Of The Roman Empire: A New History Of Rome And The Barbarians.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-515954-7. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2012.
Bryan Ward-Perkins (7 September 2006). The Fall of Rome: And the End of Civilization.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-280728-1. Retrieved 22 June 2012.
Demarest, Arthur (9 December 2004). Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization.
ISBN 978-0-521-53390-4.
McNeely, Jeffrey A. (1994) "Lessons of the past: Forests and Biodiversity" (Vol 3, No 1 1994. Biodiversity and Conservation)
Koneczny, Feliks (1962) On the Plurality of Civilizations, Posthumous English translation by Polonica Publications, London ASIN B0000CLABJ. Originally published in Polish, O Wielości Cywilizacyj, Gebethner & Wolff, Kraków 1935.
Huntington, Samuel P., The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order, (Simon & Schuster, 1996)
Asadi, Muhammed (22 January 2007). "A Critique of Huntington's "Clash of Civilizations"". Selves and Others.
Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. Retrieved 23 January 2009.
Inglehart, Ronald; Pippa Norris (March–April 2003). "The True Clash of Civilizations". Global Policy Forum.
Archived from the original on 20 January 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2009.
Berman, Morris (2007), Dark Ages America: the End of Empire (W.W. Norton)
Jacobs, Jane (2005), Dark Age Ahead (Vintage)
Jensen, Derrick (2006), "Endgame: The Problem of Civilization", Vol 1 & Vol 2 (Seven Stories Press)
Jensen, Derrick (2006), "Endgame: The Problem of Civilization", Vol 1 (Seven Stories Press), p. 17
Medieval visitors, like the Spanish traveller Pedro Tafur in 1436, viewed them however as "the Granaries of Joseph" (Pedro Tafur, Andanças e viajes Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine)
Alex, Bridget. "Which Ancient City is Considered the Oldest in the World?". Discover.
Kalmbach Media CO. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Johandi, Andreas (2012). "Mesopotamian Influences on the Old Persian Royal Ideology and Religion: The Example of Achaemenid Royal Inscriptions" (PDF). ENDC Proceedings. 16: 159–179. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Jacobsen, Thorkild. "Mesopotamian Religion". Britannica.com.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
David, Katie (2014). "From Babylon to Crete, a Millennium of Influence: The Creation of the Gortyn Law Code" (PDF). Brandeis.edu.
Brandeis University.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Papakitsos, Evangelos C. (2020). "Inquiring into the Origin of the Minoan Civilization via Systems Modelling in Humanities". Social Science and Humanities Research. 3 (5): 40–58. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
"Ancient Mathematical Sources". Britannica.com.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Marvin Perry; Myrna Chase; James Jacob; Margaret Jacob; Theodore H. Von Laue (1 January 2012). Western Civilization: Since 1400. Cengage Learning. p. XXIX. ISBN 978-1-111-83169-1. Archived from the original on 23 May 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021.
Spielvogel, Jackson J. (2016). Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 (Cengage Learning ed.). p. 156. ISBN 978-1-305-63347-6.
Neill, Thomas Patrick (1957). Readings in the History of Western Civilization, Volume 2 (Newman Press ed.). p. 224.
O'Collins, Gerald; Farrugia, Maria (2003). Catholicism: The Story of Catholic Christianity.
Oxford University Press. p. v (preface). ISBN 978-0-19-925995-3.
Roman Catholicism Archived 6 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, "Roman Catholicism, Christian church that has been the decisive spiritual force in the history of Western civilization". Encyclopædia Britannica
Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p. 2: That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and of America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo–Graeco–Christianity, Catholic and Protestant.
Cameron 2009 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCameron2009 (help).
Meyendorff 1982 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMeyendorff1982 (help).
a b Heinle & Schlaich 1996 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHeinleSchlaich1996 (help)
Meyendorff 1982, p. 19 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMeyendorff1982 (help).
Anastos 1962, p. 409 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAnastos1962 (help).
Netton, Ian Richard (19 December 2013). Encyclopedia of Islamic Civilization and Religion.
Routledge. pp. 80–81. ISBN 978-1-135-17967-0. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2020.
"Largest Buddhist Temple". Guinness World Records.
Guinness World Records.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Zakharov, Anton O. (2012). "The Śailendras Reconsidered" (PDF). ISEAS. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
a b Dellios, Rosita; Ferguson, James R. (2015). "Thinking Through Srivijaya: Polycentric Networks in Traditional Southeast Asia" (PDF). Bond University, Australia.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Takakasu, Junjiro (1896). "A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago". Oxford University Press.
Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Takakusu, Junjiro (1896). "An Introduction to I-Tsing's Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695)". Oxford, The Clarendon press.
Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Sen, Sailendra (2013). A Textbook of Medieval Indian History.
Primus Books. p. 34. ISBN 978-9-38060-734-4.
Takakasu, Junjiro (1896). "A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago". Oxford University Press.
Retrieved 6 June 2021.
"St Basil's Cathedral". Lonely Planet.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021.
"Largest Religious Structure". Guinness World Records.
Guinness World Records.
Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Bang, Peter Fibiger; Bayly, C. A.; Scheidel, Walter (2020). The Oxford World History of Empire: Volume Two: The History of Empires (Volume Two ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 430–448. ISBN 978-0-19-753278-2. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021.
Evans, Damian; Pottier, Christophe; Fletcher, Roland; Hensley, Scott; Tapley, Ian; Milne, Anthony; Barbetti, Michael (4 September 2007). "A Comprehensive Archaeological Map of the World's Largest Preindustrial Settlement Complex at Angkor, Cambodia". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 104 (36): 14277–14282. Bibcode:2007PNAS..10414277E. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702525104. PMC 1964867. PMID 17717084.
A. Leo Oppenheim (1964). Ancient Mesopotamia (PDF). The University of Chicago Press.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 August 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2021.
Curry, Deborah A.; Blandy, Susan Griswold; Martin, Lynne M. (20 February 1994). Racial and Ethnic Diversity in Academic Libraries: Multicultural Issues.
Haworth Press.
ISBN 9781560246565. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021 – via Google Books.
Schmidt, Gavin A.; Frank, Adam (10 April 2018). "The Silurian Hypothesis: Would it be possible to detect an industrial civilization in the geological record?". arXiv:1804.03748 [astro-ph.EP].
Westby, Tom; Conselice, Christopher J. (15 June 2020). "The Astrobiological Copernican Weak and Strong Limits for Intelligent Life". The Astrophysical Journal. 896 (1): 58. arXiv:2004.03968. Bibcode:2020ApJ...896...58W. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab8225. S2CID 215415788.
Socas-Navarro, Hector; Haqq-Misra, Jacob; Wright, Jason T.; Kopparapu, Ravi; Benford, James; Davis, Ross; TechnoClimes 2020 workshop participants (1 May 2021). "Concepts for future missions to search for technosignatures". Acta Astronautica. 182: 446–453. arXiv:2103.01536. Bibcode:2021AcAau.182..446S. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.02.029. ISSN 0094-5765. S2CID 232092198. Retrieved 17 April 2021.
McGee, Ben W. (1 November 2010). "A call for proactive xenoarchaeological guidelines – Scientific, policy and socio-political considerations". Space Policy. 26 (4): 209–213. Bibcode:2010SpPol..26..209M. doi:10.1016/j.spacepol.2010.08.003. ISSN 0265-9646.
McGee, B. W. (1 December 2007). "Archaeology and Planetary Science: Entering a New Era of Interdisciplinary Research". AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. 2007: P41A–0203. Bibcode:2007AGUFM.P41A0203M. Retrieved 11 November 2021.
Bibliography
Ankerl, Guy (2000) . Global communication without universal civilization.
INU societal research.
Vol. 1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western.
Geneva: INU Press.
ISBN 978-2-88155-004-1.
Brinton, Crane;  et al. (1984). A History of Civilization: Prehistory to 1715 (6th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
ISBN 978-0-13-389866-8.
Casson, Lionel (1994). Ships and Seafaring in Ancient Times.
London: British Museum Press.
ISBN 978-0-7141-1735-5.
Chisholm, Jane; Anne Millard (1991). Early Civilization. illus.
Ian Jackson.
London: Usborne.
ISBN 978-1-58086-022-2.
Collcutt, Martin; Marius Jansen; Isao Kumakura (1988). Cultural Atlas of Japan.
New York: Facts on File.
ISBN 978-0-8160-1927-4.
Drews, Robert (1993). The End of the Bronze Age: Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe ca. 1200 B.C. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-04811-6.
Edey, Maitland A. (1974). The Sea Traders.
New York: Time-Life Books.
ISBN 978-0-7054-0060-2.
J. Currie Elles (1908), The influence of commerce on civilization: the Joseph Fisher lecture on commerce delivered at the University of Adelaide by J. Currie Elles esq., April 23rd, 1908 (1st ed.), Adelaide: W. K. Thomas & Co., Wikidata Q106369892
Fairservis, Walter A. Jr. (1975). The Threshold of Civilization: An Experiment in Prehistory.
New York: Scribner.
ISBN 978-0-684-12775-0.
Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (2000). Civilizations.
London: Macmillan.
ISBN 978-0-333-90171-7.
Ferrill, Arther (1985). The Origins of War: From the Stone Age to Alexander the Great.
New York: Thames and Hudson.
ISBN 978-0-500-25093-8.
Fitzgerald, C.P. (1969). The Horizon History of China.
New York: American Heritage.
ISBN 978-0-8281-0005-2.
Fuller, J.F.C. (1954–1957). A Military History of the Western World. 3 vols.
New York: Funk & Wagnalls.
From the Earliest Times to the Battle of Lepanto.
ISBN 0-306-80304-6 (1987 reprint).
From the Defeat of the Spanish Armada to the Battle of Waterloo.
ISBN 0-306-80305-4 (1987 reprint).
From the American Civil War to the End of World War II. ISBN 0-306-80306-2 (1987 reprint).
Gowlett, John (1984). Ascent to Civilization.
London: Collins.
ISBN 978-0-00-217090-1.
Hawkes, Jacquetta (1968). Dawn of the Gods.
London: Chatto & Windus.
ISBN 978-0-7011-1332-2.
Hawkes, Jacquetta; David Trump (1993) . The Atlas of Early Man.
London: Dorling Kindersley.
ISBN 978-0-312-09746-2.
Hicks, Jim (1974). The Empire Builders.
New York: Time-Life Books.
Hicks, Jim (1975). The Persians.
New York: Time-Life Books.
Johnson, Paul (1987). A History of the Jews.
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
ISBN 978-0-297-79091-4.
Jensen, Derrick (2006). Endgame.
New York: Seven Stories Press.
ISBN 978-1-58322-730-5.
Keppie, Lawrence (1984). The Making of the Roman Army: From Republic to Empire.
Totowa, N.J.: Barnes & Noble.
ISBN 978-0-389-20447-3.
Korotayev, Andrey, World Religions and Social Evolution of the Old World Oikumene Civilizations: A Cross-Cultural Perspective.
Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 2004. ISBN 0-7734-6310-0
Kradin, Nikolay.
Archaeological Criteria of Civilization.
Social Evolution & History, Vol. 5, No 1 (2006): 89–108. ISSN 1681-4363.
Lansing, Elizabeth (1971). The Sumerians: Inventors and Builders.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 978-0-07-036357-1.
Lee, Ki-Baik (1984). A New History of Korea. trans.
Edward W. Wagner, with Edward J. Shultz.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-61575-5.
Nahm, Andrew C. (1983). A Panorama of 5000 Years: Korean History.
Elizabeth, N.J.: Hollym International.
ISBN 978-0-930878-23-8.
Oliphant, Margaret (1992). The Atlas of the Ancient World: Charting the Great Civilizations of the Past.
London: Ebury.
ISBN 978-0-09-177040-2.
Rogerson, John (1985). Atlas of the Bible.
New York: Infobase Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8160-1206-0.
Sandall, Roger (2001). The Culture Cult: Designer Tribalism and Other Essays.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview.
ISBN 978-0-8133-3863-7.
Sansom, George (1958). A History of Japan: To 1334. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8047-0523-3.
Southworth, John Van Duyn (1968). The Ancient Fleets: The Story of Naval Warfare Under Oars, 2600 B.C.–1597 A.D. New York: Twayne.
Thomas, Hugh (1981). An Unfinished History of the World (rev. ed.). London: Pan.
ISBN 978-0-330-26458-7.
Yap, Yong; Arthur Cotterell (1975). The Early Civilization of China.
New York: Putnam.
ISBN 978-0-399-11595-0.
Yurdusev, A. Nuri (2003). International Relations and the Philosophy of History. doi:10.1057/9781403938404. ISBN 978-1-349-40304-2.
External links
The dictionary definition of civilization at Wiktionary
Quotations related to Civilization at Wikiquote
BBC on civilization
Top 10 oldest civilizations
Culture OutlineSciences
Cultural anthropology
Cultural astronomy
Cultural ecology
Cultural geography
Cultural neuroscience
Cultural studies
Culturology
Culture theory
Security culture
Neuroculture
Subfields
Bioculture
Cross-cultural studies
Cross-cultural communication
Cross-cultural leadership
Cross-cultural psychiatry
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural analytics
Cultural economics
Cultural entomology
Cultural history
Cultural mapping
Cultural mediation
Cultural psychology
Cultural values
Culturomics
Intercultural learning
Intercultural relations
Internet culture
Philosophy of culture
Popular culture studies
Postcritique
Semiotics of culture
Sociology of culture
Sound culture
Theology of culture
Transcultural nursing
Types
Constructed culture
Dominant culture
Folk culture
High culture
Individualistic culture
Legal culture
Low culture
Microculture
Official culture
Political culture
Civic
Popular culture
Urban
Primitive culture
Subculture
Alternative culture
list
Super culture
Vernacular culture
Culture by location
Aspects
Acculturation
Cultural appreciation
Cultural appropriation
Cultural area
Cultural artifact
Cultural baggage
Cultural behavior
Cultural bias
Cultural capital
Cross-cultural
Cultural communication
Cultural conflict
Cultural cringe
Cultural dissonance
Cultural emphasis
Cultural framework
Cultural heritage
Cultural icon
Cultural identity
Cultural industry
Cultural invention
Cultural landscape
Cultural learning
Cultural leveling
Cultural memory
Cultural pluralism
Cultural practice
Cultural property
Cultural reproduction
Cultural system
Cultural technology
Cultural universal
Cultureme
Enculturation
High- and low-context cultures
Interculturality
Manuscript culture
Material culture
Non-material culture
Organizational culture
Print culture
Protoculture
Relational mobility
Safety culture
Technoculture
Trans-cultural diffusion
Transculturation
Visual culture
Politics
Colonial mentality
Consumer capitalism
Cross cultural sensitivity
Cultural assimilation
Cultural attaché
Cultural backwardness
Cultural Bolshevism
Cultural conservatism
Cultural contracts
Cultural deprivation
Cultural diplomacy
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural exception
Cultural feminism
Cultural genocide
Cultural globalization
Cultural hegemony
Cultural imperialism
Cultural intelligence
Cultural liberalism
Cultural nationalism
Cultural pessimism
Cultural policy
Cultural racism
Cultural radicalism
Cultural retention
Cultural Revolution
Cultural rights
Cultural safety
Cultural silence
Cultural subsidy
Cultural Zionism
Culture change
Culture minister
Culture of fear
Culture war
Deculturalization
Dominator culture
Interculturalism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism
Biculturalism
Multiracial democracy
Pluriculturalism
Polyculturalism
Transculturism
Religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Catholicism
Cultural Christians
Protestantism
Role of Christianity in civilization
Eastern Orthodoxy
Mormonism
Cultural Hindus
Islam
Cultural Muslims
Judaism
Sikhism
Related
Animal culture
Archaeological culture
Bennett scale
Cannabis culture
Circuit of culture
Civilization
Coffee culture
Cross-cultural
Cultural center
Cultural competence
Cultural critic
Cultural determinism
Cultural diversity
Cultural evolutionism
Cultural homogenization
Cultural institution
Cultural jet lag
Cultural lag
Cultural literacy
Cultural mosaic
Cultural movement
Cultural mulatto
Cultural probe
Cultural relativism
Culture speculation
Cultural tourism
Pop-culture
Cultural translation
Cultural turn
Cultural sensibility
Culture and menstruation
Culture and positive psychology
Culture and social cognition
Culture gap
Culture hero
Culture industry
Culture shock
Culturgen
Children's culture
Culturalism
Cyberculture
Death and culture
Disability culture
Deaf culture
Eastern culture
Emotions and culture
Intercultural communication
Intercultural competence
Languaculture
Living things in culture
Media culture
Oppositional culture
Participatory culture
Permission culture
Rape culture
Remix culture
Tea culture
Transformation of culture
Urban culture
Welfare culture
Western culture
Youth culture
Category
Commons
WikiProject
Changes
Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Czech Republic
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 04:40 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
