Crime - Wikipedia
Crime
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
For other uses, see Crime (disambiguation), Criminal (disambiguation), and Criminals (disambiguation).
"Offender" redirects here.
For the film, see Offender (film).
"Offenders" redirects here.
For the 2017 film, see Offenders (2017 film). For the comics, see Offenders (comics). For the 1921 film, see The Offenders.
For the 1980 film, see The Offenders (1980 film). For the 2021 TV series, see The Offenders (2021 TV series).
Illegal behavior defined by existing criminal lawIn ordinary language, a crime is an unlawful act punishable by a state or other authority.
The term crime does not, in modern criminal law, have any simple and universally accepted definition, though statutory definitions have been provided for certain purposes.
The most popular view is that crime is a category created by law; in other words, something is a crime if declared as such by the relevant and applicable law.
One proposed definition is that a crime or offence (or criminal offence) is an act harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society, or the state ("a public wrong"). Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law.
The notion that acts such as murder, rape, and theft are to be prohibited exists worldwide.
What precisely is a criminal offence is defined by the criminal law of each relevant jurisdiction.
While many have a catalogue of crimes called the criminal code, in some common law nations no such comprehensive statute exists.
The state (government) has the power to severely restrict one's liberty for committing a crime.
In modern societies, there are procedures to which investigations and trials must adhere.
If found guilty, an offender may be sentenced to a form of reparation such as a community sentence, or, depending on the nature of their offence, to undergo imprisonment, life imprisonment or, in some jurisdictions, death.
Some jurisdictions sentence individuals to programs to emphasize or provide for their rehabilitation while most jurisdictions sentence individuals with the goal of punishing them or a mix of the aforementioned practices.[citation needed]
Usually, to be classified as a crime, the "act of doing something criminal" (actus reus) must – with certain exceptions – be accompanied by the "intention to do something criminal" (mens rea).
While every crime violates the law, not every violation of the law counts as a crime.
Breaches of private law (torts and breaches of contract) are not automatically punished by the state, but can be enforced through civil procedure.
Contents
Overview
Criminology and penology
Theory
Anomie
Biosocial criminology
Broken windows
Collective efficacy
Crime analysis
Criminalization
Differential association
Deviance
Expressive function of law
Labeling theory
Psychopathy
Rational choice
Risk & actuarial criminology
Social control
Social disorganization
Social learning
Strain
Subculture
Symbolic interactionism
Victimology
Types of crime
Against humanity
Against the person
Against the state
Blue-collar
Corporate
Juvenile
Organized
Political
Public-order
State
State-corporate
Victimless
White-collar
War
Methods
Comparative
Profiling
Critical theory
Ethnography
Uniform Crime Reports
Crime mapping
Positivist school
Qualitative
Quantitative
BJS
NIBRS
Penology
Denunciation
Deterrence
Incapacitation
Trial
Prison
abolition
open
reform
Prisoner
Prisoner abuse
Prisoners' rights
Rehabilitation
Recidivism
Justice in penology
Participatory
Restorative
Retributive
Solitary confinement
Schools
Anarchist criminology
Chicago school
Classical school
Conflict criminology
Critical criminology
Environmental criminology
Feminist school
Integrative criminology
Italian school
Left realism
Marxist criminology
Neo-classical school
Positivist school
Postmodernist school
Right realism
Subfields
American
Anthropological
Biosocial criminology
Conflict
Criminology
Critical
Culture
Cyber
Demography
Development
Environmental
Experimental
Organizational
Political
Public
Radical criminology
Browse
Index
Journals
Organizations
People
When informal relationships prove insufficient to establish and maintain a desired social order, a government or a state may impose more formalized or stricter systems of social control.
With institutional and legal machinery at their disposal, agents of the state can compel populations to conform to codes and can opt to punish or attempt to reform those who do not conform.
Authorities employ various mechanisms to regulate (encouraging or discouraging) certain behaviors in general.
Governing or administering agencies may for example codify rules into laws, police citizens and visitors to ensure that they comply with those laws, and implement other policies and practices that legislators or administrators have prescribed with the aim of discouraging or preventing crime.
In addition, authorities provide remedies and sanctions, and collectively these constitute a criminal justice system.
Legal sanctions vary widely in their severity; they may include (for example) incarceration of temporary character aimed at reforming the convict.
Some jurisdictions have penal codes written to inflict permanent harsh punishments: legal mutilation, capital punishment, or life without parole.
Usually, a natural person perpetrates a crime, but legal persons may also commit crimes.
Historically, several premodern societies believed that non-human animals were capable of committing crimes, and prosecuted and punished them accordingly.
The sociologist Richard Quinney has written about the relationship between society and crime.
When Quinney states "crime is a social phenomenon" he envisages both how individuals conceive crime and how populations perceive it, based on societal norms.
Etymology
The word crime is derived from the Latin root cernō, meaning "I decide, I give judgment". Originally the Latin word crīmen meant "charge" or "cry of distress". The Ancient Greek word κρίμα, krima, from which the Latin cognate derives, typically referred to an intellectual mistake or an offense against the community, rather than a private or moral wrong.
In 13th century English crime meant "sinfulness", according to the Online Etymology Dictionary.
It was probably brought to England as Old French crimne (12th century form of Modern French crime), from Latin crimen (in the genitive case: criminis). In Latin, crimen could have signified any one of the following: "charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense".
The word may derive from the Latin cernere – "to decide, to sift" (see crisis, mapped on Kairos and Chronos). But Ernest Klein (citing Karl Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which originally would have meant "cry of distress". Thomas G. Tucker suggests a root in "cry" words and refers to English plaint, plaintiff, and so on.
The meaning "offense punishable by law" dates from the late 14th century.
The Latin word is glossed in Old English by facen, also "deceit, fraud, treachery", [cf. fake]. Crime wave is first attested in 1893 in American English.
Definition
Criminal law
Elements
Actus reus
Mens rea
Causation
Concurrence
Scope of criminal liability
Accessory
Accomplice
Complicity
Corporate
Principal
Vicarious
Severity of offense
Felony
Infraction (also called violation)
Misdemeanor
Inchoate offenses
Attempt
Conspiracy
Incitement
Solicitation
Crimes against the person
Assassination
Assault
Battery
Child abuse
Criminal negligence
Defamation
Domestic violence
False imprisonment
Harassment
Home invasion
Homicide
Intimidation
Kidnapping
Castration
Manslaughter (corporate)
Mayhem
Murder
corporate
Negligent homicide
Invasion of privacy
Robbery
Stalking
Torture
Sexual offenses
Adultery
Bigamy
Child sexual abuse
Cybersex trafficking
Fornication
Homosexuality
Incest
Indecent exposure
Masturbation
Obscenity
Prostitution
Rape
Sex trafficking
Sexual assault
Sexual slavery
Crimes against property
Arson
Blackmail
Bribery
Burglary
Embezzlement
Extortion
False pretenses
Forgery
Fraud
Gambling
Intellectual property violation
Larceny
Payola
Pickpocketing
Possessing stolen property
Robbery
Smuggling
Tax evasion
Theft
Vandalism
Crimes against justice
Compounding
Malfeasance in office
Miscarriage of justice
Misprision
Obstruction
Perjury
Perverting the course of justice
Crimes against the public
Apostasy
Begging
Censorship violation
Dueling
Miscegenation
Illegal consumption (such as prohibition of drugs, alcohol, and smoking)
Suicide
Terrorism
Crimes against animals
Cruelty to animals
Wildlife smuggling
Bestiality
Crimes against the state
Lèse-majesté
Treason
Espionage
Secession
Sedition
Subversion
Defences to liability
Automatism
Consent
Defence of property
Diminished responsibility
Duress
Entrapment
Ignorantia juris non excusat
Infancy
Insanity
Justification
Mistake (of law)
Necessity
Provocation
Self-defence
Other common-law areas
Contracts
Evidence
Property
Torts
Wills, trusts and estates
Portals
Law
England and Wales
Whether a given act or omission constitutes a crime does not depend on the nature of that act or omission; it depends on the nature of the legal consequences that may follow it.
An act or omission is a crime if it is capable of being followed by what are called criminal proceedings.
The following definition of crime was provided by the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871, and applied for the purposes of section 10 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1908:
The expression "crime" means, in England and Ireland, any felony or the offence of uttering false or counterfeit coin, or of possessing counterfeit gold or silver coin, or the offence of obtaining goods or money by false pretences, or the offence of conspiracy to defraud, or any misdemeanour under the fifty-eighth section of the Larceny Act, 1861.
Scotland
For the purpose of section 243 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, a crime means an offence punishable on indictment, or an offence punishable on summary conviction, and for the commission of which the offender is liable under the statute making the offence punishable to be imprisoned either absolutely or at the discretion of the court as an alternative for some other punishment.
Sociology
A normative definition views crime as deviant behavior that violates prevailing norms – cultural standards prescribing how humans ought to behave normally.
This approach considers the complex realities surrounding the concept of crime and seeks to understand how changing social, political, psychological, and economic conditions may affect changing definitions of crime and the form of the legal, law-enforcement, and penal responses made by society.
These structural realities remain fluid and often contentious.
For example: as cultures change and the political environment shifts, societies may criminalise or decriminalise certain behaviours, which directly affects the statistical crime rates, influence the allocation of resources for the enforcement of laws, and (re-)influence the general public opinion.
Similarly, changes in the collection and/or calculation of data on crime may affect the public perceptions of the extent of any given "crime problem". All such adjustments to crime statistics, allied with the experience of people in their everyday lives, shape attitudes on the extent to which the state should use law or social engineering to enforce or encourage any particular social norm.
Behaviour can be controlled and influenced by a society in many ways without having to resort to the criminal justice system.
Indeed, in those cases where no clear consensus exists on a given norm, the drafting of criminal law by the group in power to prohibit the behaviour of another group may seem to some observers an improper limitation of the second group's freedom, and the ordinary members of society have less respect for the law or laws in general – whether the authorities actually enforce the disputed law or not.
Other definitions
Legislatures can pass laws (called mala prohibita) that define crimes against social norms.
These laws vary from time to time and from place to place: note variations in gambling laws, for example, and the prohibition or encouragement of duelling in history.
Other crimes, called mala in se, count as outlawed in almost all societies, (murder, theft and rape, for example).
English criminal law and the related criminal law of Commonwealth countries can define offences that the courts alone have developed over the years, without any actual legislation: common law offences.
The courts used the concept of malum in se to develop various common law offences.
Criminalization
Main article: Criminalization
The spiked heads of executed criminals once adorned the gatehouse of the medieval London Bridge.
One can view criminalization as a procedure deployed by society as a preemptive harm-reduction device, using the threat of punishment as a deterrent to anyone proposing to engage in the behavior causing harm.
The state becomes involved because governing entities can become convinced that the costs of not criminalizing (through allowing the harms to continue unabated) outweigh the costs of criminalizing it (restricting individual liberty, for example, to minimize harm to others).[citation needed]
States control the process of criminalization because:
Even if victims recognize their own role as victims, they may not have the resources to investigate and seek legal redress for the injuries suffered: the enforcers formally appointed by the state often have better access to expertise and resources.
The victims may only want compensation for the injuries suffered, while remaining indifferent to a possible desire for deterrence.
Fear of retaliation may deter victims or witnesses of crimes from taking any action.
Even in policed societies, fear may inhibit from reporting incidents or from co-operating in a trial.
Victims, on their own, may lack the economies of scale that could allow them to administer a penal system, let alone to collect any fines levied by a court.
Garoupa and Klerman (2002) warn that a rent-seeking government has as its primary motivation to maximize revenue and so, if offenders have sufficient wealth, a rent-seeking government will act more aggressively than a social-welfare-maximizing government in enforcing laws against minor crimes (usually with a fixed penalty such as parking and routine traffic violations), but more laxly in enforcing laws against major crimes.
As a result of the crime, victims may die or become incapacitated.
Labelling theory
Further information: Labeling theory § The "criminal"
The label of "crime" and the accompanying social stigma normally confine their scope to those activities seen as injurious to the general population or to the state, including some that cause serious loss or damage to individuals.
Those who apply the labels of "crime" or "criminal" intend to assert the hegemony of a dominant population, or to reflect a consensus of condemnation for the identified behavior and to justify any punishments prescribed by the state (if standard processing tries and convicts an accused person of a crime).
Natural-law theory
Justifying the state's use of force to coerce compliance with its laws has proven a consistent theoretical problem.
One of the earliest justifications involved the theory of natural law.
This posits that the nature of the world or of human beings underlies the standards of morality or constructs them.
Thomas Aquinas wrote in the 13th century: "the rule and measure of human acts is the reason, which is the first principle of human acts". He regarded people as by nature rational beings, concluding that it becomes morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms to their rational nature.
Thus, to be valid, any law must conform to natural law and coercing people to conform to that law is morally acceptable.
In the 1760s, William Blackstone described the thesis:
"This law of nature, being co-eval with mankind and dictated by God himself, is of course superior in obligation to any other.
It is binding over all the globe, in all countries, and at all times: no human laws are of any validity, if contrary to this; and such of them as are valid derive all their force, and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from this original."
But John Austin (1790–1859), an early positivist, applied utilitarianism in accepting the calculating nature of human beings and the existence of an objective morality.
He denied that the legal validity of a norm depends on whether its content conforms to morality.
Thus in Austinian terms, a moral code can objectively determine what people ought to do, the law can embody whatever norms the legislature decrees to achieve social utility, but every individual remains free to choose what to do.
Similarly, H.L.A. Hart saw the law as an aspect of sovereignty, with lawmakers able to adopt any law as a means to a moral end.
Thus the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of a proposition of law simply involved internal logic and consistency, and that the state's agents used state power with responsibility.
Ronald Dworkin rejects Hart's theory and proposes that all individuals should expect the equal respect and concern of those who govern them as a fundamental political right.
He offers a theory of compliance overlaid by a theory of deference (the citizen's duty to obey the law) and a theory of enforcement, which identifies the legitimate goals of enforcement and punishment.
Legislation must conform to a theory of legitimacy, which describes the circumstances under which a particular person or group is entitled to make law, and a theory of legislative justice, which describes the law they are entitled or obliged to make.
There are natural-law theorists who have accepted the idea of enforcing the prevailing morality as a primary function of the law.
This view entails the problem that it makes any moral criticism of the law impossible: if conformity with natural law forms a necessary condition for legal validity, all valid law must, by definition, count as morally just.
Thus, on this line of reasoning, the legal validity of a norm necessarily entails its moral justice.
One can solve this problem by granting some degree of moral relativism and accepting that norms may evolve over time and, therefore, one can criticize the continued enforcement of old laws in the light of the current norms.
People may find such law acceptable, but the use of state power to coerce citizens to comply with that law lacks moral justification.
More recent conceptions of the theory characterise crime as the violation of individual rights.
Since society considers so many rights as natural (hence the term right) rather than man-made, what constitutes a crime also counts as natural, in contrast to laws (seen as man-made). Adam Smith illustrates this view, saying that a smuggler would be an excellent citizen, "...had not the laws of his country made that a crime which nature never meant to be so."
Natural-law theory therefore distinguishes between "criminality" (which derives from human nature) and "illegality" (which originates with the interests of those in power). Lawyers sometimes express the two concepts with the phrases malum in se and malum prohibitum respectively.
They regard a "crime malum in se" as inherently criminal; whereas a "crime malum prohibitum" (the argument goes) counts as criminal only because the law has decreed it so.
It follows from this view that one can perform an illegal act without committing a crime, while a criminal act could be perfectly legal.
Many Enlightenment thinkers (such as Adam Smith and the American Founding Fathers) subscribed to this view to some extent, and it remains influential among so-called classical liberals[citation needed] and libertarians.[citation needed]
History
Some religious communities regard sin as a crime; some may even highlight the crime of sin very early in legendary or mythological accounts of origins – note the tale of Adam and Eve and the theory of original sin.
What one group considers a crime may cause or ignite war or conflict.
However, the earliest known civilizations had codes of law, containing both civil and penal rules mixed together, though not always in recorded form.
Ancient Near East
The Sumerians produced the earliest surviving written codes.
Urukagina (reigned c. 2380 BC – c. 2360 BC, short chronology) had an early code that has not survived; a later king, Ur-Nammu, left the earliest extant written law system, the Code of Ur-Nammu (c. 2100 – c. 2050 BC), which prescribed a formal system of penalties for specific cases in 57 articles.
The Sumerians later issued other codes, including the "code of Lipit-Ishtar". This code, from the 20th century BCE, contains some fifty articles, and scholars have reconstructed it by comparing several sources.
The Sumerian was deeply conscious of his personal rights and resented any encroachment on them, whether by his King, his superior, or his equal.
No wonder that the Sumerians were the first to compile laws and law codes.— Kramer
Successive legal codes in Babylon, including the code of Hammurabi (c. 1790 BC), reflected Mesopotamian society's belief that law derived from the will of the gods (see Babylonian law).
Many states at this time functioned as theocracies, with codes of conduct largely religious in origin or reference.
In the Sanskrit texts of Dharmaśāstra (c. 1250 BC), issues such as legal and religious duties, code of conduct, penalties and remedies, etc. have been discussed and forms one of the elaborate and earliest source of legal code.
Sir Henry Maine studied the ancient codes available in his day, and failed to find any criminal law in the "modern" sense of the word.
While modern systems distinguish between offences against the "state" or "community", and offences against the "individual", the so-called penal law of ancient communities did not deal with "crimes" (Latin: crimina), but with "wrongs" (Latin: delicta). Thus the Hellenic laws treated all forms of theft, assault, rape, and murder as private wrongs, and left action for enforcement up to the victims or their survivors.
The earliest systems seem to have lacked formal courts.
Rome and its legacy in Europe
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Crime" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Romans systematized law and applied their system across the Roman Empire.
Again, the initial rules of Roman law regarded assaults as a matter of private compensation.
The most significant Roman law concept involved dominion.
The pater familias owned all the family and its property (including slaves); the pater enforced matters involving interference with any property.
The Commentaries of Gaius (written between 130 and 180 AD) on the Twelve Tables treated furtum (in modern parlance: "theft") as a tort.
Similarly, assault and violent robbery involved trespass as to the pater's property (so, for example, the rape of a slave could become the subject of compensation to the pater as having trespassed on his "property"), and breach of such laws created a vinculum juris (an obligation of law) that only the payment of monetary compensation (modern "damages") could discharge.
Similarly, the consolidated Teutonic laws of the Germanic tribes, included a complex system of monetary compensations for what courts would now[update] consider the complete[citation needed] range of criminal offences against the person, from murder down.
Even though Rome abandoned its Britannic provinces around 400 AD, the Germanic mercenaries – who had largely become instrumental in enforcing Roman rule in Britannia – acquired ownership of land there and continued to use a mixture of Roman and Teutonic Law, with much written down under the early Anglo-Saxon kings.
But only when a more centralized English monarchy emerged following the Norman invasion, and when the kings of England attempted to assert power over the land and its peoples, did the modern concept emerge, namely of a crime not only as an offence against the "individual", but also as a wrong against the "state".
This idea came from common law, and the earliest conception of a criminal act involved events of such major significance that the "state" had to usurp the usual functions of the civil tribunals, and direct a special law or privilegium against the perpetrator.
All the earliest English criminal trials involved wholly extraordinary and arbitrary courts without any settled law to apply, whereas the civil (delictual) law operated in a highly developed and consistent manner (except where a king wanted to raise money by selling a new form of writ). The development of the idea that the "state" dispenses justice in a court only emerges in parallel with or after the emergence of the concept of sovereignty.
In continental Europe, Roman law persisted, but with a stronger influence from the Christian Church.
Coupled with the more diffuse political structure based on smaller feudal units, various legal traditions emerged, remaining more strongly rooted in Roman jurisprudence, but modified to meet the prevailing political climate.
In Scandinavia the effect of Roman law did not become apparent until the 17th century, and the courts grew out of the things – the assemblies of the people.
The people decided the cases (usually with largest freeholders dominating). This system later gradually developed into a system with a royal judge nominating a number of the most esteemed men of the parish as his board, fulfilling the function of "the people" of yore.
From the Hellenic system onwards, the policy rationale for requiring the payment of monetary compensation for wrongs committed has involved the avoidance of feuding between clans and families.
If compensation could mollify families' feelings, this would help to keep the peace.
On the other hand, the institution of oaths also played down the threat of feudal warfare.
Both in archaic Greece and in medieval Scandinavia, an accused person walked free if he could get a sufficient number of male relatives to swear him not guilty. (Compare the United Nations Security Council, in which the veto power of the permanent members ensures that the organization does not become involved in crises where it could not enforce its decisions.)
These means of restraining private feuds did not always work, and sometimes prevented the fulfillment of justice.
But in the earliest times the "state" did not always provide an independent policing force.
Thus criminal law grew out of what 21st-century lawyers would call torts; and, in real terms, many acts and omissions classified as crimes actually overlap with civil-law concepts.
The development of sociological thought from the 19th century onwards prompted some fresh views on crime and criminality, and fostered the beginnings of criminology as a study of crime in society.
Nietzsche noted a link between crime and creativity – in The Birth of Tragedy he asserted:[needs context] "The best and brightest that man can acquire he must obtain by crime". In the 20th century, Michel Foucault in Discipline and Punish made a study of criminalization as a coercive method of state control.
Classification
By type
The following classes of offences are used, or have been used, as legal terms:
Offence against the person
Violent offence
Sexual offence
Offence against property
Researchers and commentators have classified crimes into the following categories, in addition to those above:
Forgery, personation and cheating
Firearms and offensive weapons
Offences against the state/offences against the Crown and Government, or political offences
Harmful or dangerous drugs
Offences against religion and public worship
Offences against public justice, or offences against the administration of public justice
Public order offence
Commerce, financial markets and insolvency
Offences against public morals and public policy
Motor vehicle offences
Conspiracy, incitement and attempt to commit crime
Inchoate offence
Juvenile delinquency
Victimless crime
By penalty
One can categorise crimes depending on the related punishment, with sentencing tariffs prescribed in line with the perceived seriousness of the offence.
Thus fines and noncustodial sentences may address the crimes seen as least serious, with lengthy imprisonment or (in some jurisdictions) capital punishment reserved for the most serious.
Common law
Under the common law of England, crimes were classified as either treason, felony or misdemeanour, with treason sometimes being included with the felonies.
This system was based on the perceived seriousness of the offence.
It is still used in the United States but the distinction between felony and misdemeanour is abolished in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
By mode of trial
The following classes of offence are based on mode of trial:
Indictable-only offence
Indictable offence
Hybrid offence, a.k.a. either-way offence in England and Wales
Summary offence, a.k.a. infraction in the US
By origin
In common law countries, crimes may be categorised into common law offences and statutory offences.
In the US, Australia and Canada (in particular), they are divided into federal crimes and under state crimes.
United States
Felony Sentences in State Courts, study by the United States Department of Justice.
In the United States since 1930, the FBI has tabulated Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) annually from crime data submitted by law enforcement agencies across the United States.
Officials compile this data at the city, county, and state levels into the UCR. They classify violations of laws based on common law as Part I (index) crimes in UCR data.
These are further categorized as violent or property crimes.
Part I violent crimes include murder and criminal homicide (voluntary manslaughter), forcible rape, aggravated assault, and robbery; while Part I property crimes include burglary, arson, larceny/theft, and motor-vehicle theft.
All other crimes count come under Part II.
For convenience, such lists usually include infractions although, in the U.S., they may come into the sphere not of the criminal law, but rather of the civil law.
Compare tortfeasance.
Booking arrests require detention for a time-frame ranging 1 to 24 hours.
Reports, studies and organizations
There are several national and International organizations offering studies and statistics about global and local crime activity, such as United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United States of America Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) safety report or national reports generated by the law-enforcement authorities of EU state member reported to the Europol.
"Offence" in common law jurisdictions
In England and Wales, as well as in Hong Kong, the term "offence" means the same thing as "crime", They are further split into:
Summary offences
Indictable offences
Causes and correlates
Main article: Causes and correlates of crime
Many different causes and correlates of crime have been proposed with varying degree of empirical support.
They include socioeconomic, psychological, biological, and behavioral factors.
Controversial topics include media violence research and effects of gun politics.
Emotional state (both chronic and current) have a tremendous impact on individual thought processes and, as a result, can be linked to criminal activities.
The positive psychology concept of Broaden and Build posits that cognitive functioning expands when an individual is in a good-feeling emotional state and contracts as emotional state declines.
In positive emotional states an individual is able to consider more possible solutions to problems, but in lower emotional states fewer solutions can be ascertained.
The narrowed thought-action repertoires can result in the only paths perceptible to an individual being ones they would never use if they saw an alternative, but if they can't conceive of the alternatives that carry less risk they will choose one that they can see.
Criminals who commit even the most horrendous of crimes, such as mass murders, did not see another solution.
International
Main article: International criminal law
Kang Kek Iew before the Cambodian Genocide Tribunal on July 20, 2009
Crimes defined by treaty as crimes against international law include:
Crimes against peace
Crimes of apartheid
Forced disappearance
Genocide
Incitement to genocide
Piracy
Sexual slavery
Slavery
Torture
Waging a war of aggression
War crimes
From the point of view of state-centric law, extraordinary procedures (international courts or national courts operating with universal jurisdiction) may prosecute such crimes.
Note the role of the International Criminal Court at The Hague in the Netherlands.[citation needed]
Religion
Main article: Religious law
See also: Category:Crimes in religion
Religious sentiment often becomes a contributory factor of crime.
In the 1819 anti-Jewish Hep-Hep riots in Würzburg, rioters attacked Jewish businesses and destroyed property.
Different religious traditions may promote distinct norms of behaviour, and these in turn may clash or harmonise with the perceived interests of a state.
Socially accepted or imposed religious morality has influenced secular jurisdictions on issues that may otherwise concern only an individual's conscience.
Activities sometimes criminalized on religious grounds include (for example) alcohol consumption (prohibition), abortion and stem-cell research.
In various historical and present-day societies, institutionalized religions have established systems of earthly justice that punish crimes against the divine will and against specific devotional, organizational and other rules under specific codes, such as Roman Catholic canon law and Islamic Shariah Law.
Military jurisdictions and states of emergency
In the military sphere, authorities can prosecute both regular crimes and specific acts (such as mutiny or desertion) under martial-law codes that either supplant or extend civil codes in times of (for example) war.
Many constitutions contain provisions to curtail freedoms and criminalize otherwise tolerated behaviors under a state of emergency in case of war, natural disaster or civil unrest.
Undesired activities at such times may include assembly in the streets, violation of curfew, or possession of firearms.
Occupational
Main article: Occupational crime
Two common types of employee crime exist: embezzlement and wage theft.
The complexity and anonymity of computer systems may help criminal employees camouflage their operations.
The victims of the most costly scams include banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, and other large financial institutions.
In the United States, it is estimated[by whom?] that $40 billion to $60 billion are lost annually due to all forms of wage theft.
This compares to national annual losses of $340 million due to robbery, $4.1 billion due to burglary, $5.3 billion due to larceny, and $3.8 billion due to auto theft in 2012. In Singapore, as in the United States, wage theft was found to be widespread and severe.
In a 2014 survey it was found that as many as one-third of low wage male foreign workers in Singapore, or about 130,000, were affected by wage theft from partial to full denial of pay.
See also
Law portal
Crime displacement
Crime science
Federal Crime
Law and order (politics)
National Museum of Crime & Punishment in Washington DC
Organized crime (also knows as the criminal underworld)
Category:Age of criminal responsibility
Notes
a b "Crime". Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2009.
a b Farmer, Lindsay: "Crime, definitions of", in Cane and Conoghan (editors), The New Oxford Companion to Law, Oxford University Press, 2008 (ISBN 978-0-19-929054-3), p. 263 (Google Books Archived 2016-06-04 at the Wayback Machine).
In the United Kingdom, for instance, the definitions provided by section 243(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 and by the Schedule to the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871.
a b Elizabeth A. Martin (2003). Oxford Dictionary of Law (7 ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-860756-4.
Easton, Mark (17 June 2010). "What is crime?". BBC News.
Archived from the original on 27 February 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2013.
Girgen, Jen (2003). "The Historical and Contemporary Prosecution and Punishment of Animals". Animal Law Journal. 9: 97. Archived from the original on 29 December 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2017.
Quinney, Richard, "Structural Characteristics, Population Areas, and Crime Rates in the United States," The Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology and Police Science, 57(1), pp. 45–52
Ernest Klein, Klein's Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the English Language Archived 2016-03-22 at the Wayback Machine
Bakaoukas, Michael. "The conceptualisation of 'Crime' in Classical Greek Antiquity: From the ancient Greek 'crime' (krima) as an intellectual error to the christian 'crime' (crimen) as a moral sin." ERCES ( European and International research group on crime, Social Philosophy and Ethics). 2005. "Ercesoqr". Archived from the original on 2011-09-28. Retrieved 2011-06-27.
Seaman v Burley  2 QB, per Lord Esher MR at 346
a b Glanville Williams, Learning the Law, Eleventh Edition, Stevens, 1982, p. 3
Chapter 1 of "Smith and Hogan's Criminal Law" (13th Ed by Ormerod) discusses the various proposed definitions of "crime" in more detail.
The Prevention of Crime Act 1908, section 10(6) and Schedule
The Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, section 243(2) Archived 2012-01-11 at the Wayback Machine
Canadian Law Dictionary, John A. Yogis, Q.C., Barrons: 2003
See Polinsky & Shavell (1997) on the fundamental divergence between the private and the social motivation for using the legal system.
See Polinsky (1980) on the enforcement of fines
Thomas, Aquinas, Saint, 1225?-1274. (2002). On law, morality, and politics.
Regan, Richard J., Baumgarth, William P. (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Hackett Pub.
ISBN 0872206637. OCLC 50423002.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Blackstone, William, 1723-1780. (1979). Commentaries on the laws of England.
William Blackstone Collection (Library of Congress). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 41. ISBN 0226055361. OCLC 4832359.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Hart, H. L. A. (Herbert Lionel Adolphus), 1907-1992. (1994). The concept of law (2nd ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
ISBN 0198761228. OCLC 31410701.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Dworkin, Ronald. (1978). Taking rights seriously : [with a new appendix, a response to critics]. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
ISBN 0674867114. OCLC 4313351.
Finnis, John (2015). Natural Law & Natural Rights. 3.2 Natural law & (purely) positive law as concurrent dimensions of legal reasoning.
OUP. ISBN 978-0199599141. Archived from the original on 2019-08-06. Retrieved 2019-07-17. The moral standards...which Dworkin (in line with natural law theory) treats as capable of being morally objective & true, thus function as a direct source of law and...as already law, except when their fit with the whole set of social-fact sources in the relevant community is so weak that it would be more accurate (according to Dworkin) to say that judges who apply them are applying morality not law.
Bix, Brian H. (August 2015). "Kelsen, Hart, & legal normativity". 3.3 Law and morality.
Revus - OpenEdition Journals. 34 (34). doi:10.4000/revus.3984. ...it was part of the task of a legal theorist to explain the 'normativity' or 'authority' of law, by which they meant 'our sense that ‘legal’ norms provide agents with special reasons for acting, reasons they would not have if the norm were not a ‘legal’ one'...this may be a matter calling more for a psychological or sociological explanation, rather than a philosophical one.
Oppenheim (1964)
Kramer (1971: 4)
Driver and Mills (1952–55) and Skaist (1994)
The Babylonian laws.
Driver, G. R. (Godfrey Rolles), 1892–1975; Miles, John C. (John Charles), Sir, 1870–1963. Eugene, Oregon: Wipf & Stock Pub.
April 2007. ISBN 978-1556352294. OCLC 320934300.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Anuradha Jaiswal, Criminal Justice Tenets of Manusmriti – A Critique of the Ancient Hindu Code
Olivelle, Patrick. 2004. The Law Code of Manu.
New York: Oxford UP.
Maine, Henry Sumner, 1822–1888 (1861). Ancient law : its connection with the early history of society, and its relation to modern ideas.
Tucson.
ISBN 0816510067. OCLC 13358229.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Gagarin, Michael. (1986). Early Greek law.
London: University of California Press.
ISBN 9780520909168. OCLC 43477491.
Garner, Richard, 1953- (1987). Law & society in classical Athens.
New York: St.
Martin's Press.
ISBN 0312008562. OCLC 15365822.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Daube, David. (1969). Roman law: linguistic, social and philosophical aspects.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh U.P. ISBN 0852240511. OCLC 22054.
Guterman, Simeon L. (Simeon Leonard), 1907- (1990). The principle of the personality of law in the Germanic kingdoms of western Europe from the fifth to the eleventh century.
New York: P. Lang.
ISBN 0820407313. OCLC 17731409.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Attenborough: 1963
Kern: 1948; Blythe: 1992; and Pennington: 1993
Vinogradoff (1909); Tierney: 1964, 1979
The concept of the pater familias acted as a unifying factor in extended kin groups, and the later practice of wergild functioned in this context.[citation needed]
a b For example, by the Visiting Forces Act 1952
a b For example, by section 31(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, and by the Criminal Justice Act 2003
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 22
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 24
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 25
E.g.
Card, Cross and Jones: Criminal Law, 12th ed, 1992, chapter 17
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 26
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 27
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 28
E.g.
Card, Cross and Jones: Criminal Law, 12th ed, 1992, chapter 16
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 29
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 30
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 31
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 32
E.g.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, 1999, chapter 33
"FBI: Uniform Crime Reports". Fbi.gov.
Archived from the original on 2004-10-24. Retrieved 2013-02-28.
Fredrickson, B.L. (2005). Positive Emotions broaden the scope of attention and though-action repertoires.
Cognition and Emotion, 19: 313–332.
Baumeister, R.F. (2012). Human Evil: The myth of pure evil and the true causes of violence.
In A.P. Association, M. Mikulincer, & P.R. Shaver (Eds.), The social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp. 367–380). Washington, DC
Sara Baase, A Gift of Fire: Social, Legal, and Ethical Issues for Computing and The Internet.
Third Ed. "Employee Crime" (2008)
Michael De Groote, Michael De Groote (24 June 2014). "Wage theft: How employers steal millions from workers every week". Desert News National.
Archived from the original on 2 July 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2014.
"Crime in the United States 2012, Table 23". Uniform Crime Reports.
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Archived from the original on 2016-06-05.
Choo, Irene (1 September 2014). "Cheap foreign labour to spur economic growth – think deeper and harder". The Online Citizen.
Archived from the original on 14 October 2014.
References and further reading
Attenborough, F.L. (ed. and trans.) (1922). The Laws of the Earliest English Kings.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reprint March 2006. The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd.
ISBN 1-58477-583-1
Blythe, James M. (1992). Ideal Government and the Mixed Constitution in the Middle Ages.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
ISBN 0-691-03167-3
Cohen, Stanley (1985). Visions of Social Control: Crime, Punishment, and Classification.
Polity Press.
ISBN 0-7456-0021-2
Foucault, Michel (1975). Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison, New York: Random House.
Garoupa, Nuno & Klerman, Daniel. (2002). "Optimal Law Enforcement with a Rent-Seeking Government". American Law and Economics Review Vol. 4, No. 1. pp. 116–140.
Hart, H.L.A. (1972). Law, Liberty and Morality.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
ISBN 0-8047-0154-7
Hitchins, Peter.
A Brief History of Crime  (2003) 2nd edition was issued as he Abolition of Liberty: The Decline of Order and Justice in England (2004)
Kalifa, Dominique.
Vice, Crime, and Poverty: How the Western Imagination Invented the Underworld (Columbia University Press, 2019)
Kern, Fritz. (1948). Kingship and Law in the Middle Ages.
Reprint edition (1985), Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
Kramer, Samuel Noah. (1971). The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character.
Chicago: University of Chicago.
ISBN 0-226-45238-7
Maine, Henry Sumner. (1861). Ancient Law: Its Connection with the Early History of Society, and Its Relation to Modern Ideas.
Reprint edition (1986). Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
ISBN 0-8165-1006-7
Oppenheim, A. Leo (and Reiner, Erica as editor). (1964). Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization.
Revised edition (September 15, 1977). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 0-226-63187-7
Pennington, Kenneth. (1993). The Prince and the Law, 1200–1600: Sovereignty and Rights in the Western Legal Tradition.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 0-520-07995-7
Polinsky, A. Mitchell. (1980). "Private versus Public Enforcement of Fines". The Journal of Legal Studies, Vol.
IX, No. 1, (January), pp. 105–127.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell & Shavell, Steven. (1997). On the Disutility and Discounting of Imprisonment and the Theory of Deterrence, NBER Working Papers 6259, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Skaist, Aaron Jacob. (1994). The Old Babylonian Loan Contract: Its History and Geography.
Ramat Gan, Israel: Bar-Ilan University Press.
ISBN 965-226-161-0
Théry, Julien. (2011). "Atrocitas/enormitas.
Esquisse pour une histoire de la catégorie de 'crime énorme' du Moyen Âge à l'époque moderne", Clio@Themis, Revue électronique d'histoire du droit, n. 4
Tierney, Brian. (1979). Church Law and Constitutional Thought in the Middle Ages.
London: Variorum Reprints.
ISBN 0-86078-036-8
Tierney, Brian (1988) . The Crisis of Church and State, 1050–1300: with selected documents (Reprint ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
ISBN 978-0-8020-6701-2.
Vinogradoff, Paul. (1909). Roman Law in Medieval Europe.
Reprint edition (2004). Kessinger Publishing Co.
ISBN 1-4179-4909-0
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Crime.
Look up crime in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Crime.
Wikivoyage has travel information for crime.
Crime at Curlie
Articles related to crime
Types of crimeNote: Crimes vary by jurisdiction.
Not all types are listed here.Classes
Infraction
Misdemeanor
Felony
Summary
Indictable
Hybrid
Law portalAgainst the person
Assault
Battery
Blackmail
Cybersex trafficking
Extortion
Discrimination
Harassment
Kidnapping
Identity theft
Manslaughter
Mayhem
Murder
Rape
Robbery
Sex trafficking
Sexual assault
Sexual slavery
Corporate manslaughter
Against property
Arson
Burglary
Deception
Embezzlement
False pretenses
Fraud
Larceny
Possession of stolen goods
Theft
Vandalism
Against public order
Drug possession
Public order
Breach of the peace
Against the state
Tax noncompliance
Espionage
Treason
Secession
Sedition
Subversion
Against justice
Bribery
Misprision of felony
Obstruction
Perjury
Malfeasance in office
Inchoate offenses
Accessory
Attempt
Conspiracy
Incitement
Encouraging or assisting a crime
Solicitation
Common purpose
WikiSource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikinews
International criminal lawSources
Customary international law
Peremptory norm
Hague Conventions
Geneva Conventions
Nuremberg Charter
Nuremberg principles
United Nations Charter
Genocide Convention
Convention Against Torture
Rome Statute
Law portalCrimes againstinternational law
Crimes against humanity
Crime of aggression
Crime of apartheid
Genocide
Genocidal intent
Incitement to genocide
Piracy
Slave trading
War crime
International courts(in order of foundation)
International Military Tribunal (Nuremberg Trials)
International Military Tribunal for the Far East
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
Special Court for Sierra Leone
International Criminal Court
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
Special Panels of the Dili District Court
Special Tribunal for Lebanon
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
History
List of war crimes
List of convicted war criminals
Leipzig War Crimes Trials
Prosecution of Ottoman war criminals
Istanbul trials of 1919–1920
Malta exiles
War crimes committed by country
Germany
Italy
Japan
Russia
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
United States
Related concepts
Command responsibility
Superior orders
Joint criminal enterprise
International humanitarian law
International speech crimes
Universal jurisdiction
LawCore subjects
Administrative law
Civil law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Private law
Procedure
Civil
Criminal
Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort
Disciplines
Agricultural law
Aviation law
Amnesty law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Drugs law
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial law
Financial regulation
Health law
History of the legal profession
History of the American legal profession
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Jurimetrics
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Nationality law
Probate
Estate
Will and testament
Product liability
Public international law
Reparations
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Unenforced law
Women in law
Sources of law
Charter
Legal code / Statutory law
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Divine law
Human rights
Natural law
Natural and legal rights
Case law
Precedent
Law reports
Legal treatise
Regulations
Law making
Ballot measure
Codification
Decree
Edict
Executive order
Proclamation
Legislation
Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking
Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Concordat
Statutory law
Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)
Legal systems
Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law
Canon law
Catholic canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Parsi law
Sharia
Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa
Legal theory
Anarchist
Contract theory
Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Expressive function
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Libertarian
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Principle of typicality
Pseudolaw
Rule of law
Sociology
Jurisprudence
Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge
Justice of the peace
Magistrate
Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law
Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor
Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict
Legal institutions
Barristers' chambers
Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Court of equity
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education
Law school
Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal
Law portal
Category
Index
Outline
Criminal procedure (investigation)Criminal investigation
Arguido
Arrest
Arrest warrant
Consent search
Detention
Exigent circumstance
Knock-and-announce
Miranda warning
Pretextual stop
Probable cause
Reasonable suspicion
Right to silence
Search and seizure
Search of persons
Search warrant
Suspect
Terry stop
Law portalCriminal prosecution
Adversarial system
Bail
Bill of attainder
Criminal jurisdiction
Deferred prosecution agreement
Ex post facto law
Extradition
Grand jury
Habeas corpus
Indictment
Inquisitorial system
Nolle prosequi
Precognition
Preliminary hearing
Statute of limitations
Charges and pleas
Alford plea
Arraignment
Indictment
Information
Nolo contendere
Peremptory plea
Plea
Plea bargain
Presentence investigation
Related areas
Criminal defenses
Criminal law
Evidence
Legal abuse
Wiktionary
Wikibooks
Wikiquote
WikiSource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiversity
Authority control National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 1 October 2022, at 20:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
