Fossil fuel - Wikipedia
Fossil fuel
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Fuel formed over millions of years from dead plants and animals
"Oil and gas" redirects here.
For other uses, see Oil and gas (disambiguation).
The main fossil fuels: gas, oil and coal.
A fossil fuel is a hydrocarbon-containing material formed naturally in the earth's crust from the remains of dead plants and animals that is extracted and burned as a fuel.
The main fossil fuels are coal, crude oil and natural gas.
Fossil fuels may be burned to provide heat for use directly (such as for cooking or heating), to power engines (such as internal combustion engines in motor vehicles), or to generate electricity.
Some fossil fuels are refined into derivatives such as kerosene, gasoline and propane before burning.
The origin of fossil fuels is the anaerobic decomposition of buried dead organisms, containing organic molecules created by photosynthesis.
The conversion from these materials to high-carbon fossil fuels typically require a geological process of millions of years.
In 2019, 84% of primary energy consumption in the world and 64% of its electricity was from fossil fuels.
The large-scale burning of fossil fuels causes serious environmental damage.
Over 80% of the carbon dioxide (CO2) generated by human activity comes from burning them: around 35 billion tonnes a year, compared to 4 billion from land development.
Natural processes on Earth, mostly absorption by the ocean, can only remove a small part of this.
Therefore, there is a net increase of many billion tonnes of atmospheric carbon dioxide per year.
Although methane leaks are significant,: 52  the burning of fossil fuels is the main source of greenhouse gas emissions causing global warming and ocean acidification.
Additionally, most air pollution deaths are due to fossil fuel particulates and noxious gases.
It is estimated that this costs over 3% of global GDP and that fossil fuel phase-out would save millions of lives each year.
Recognition of the climate crisis, pollution and other negative impacts caused by fossil fuels has led to a widespread policy transition and activist movement focused on ending their use in favor of sustainable energy.
However, because the fossil fuel industry is so heavily integrated in the global economy and heavily subsidized, this transition is expected to have significant economic impacts.
Many stakeholders argue that this change needs to be a just transition and create policy that addresses the societal burdens created by the stranded assets of the fossil fuel industry.
International policy, in the form of United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 7: Affordable and Clean Energy, Sustainable Development Goal 13: Climate Action and the Paris Climate Agreement, is designed to facilitate this transition at a global level.
In 2021, the International Energy Agency concluded that no new fossil fuel extraction projects could be opened if the global economy and society wants to avoid the worst impacts of climate change and meet international goals for climate change mitigation.
Contents
Origin
Since oil fields are located only at certain places on earth, only some countries are oil-independent; the other countries depend on the oil-production capacities of these countries
The theory that fossil fuels formed from the fossilized remains of dead plants by exposure to heat and pressure in Earth's crust over millions of years was first introduced by Andreas Libavius "in his 1597 Alchemia [Alchymia]" and later by Mikhail Lomonosov "as early as 1757 and certainly by 1763".  The first use of the term "fossil fuel" occurs in the work of the German chemist Caspar Neumann, in English translation in 1759. The Oxford English Dictionary notes that in the phrase "fossil fuel" the adjective "fossil" means "[o]btained by digging; found buried in the earth", which dates to at least 1652, before the English noun "fossil" came to refer primarily to long-dead organisms in the early 18th century.
Aquatic phytoplankton and zooplankton that died and sedimented in large quantities under anoxic conditions millions of years ago began forming petroleum and natural gas as a result of anaerobic decomposition.
Over geological time this organic matter, mixed with mud, became buried under further heavy layers of inorganic sediment.
The resulting high temperature and pressure caused the organic matter to chemically alter, first into a waxy material known as kerogen, which is found in oil shales, and then with more heat into liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons in a process known as catagenesis.
Despite these heat-driven transformations, the energy released in combustion is still photosynthetic in origin.
Terrestrial plants tended to form coal and methane.
Many of the coal fields date to the Carboniferous period of Earth's history.
Terrestrial plants also form type III kerogen, a source of natural gas.
Although fossil fuels are continually formed by natural processes, they are classified as non-renewable resources because they take millions of years to form and known viable reserves are being depleted much faster than new ones are generated.
Importance
A petrochemical refinery in Grangemouth, Scotland, UK
See also: Fossil fuel power station
Fossil fuels have been important to human development because they can be readily burned in the open atmosphere to produce heat.
The use of peat as a domestic fuel predates recorded history.
Coal was burned in some early furnaces for the smelting of metal ore, while semi-solid hydrocarbons from oil seeps were also burned in ancient times, they were mostly used for waterproofing and embalming.
Commercial exploitation of petroleum began in the 19th century.
Natural gas, once flared-off as an unneeded byproduct of petroleum production, is now considered a very valuable resource.
Natural gas deposits are also the main source of helium.
Heavy crude oil, which is much more viscous than conventional crude oil, and oil sands, where bitumen is found mixed with sand and clay, began to become more important as sources of fossil fuel in the early  2000s.
Oil shale and similar materials are sedimentary rocks containing kerogen, a complex mixture of high-molecular weight organic compounds, which yield synthetic crude oil when heated (pyrolyzed). With additional processing, they can be employed instead of other established fossil fuels.
During the 2010s and 2020s there was disinvestment from exploitation of such resources due to their high carbon cost relative to more easily-processed reserves.
Prior to the latter half of the 18th century, windmills and watermills provided the energy needed for work such as milling flour, sawing wood or pumping water, while burning wood or peat provided domestic heat.
The wide-scale use of fossil fuels, coal at first and petroleum later, in steam engines enabled the Industrial Revolution.
At the same time, gas lights using natural gas or coal gas were coming into wide use.
The invention of the internal combustion engine and its use in automobiles and trucks greatly increased the demand for gasoline and diesel oil, both made from fossil fuels.
Other forms of transportation, railways and aircraft, also require fossil fuels.
The other major use for fossil fuels is in generating electricity and as feedstock for the petrochemical industry.
Tar, a leftover of petroleum extraction, is used in the construction of roads.
The energy for the Green Revolution was provided by fossil fuels in the form of fertilizers (natural gas), pesticides (oil), and hydrocarbon fueled irrigation.
The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer has significantly supported global population growth — it has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed as a result of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use.
According to ICIS Fertilizers managing editor Julia Meehan, "People don’t realise that 50% of the world’s food relies on fertilisers."
An oil well in the Gulf of Mexico
Environmental effects
The Global Carbon Project shows how additions to CO2 since 1880 have been caused by different sources ramping up one after another.
Main articles: Effects of climate change and Health and environmental impact of the coal industry
The burning of fossil fuels has a number of negative externalities – harmful environmental impacts where the effects extend beyond the people using the fuel.
The actual effects depend on the fuel in question.
All fossil fuels release CO2 when they burn, thus accelerating climate change.  Burning coal, and to a lesser extent oil and its derivatives, contribute to atmospheric particulate matter, smog and acid rain.
Global surface temperature reconstruction over the last 2000 years using proxy data from tree rings, corals, and ice cores in blue.
Directly observational data is in red, with all data showing a 5 year moving average.
In 2020, renewables overtook fossil fuels as the European Union's main source of electricity for the first time.
Climate change is largely driven by the release of greenhouse gasses like CO2, with the burning of fossil fuels being the main source of these emissions.
In most parts of the world climate change is negatively impacting ecosystems.
This includes contributing to the extinction of species (see also extinction risk from climate change) and reducing people's ability to produce food, thus adding to the problem of world hunger.
Continued rises in global temperatures will lead to further adverse effects on both ecosystems and people, with the World Health Organization having stated climate change is the greatest threat to human health in the 21st century.
Combustion of fossil fuels generates sulfuric and nitric acids, which fall to Earth as acid rain, impacting both natural areas and the built environment.
Monuments and sculptures made from marble and limestone are particularly vulnerable, as the acids dissolve calcium carbonate.
Fossil fuels also contain radioactive materials, mainly uranium and thorium, which are released into the atmosphere.
In 2000, about 12,000 tonnes of thorium and 5,000 tonnes of uranium were released worldwide from burning coal.
It is estimated that during 1982, US coal burning released 155 times as much radioactivity into the atmosphere as the Three Mile Island accident.
Burning coal also generates large amounts of bottom ash and fly ash.
These materials are used in a wide variety of applications (see Fly ash reuse), utilizing, for example, about 40% of the United States production.
In addition to the effects that result from burning, the harvesting, processing, and distribution of fossil fuels also have environmental effects.
Coal mining methods, particularly mountaintop removal and strip mining, have negative environmental impacts, and offshore oil drilling poses a hazard to aquatic organisms.
Fossil fuel wells can contribute to methane release via fugitive gas emissions.
Oil refineries also have negative environmental impacts, including air and water pollution.
Coal is sometimes transported by diesel-powered locomotives, while crude oil is typically transported by tanker ships, requiring the combustion of additional fossil fuels.
A variety of mitigating efforts have arisen to counter the negative effects of fossil fuels.
This includes a movement to use alternative energy sources, such as renewable energy.
Environmental regulation uses a variety of approaches to limit these emissions; for example, rules against releasing waste products like fly ash into the atmosphere.
In December 2020, the United Nations released a report saying that despite the need to reduce greenhouse emissions, various governments are "doubling down" on fossil fuels, in some cases diverting over 50% of their COVID-19 recovery stimulus funding to fossil fuel production rather than to alternative energy.
The UN secretary general António Guterres declared that "Humanity is waging war on nature.
This is suicidal.
Nature always strikes back – and it is already doing so with growing force and fury." However, Guterres also said there is still cause for hope, anticipating Joe Biden's plan for the US to join other large emitters like China and the EU in adopting targets to reach net zero emissions by 2050.
Illness and deaths
Environmental pollution from fossil fuels impacts humans because particulates and other air pollution from fossil fuel combustion cause illness and death when inhaled.
These health effects include premature death, acute respiratory illness, aggravated asthma, chronic bronchitis and decreased lung function.
The poor, undernourished, very young and very old, and people with preexisting respiratory disease and other ill health are more at risk.
Global air pollution deaths due to fossil fuels in 2018 have been estimated at over 8 million people, nearly 1 in 5 deaths worldwide.
While all energy sources inherently have adverse effects, the data shows that fossil fuels cause the highest levels of greenhouse gas emissions and are the most dangerous for human health.
In contrast, modern renewable energy sources appear to be safer for human health and cleaner.
The death rate from accidents and air pollution in the EU are as follows per terawatt-hour: coal (24.6 deaths), oil (18.4 deaths), natural gas (2.8 deaths), biomass (4.6 deaths), hydropower (0.02 deaths), nuclear energy (0.07 deaths), wind (0.04 deaths), and solar (0.02 deaths). The greenhouse gas emissions from each energy source are as follows, measured in tonnes: coal (820 tonnes), oil (720 tonnes), natural gas (490 tonnes), biomass (78–230 tonnes), hydropower (34 tonnes), nuclear energy (3 tonnes), wind (4 tonnes), and solar (5 tonnes). As the data shows, coal, oil, natural gas, and biomass cause higher death rates and higher levels of greenhouse gas emissions than hydropower, nuclear energy, wind, and solar power.
Scientists propose that 1.8 million lives have been saved by replacing fossil fuel sources with nuclear power.
Phase-out
This paragraph is an excerpt from Fossil fuel phase-out.
Fossil fuel phase-out is the gradual reduction of the use and production of fossil fuels to zero.
It is part of the ongoing renewable energy transition.
Current efforts in fossil fuel phase-out involve replacing fossil fuels with sustainable energy sources in sectors such as transport and heating.
Alternatives to fossil fuels include electrification, green hydrogen and biofuel.
Phase-out policies include both demand-side and supply-side constraints.
Whereas demand-side approaches seek to reduce fossil-fuel consumption, supply-side initiatives seek to constraint production to accelerate the pace of energy transition and reduction in emissions.
Just transition
This section is an excerpt from Just transition.
Protestor in Melbourne calling for a just transition and decarbonisation
Just transition is a framework developed by the trade union movement to encompass a range of social interventions needed to secure workers' rights and livelihoods when economies are shifting to sustainable production, primarily combating climate change and protecting biodiversity.
In Europe, advocates for a just transition want to unite social and climate justice, for example, for coal workers in coal-dependent developing regions who lack employment opportunities beyond coal.
Divestment
This section is an excerpt from Fossil fuel divestment.
As of 2021, 1,300 institutions possessing 14.6 trillion dollars divested from the fossil fuel industry.
Fossil fuel divestment or fossil fuel divestment and investment in climate solutions is an attempt to reduce climate change by exerting social, political, and economic pressure for the institutional divestment of assets including stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments connected to companies involved in extracting fossil fuels.
Fossil fuel divestment campaigns emerged on campuses in the United States in 2011 with students urging their administrations to turn endowment investments in the fossil fuel industry into investments in clean energy and communities most impacted by climate change.
In 2012, Unity College in Maine became the first institution of higher learning to divest its endowment from fossil fuels.
By 2015, fossil fuel divestment was reportedly the fastest growing divestment movement in history.
In October 2021, a total of 1,485 institutions representing $39.2 trillion in assets worldwide had begun or committed to a divestment from fossil fuels.
Investment: Companies, governments and households invested $501.3 billion in decarbonization in 2020, including renewable energy (solar, wind), electric vehicles and associated charging infrastructure, energy storage, energy-efficient heating systems, carbon capture and storage, and hydrogen.
Cost: With increasingly widespread implementation of renewable energy sources, costs have declined, most notably for energy generated by solar panels.Levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is a measure of the average net present cost of electricity generation for a generating plant over its lifetime.
Industrial sector
Main articles: Coal industry and Petroleum industry
Further information: Fossil fuel exporters and Fossil fuels lobbyIn 2019, Saudi Aramco was listed and it reached a US$2 trillion valuation on its second day of trading, after the world's largest initial public offering.
Economic effects
Air pollution from fossil fuels in 2018 has been estimated to cost US$2.9 trillion, or 3.3% of global GDP.
Subsidies
This section is an excerpt from Fossil fuel subsidies.
Fossil-fuel subsidies per capita, 2019. Fossil-fuel pre-tax subsidies per capita are measured in constant US dollars.
Fossil-fuel subsidies as a share of GDP, 2019. Fossil-fuel pre-tax subsidies are given as a share of total gross domestic product.
Fossil fuel subsidies are energy subsidies on fossil fuels.
They may be tax breaks on consumption, such as a lower sales tax on natural gas for residential heating; or subsidies on production, such as  tax breaks on exploration for oil.
Or they may be free or cheap negative externalities; such as air pollution or climate change due to burning gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.
Some fossil fuel subsidies are via electricity generation, such as subsidies for coal-fired power stations.
One downside to subsidizing any industry is that competition and innovation are lessened or lost completely.
Subsidizing can make a product be cheaper for buyers, but in the long run, innovation and lower prices come from a competitive free market. 
Despite the G20 countries having pledged to phase-out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies,  they may be continued because of voter demand or for energy security.
Global fossil fuel consumption subsidies in 2021 have been estimated at 440 billion dollars; although they vary each year depending on oil prices they are consistently hundreds of billions of dollars.
Eliminating fossil fuel subsidies would greatly reduce global carbon emissions and would reduce the health risks of air pollution.
As of 2021[update], policy researchers estimate that substantially more money is spent on fossil fuel subsidies than on environmentally harmful agricultural subsidies or environmentally harmful water subsidies.
Lobbying activities
These paragraphs are an excerpt from Fossil fuels lobby.
"Fossil fuels lobby" is a term used to label the paid representatives of corporations involved in the fossil fuel industry (oil, gas, coal), as well as related industries like chemicals, plastics, aviation and other transportation.
Because of their wealth and the importance of energy, transport and chemical industries to local, national and international economies, these lobbies have the capacity and money to attempt to have outsized influence governmental policy.
In particular, the lobbies have been known to obstruct policy related to environmental protection, environmental health and climate action.
Lobbies are active in most fossil-fuel intensive economies with democratic governance, with reporting on the lobbies most prominent in Canada, Australia, the United States and Europe, however the lobbies are present in many parts of the world.
Big Oil companies such as ExxonMobil, Shell, BP, TotalEnergies, Chevron Corporation, and ConocoPhillips are among the largest corporations associated with the fossil fuels lobby.
The American Petroleum Institute is a powerful industry lobbyist for Big Oil with significant clout in Washington, D.C.
Some observers have also been critical of the presence of major fossil fuel companies at global forums for decision making, like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Paris Climate Agreement negotiations, the Plastic  and other international forums.
The lobby is known for exploiting international crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, or the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, to try to roll back existing regulations or justify new fossil fuel development.
See also
Abiogenic petroleum origin proposes that petroleum is not a fossil fuel
Bioremediation
Carbon bubble
Environmental impact of the energy industry
Externality
Fossil Fools Day
Fossil Fuel Beta
Fossil fuel divestment
Fossil fuel drilling
Fossil fuel exporters
Fossil fuel phase-out
Fossil fuels lobby
Fugitive gas emissions
Hydraulic fracturing
Liquefied petroleum gas
Low-carbon power
Peak coal
Peak gas
Petroleum industry
Phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles
Eco-economic decoupling
Shale gas
Oil shale
Footnotes
"Fossil fuel". ScienceDaily.
Retrieved 29 October 2021.
"Fossil fuels". Geological Survey Ireland.
Retrieved 29 October 2021.
a b "thermochemistry of fossil fuel formation" (PDF).
Paul Mann, Lisa Gahagan, and Mark B. Gordon, "Tectonic setting of the world's giant oil and gas fields", in Michel T. Halbouty (ed.) Giant Oil and Gas Fields of the Decade, 1990–1999, Tulsa, Okla.: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 50, accessed 22 June 2009.
Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (28 November 2020). "Energy". Our World in Data.
Ambrose, Jillian (12 April 2020). "Carbon emissions from fossil fuels could fall by 2.5bn tonnes in 2020". The Guardian.
ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 April 2020.
"Global Carbon Project (GCP)". 
"What Are Greenhouse Gases?". US Department of Energy.
Retrieved 9 September 2007.
"Chapter 2: Emissions trends and drivers" (PDF). Ipcc_Ar6_Wgiii. 2022.
a b "Quantifying the Economic Costs of Air Pollution from Fossil Fuels" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2020.
Zhang, Sharon. "Air Pollution Is Killing More People Than Smoking—and Fossil Fuels Are Largely to Blame". Pacific Standard.
Retrieved 5 February 2020.
Dickie, Gloria (4 April 2022). "Factbox: Key takeaways from the IPCC report on climate change mitigation". Reuters.
Retrieved 5 April 2022.
"Price Spike Fortifies Fossil Fuel Subsidies". Energy Intelligence. 14 April 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022.
"Why are fossil fuels so hard to quit?". Brookings. 8 June 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2022.
"IPCC: We can tackle climate change if big oil gets out of the way". the Guardian. 5 April 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2022.
Monga, Jean Eaglesham and Vipal (20 November 2021). "Trillions in Assets May Be Left Stranded as Companies Address Climate Change". Wall Street Journal.
ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 5 April 2022.
Bos, Kyra; Gupta, Joyeeta (1 October 2019). "Stranded assets and stranded resources: Implications for climate change mitigation and global sustainable development". Energy Research & Social Science. 56: 101215. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2019.05.025. ISSN 2214-6296. S2CID 198658515.
"No new oil, gas or coal development if world is to reach net zero by 2050, says world energy body". the Guardian. 18 May 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.
Oil fields map Archived 6 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine. quakeinfo.ucsd.edu
Hsu, Chang Samuel; Robinson, Paul R. (2017). Springer Handbook of Petroleum Technology (2nd, illustrated ed.). Springer. p. 360. ISBN 978-3-319-49347-3. Extract of p. 360
Caspar Neumann; William Lewis (1759). The Chemical Works of Caspar Neumann ... (1773 printing). J. and F. Rivington. pp. 492–.
"fossil". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) – "fossil [...] adj. [...] Obtained by digging; found buried in the earth.
Now chiefly of fuels and other materials occurring naturally in underground deposits; esp. in FOSSIL FUEL n."
"fossil". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) – "fossil [...] n. [...] Something preserved in the ground, esp. in petrified form in rock, and recognizable as the remains of a living organism of a former geological period, or as preserving an impression or trace of such an organism."
Miller, G.; Spoolman, Scott (2007). Environmental Science: Problems, Connections and Solutions.
Cengage Learning.
ISBN 978-0-495-38337-6. Retrieved 14 April 2018 – via Google Books.
Ahuja, Satinder (2015). Food, Energy, and Water: The Chemistry Connection.
Elsevier.
ISBN 978-0-12-800374-9. Retrieved 14 April 2018 – via Google Books.
"Encyclopædia Britannica, use of oil seeps in ancient times". Retrieved 9 September 2007.
Bilkadi, Zayn (1992). "Bulls From the Sea: Ancient Oil Industries". Aramco World.
Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.
Ball, Max W.; Douglas Ball; Daniel S. Turner (1965). This Fascinating Oil Business.
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
ISBN 978-0-672-50829-5.
Kaldany, Rashad, Director Oil, Gas, Mining and Chemicals Dept, World Bank (13 December 2006). Global Gas Flaring Reduction: A Time for Action! (PDF). Global Forum on Flaring & Gas Utilization.
Paris.
Retrieved 9 September 2007.
"Oil Sands Global Market Potential 2007". Retrieved 9 September 2007.
Carrington, Damian (12 December 2017). "Insurance giant Axa dumps investments in tar sands pipelines". The Guardian.
Retrieved 24 December 2017.
Eating Fossil Fuels.
EnergyBulletin.  Archived June 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
"Soaring fertilizer prices put global food security at risk". Axios. 6 May 2022.
Erisman, Jan Willem; MA Sutton, J Galloway, Z Klimont, W Winiwarter (October 2008). "How a century of ammonia synthesis changed the world". Nature Geoscience. 1 (10): 636–639. Bibcode:2008NatGe...1..636E. doi:10.1038/ngeo325. S2CID 94880859. Archived from the original on 23 July 2010.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
"Fears global energy crisis could lead to famine in vulnerable countries". The Guardian. 20 October 2021.
Oswald Spengler (1932). Man and Technics (PDF). Alfred A. Knopf.
ISBN 0-8371-8875-X. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
Griffin, Rodman (10 July 1992). "Alternative Energy". 2 (2): 573–596. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
a b Michael Stephenson (2018). Energy and Climate Change: An Introduction to Geological Controls, Interventions and Mitigations.
Elsevier.
ISBN 978-0128120217.
Neukom, Raphael; Barboza, Luis A.; Erb, Michael P.; Shi, Feng;  et al. (2019). "Consistent multidecadal variability in global temperature reconstructions and simulations over the Common Era". Nature Geoscience. 12 (8): 643–649. Bibcode:2019NatGe..12..643P. doi:10.1038/s41561-019-0400-0. ISSN 1752-0908. PMC 6675609. PMID 31372180.
"Global Annual Mean Surface Air Temperature Change". NASA. Retrieved 23 February 2020.
"The European Power Sector in 2020 / Up-to-Date Analysis on the Electricity Transition" (PDF). ember-climate.org.
Ember and Agora Energiewende. 25 January 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 January 2021.
EPA (19 January 2017). "Climate Impacts on Ecosystems". Retrieved 7 December 2020.
"WHO calls for urgent action to protect health from climate change". World Health Organization.
November 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
World Meteorological Organization (2020). WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2019. WMO-No. 1248. Geneva.
ISBN 978-92-63-11248-4.
Coal Combustion: Nuclear Resource or Danger Archived 5 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine – Alex Gabbard
Nuclear proliferation through coal burning Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine – Gordon J. Aubrecht, II, Ohio State University
American Coal Ash Association. "CCP Production and Use Survey" (PDF).[permanent dead link][dead link]
Damian Carrington (2 December 2020). "World is 'doubling down' on fossil fuels despite climate crisis – UN report". The Guardian.
Retrieved 7 December 2020.
Fiona Harvey (2 December 2020). "Humanity is waging war on nature, says UN secretary general". The Guardian.
Retrieved 7 December 2020.
"The Production Gap: The discrepancy between countries' planned fossil fuel production and global production levels consistent with limiting warming to 1.5°C or 2°C". UNEP. December 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
Liodakis, E; Dashdorj, Dugersuren; Mitchell, Gary E. (2011). The nuclear alternative: Energy Production within Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
AIP Conference Proceedings.
Vol. 1342. p. 91. Bibcode:2011AIPC.1342...91L. doi:10.1063/1.3583174.
February 19; Chaisson, 2021 Clara. "Fossil Fuel Air Pollution Kills One in Five People". NRDC. Retrieved 5 April 2022.
"What are the safest and cleanest sources of energy?". Our World in Data.
Retrieved 29 December 2020.
Jogalekar, Ashutosh. "Nuclear power may have saved 1.8 million lives otherwise lost to fossil fuels, may save up to 7 million more". Scientific American Blog Network.
Retrieved 29 December 2020.
Green, F., & Denniss, R. (2018). "Cutting with both arms of the scissors: the economic and political case for restrictive supply-side climate policies". Climatic Change. 150 (1): 73–87. Bibcode:2018ClCh..150...73G. doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2162-x.
S2CID 59374909. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
"Climate Frontlines Briefing - No Jobs on a Dead Planet" (PDF). International Trade Union Confederation.
March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2020.
"Just Transition Platform". European Commission - European Commission.
Retrieved 19 August 2020.
"Divestment Commitments". Gofossilfree.org.
Retrieved 11 April 2020.
Gibson, Dylan; Duram, Leslie (2020). "Shifting Discourse on Climate and Sustainability: Key Characteristics of the Higher Education Fossil Fuel Divestment Movement". Sustainability. 12 (23): 10069. doi:10.3390/su122310069.
"Divestment from Fossil Fuels". Unity College.
Retrieved 29 December 2021.
"Fossil fuel divestment: a brief history". The Guardian. 8 October 2014. Retrieved 25 March 2015.
"1485 institutions with assets over $39.2 Trillion have committed to divest from fossil fuels". Stand.earth. 26 October 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021.
"Energy Transition Investment Hit $500 Billion in 2020 – For First Time". BloombergNEF. (Bloomberg New Energy Finance). 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021.
Chrobak, Ula; Chodosh, Sara (28 January 2021). "Solar power got cheap.
So why aren't we using it more?". Popular Science.
Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. ● Chodosh's graphic is derived from data in "Lazard's Levelized Cost of Energy Version 14.0" (PDF). Lazard.com.
Lazard. 19 October 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2021.
Kerr, Simeon; Massoudi, Arash; Raval, Anjli (19 December 2019). "Saudi Aramco touches $2tn valuation on second day of trading". Financial Times.
Retrieved 10 January 2020.
Raval, Anjli; Kerr, Simeon; Stafford, Philip (5 December 2019). "Saudi Aramco raises $25.6bn in world's biggest IPO". Financial Times.
Retrieved 10 January 2020.
"Update on recent progress in reform of inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption" (PDF). 2021.
George, Johannes Urpelainen and Elisha (14 July 2021). "Reforming global fossil fuel subsidies: How the United States can restart international cooperation". Brookings.
Retrieved 26 February 2022.
Brower, Derek; Wilson, Tom; Giles, Chris (25 February 2022). "The new energy shock: Putin, Ukraine and the global economy". Financial Times.
Retrieved 26 February 2022.
"Energy subsidies". International Energy Agency.
Retrieved 26 February 2022.
"Fossil Fuel Subsidies & Finance". Oil Change International.
Retrieved 2 June 2022.
Coady, David; Parry, Ian; Sears, Louis; Shang, Baoping (March 2017). "How Large Are Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies?". World Development. 91: 11–27. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.10.004.
John Schwartz (5 December 2015). "On Tether to Fossil Fuels, Nations Speak With Money". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2015. ...the elimination of subsidies as one of the most effective strategies for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Ross, Michael L.; Hazlett, Chad; Mahdavi, Paasha (January 2017). "Global progress and backsliding on gasoline taxes and subsidies". Nature Energy. 2 (1): 16201. Bibcode:2017NatEn...216201R. doi:10.1038/nenergy.2016.201. S2CID 157840070.
"Fossil fuel subsidies: If we want to reduce greenhouse gas emissions we should not pay people to burn fossil-fuels". Our World in Data.
Retrieved 4 November 2021.
"Local Environmental Externalities due to Energy Price Subsidies: A Focus on Air Pollution and Health" (PDF). World Bank.
"Protecting Nature by Reforming Environmentally Harmful Subsidies: The Role of Business | Earth Track". 
"Why fossil fuel lobbyists are dominating climate policy during Covid-19". Greenhouse PR. 23 July 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020.
Welle (), Deutsche. "Lobbying threat to global climate action | DW | 05.11.2021". DW.COM. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
Laville, Sandra (22 March 2019). "Top oil firms spending millions lobbying to block climate change policies, says report". The Guardian.
ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 25 October 2019.
The Guardian, 19 Jul. 2021 "How a Powerful U.S. Lobby Group Helps Big Oil to Block Climate Action"
Yale Environment 360, 19 Jul. 2019 "Fossil Fuel Interests Have Outspent Environmental Advocates 10:1 on Climate Lobbying"
Reuters Events, 23 Nov. 2015 "Lobbying: Climate Change--Beware Hot Air"
a b "IPCC: We can tackle climate change if big oil gets out of the way". the Guardian. 5 April 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
a b Welle (), Deutsche. "Oil and gas companies exploit coronavirus to roll back environmental regulations | DW | 16.04.2020". DW.COM. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
a b "US fossil fuel industry leaps on Russia's invasion of Ukraine to argue for more drilling". the Guardian. 26 February 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
Manjoo, Farhad (24 March 2022). "Opinion | We're in a Fossil Fuel War.
Biden Should Say So". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
Further reading
Ross Barrett and Daniel Worden (eds.), Oil Culture.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2014.
Bob Johnson, Carbon Nation: Fossil Fuels in the Making of American Culture.
Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2014.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Fossil fuel.
Global Fossil Infrastructure Tracker Archived 10 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air
Climate changeOverview
Attribution of recent climate change
Effects of climate change
Climate change mitigation
Climate change adaptation
By country and region
CausesOverview
Attribution of recent climate change
Extreme event attribution
Greenhouse effect
Scientific consensus on climate change
Sources
Greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gas emissions
Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture
Fossil fuel
Deforestation and climate change
Land use, land-use change, and forestry
History
History of climate change science
History of climate change policy and politics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
United Nations conferences
Effects and issuesPhysical
Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic methane emissions
Drought
Glacier retreat
Oceans
Ocean acidification
Ocean heat content
Ozone depletion
Tipping points in the climate system
Sea level rise
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
Tropical cyclones
Water cycle
Wildfires
Flora and fauna
Ecosystems
Mass mortality event
Invasive species
Plant biodiversity
Marine life
Terrestrial animals
Birds
Extinction risk from climate change
Forest dieback
Social impacts
Agriculture
Cities
Children
Disability
Economic impacts
Fisheries
Gender
Health
Human rights
Indigenous peoples
Mental health
Migration
Poverty
Risk assessments
Security and conflict
Climate vulnerability
By country & region
Africa
Americas
Antarctica
Arctic
Australia
Caribbean
Europe
Middle East and North Africa
Small island countries
South Asia
by individual country
Society and climate changeSociety
Business responses
Climate action
Climate grief
Climate movement
school strike
Climate emergency declaration
Denial
Soft denial
Tobacco industry playbook
conspiracy theories
Controversy
Ethics
Governance
Litigation
Climate justice
Politics
Public opinion
Women
Communication
Education
Climate spiral
Popular culture depictions
art
climate fiction
games
Climate Change Performance Index
Climate crisis (term)
Media coverage
Warming stripes
International agreements
Glasgow Climate Pact
Kyoto Protocol
Paris Agreement
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
MitigationEconomics and finance
Carbon credit
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Climate debt
Climate risk
Climate risk insurance
Climate finance
Fossil fuel divestment
Economics of mitigation
Emissions trading
Low-carbon economy
Energy
Carbon capture and storage
Energy transition
Fossil fuel phase-out
Low-carbon energy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
Personal
Carbon neutrality
Individual action on climate change
Other
Blue carbon
Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon capture and storage
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Solar geoengineering
Nature-based solutions
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Background and theoryMeasurements
Satellite measurements
Theory
Albedo
Carbon sink
Climate sensitivity
Climate variability and change
Cloud forcing
Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis
Iris hypothesis
Feedbacks
Earth's energy budget
Effective temperature
Global warming potential
Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change
Orbital forcing
Radiative forcing
Research
Climate model
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Climate change portal
Glossary
Index
Category
Natural resourcesAirPollution / quality
Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor
developing nations
Law
Clean Air Act (USA)
Ozone depletion
Emissions
Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)
Energy
Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
sunlight
shade
Wind
Land
Arable
peak farmland
Degradation
Landscape
cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed
Law
property
Management
habitat conservation
Minerals
Gemstone
Ore
Metal
mining
law
sand
peak
rights
Soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
Use
planning
reserve
Life
Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries
climate change
law
management
Forests
genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products
Game
law
Marine conservation
Meadow
Plants
FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife
conservation
management
WaterTypes / location
Aquifer
storage and recovery
Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
Hydrosphere
Ice
bergs
glacial
polar
Irrigation
huerta
Marine
Rain
harvesting
Stormwater
Surface water
Sewage
Reclaimed water
Watershed
Aspects
Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources
management
policy
Related
Commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
Economics
ecological
land
Ecosystem services
Exploitation
overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day
Management
adaptive
Natural capital
accounting
good
Natural heritage
Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness
Resource
Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable
Category
Energy
Outline
History
Index
Fundamental concepts
Energy
Units
Conservation of energy
Energetics
Energy transformation
Energy condition
Energy transition
Energy level
Energy system
Mass
Negative mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Power
Thermodynamics
Quantum thermodynamics
Laws of thermodynamics
Thermodynamic system
Thermodynamic state
Thermodynamic potential
Thermodynamic free energy
Irreversible process
Thermal reservoir
Heat transfer
Heat capacity
Volume (thermodynamics)
Thermodynamic equilibrium
Thermal equilibrium
Thermodynamic temperature
Isolated system
Entropy
Free entropy
Entropic force
Negentropy
Work
Exergy
Enthalpy
Types
Kinetic
Internal
Thermal
Potential
Gravitational
Elastic
Electric potential energy
Mechanical
Interatomic potential
Quantum potential
Electrical
Magnetic
Ionization
Radiant
Binding
Nuclear binding energy
Gravitational binding energy
Quantum chromodynamics binding energy
Dark
Quintessence
Phantom
Negative
Chemical
Rest
Sound energy
Surface energy
Vacuum energy
Zero-point energy
Quantum potential
Quantum fluctuation
Energy carriers
Radiation
Enthalpy
Mechanical wave
Sound wave
Fuel
fossil fuel
Hydrogen
Hydrogen fuel
Heat
Latent heat
Work
Electricity
Battery
Capacitor
Primary energy
Fossil fuel
Coal
Petroleum
Natural gas
Nuclear fuel
Natural uranium
Radiant energy
Solar
Wind
Hydropower
Marine energy
Geothermal
Bioenergy
Gravitational energy
Energy systemcomponents
Energy engineering
Oil refinery
Electric power
Fossil fuel power station
Cogeneration
Integrated gasification combined cycle
Nuclear power
Nuclear power plant
Radioisotope thermoelectric generator
Solar power
Photovoltaic system
Concentrated solar power
Solar thermal energy
Solar power tower
Solar furnace
Wind power
Wind farm
Airborne wind energy
Hydropower
Hydroelectricity
Wave farm
Tidal power
Geothermal power
Biomass
Use andsupply
Energy consumption
Energy storage
World energy consumption
Energy security
Energy conservation
Efficient energy use
Transport
Agriculture
Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
Energy policy
Energy development
Worldwide energy supply
South America
USA
Mexico
Canada
Europe
Asia
Africa
Australia
Misc.
Jevons paradox
Carbon footprint
Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject
Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)
Portals: Energy Renewable energy Climate change
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 13:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
