Gender - Wikipedia
Gender
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Characteristics distinguishing between femininity and masculinity
For the grammatical concept, see Grammatical gender.
For other uses, see Gender (disambiguation).
Gender symbols intertwined.
The red (left) is the female Venus symbol.
The blue (right) represents the male Mars symbol.
Gender is the range of characteristics pertaining to femininity and masculinity and differentiating between them.
Depending on the context, this may include sex-based social structures (i.e. gender roles) and gender identity.
Most cultures use a gender binary, in which gender is divided into two categories, and people are considered part of one or the other (boys/men and girls/women); those who exist outside these groups may fall under the umbrella term non-binary.
Some societies have specific genders besides "man" and "woman", such as the hijras of South Asia; these are often referred to as third genders (and fourth genders, etc.). Most scholars agree that gender is a central characteristic for social organization.
Sexologist John Money is often regarded as the first to introduce a terminological distinction between biological sex and "gender role" (which, as originally defined, includes the concepts of both gender role and what would later become known as gender identity) in 1955 although Madison Bentley had already in 1945 defined gender as the "socialized obverse of sex", and Simone de Beauvoir's 1949 book The Second Sex has been interpreted as the beginning of the distinction between sex and gender in feminist theory.
Before Money's work, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories.
However, Money's meaning of the word did not become widespread until the 1970s, when feminist theory embraced the concept of a distinction between biological sex and the social construct of gender.
Most contemporary social scientists, behavioral scientists and biologists, many legal systems and government bodies, and intergovernmental agencies such as the WHO, make a distinction between gender and sex.
In other contexts, the term gender is used to replace sex without representing a clear conceptual difference.
For instance, in non-human animal research, gender is commonly used to refer to the biological sex of the animals.
This change in the meaning of gender can be traced to the 1980s.
In 1993, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) started to use gender instead of sex.
Later, in 2011, the FDA reversed its position and began using sex as the biological classification and gender as "a person's self-representation as male or female, or how that person is responded to by social institutions based on the individual's gender presentation."
The social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies.
Other sciences, such as sexology and neuroscience, are also interested in the subject.
The social sciences sometimes approach gender as a social construct, and gender studies particularly do, while research in the natural sciences investigates whether biological differences in females and males influence the development of gender in humans; both inform the debate about how far biological differences influence the formation of gender identity and gendered behavior.
In some English literature, there is also a trichotomy between biological sex, psychological gender, and social gender role.
This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.
Contents
Etymology and usage
Derivation
The modern English word gender comes from the Middle English gender, gendre, a loanword from Anglo-Norman and Middle French gendre.
This, in turn, came from Latin genus.
Both words mean "kind", "type", or "sort". They derive ultimately from a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root *ǵénh₁- 'to beget', which is also the source of kin, kind, king, and many other English words, with cognates widely attested in many Indo-European languages.
It appears in Modern French in the word genre (type, kind, also genre sexuel) and is related to the Greek root gen- (to produce), appearing in gene, genesis, and oxygen.
The Oxford Etymological Dictionary of the English Language of 1882 defined gender as kind, breed, sex, derived from the Latin ablative case of genus, like genere natus, which refers to birth.
The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of gender as "kind" had already become obsolete.
History of the concept
The concept of gender, in the modern sense, is a recent invention in human history.
The ancient world had no basis of understanding gender as it has been understood in the humanities and social sciences for the past few decades.
The term gender had been associated with grammar for most of history and only started to move towards it being a malleable cultural construct in the 1950s and 1960s.
Before Sexologist John Money and colleagues introduced the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role in 1955, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories.
For example, in a bibliography of 12,000 references on marriage and family from 1900 to 1964, the term gender does not even emerge once.
Analysis of more than 30 million academic article titles from 1945 to 2001 showed that the uses of the term "gender", were much rarer than uses of "sex", was often used as a grammatical category early in this period.
By the end of this period, uses of "gender" outnumbered uses of "sex" in the social sciences, arts, and humanities.
It was in the 1970s that feminist scholars adopted the term gender as way of distinguishing "socially constructed" aspects of male–female differences (gender) from "biologically determined" aspects (sex).
In the last two decades of the 20th century, the use of gender in academia has increased greatly, outnumbering uses of sex in the social sciences.
While the spread of the word in science publications can be attributed to the influence of feminism, its use as a synonym for sex is attributed to the failure to grasp the distinction made in feminist theory, and the distinction has sometimes become blurred with the theory itself; David Haig stated, "Among the reasons that working scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation."
In legal cases alleging discrimination, sex is usually preferred as the determining factor rather than gender as it refers to biology rather than socially constructed norms which are more open to interpretation and dispute.
Julie Greenberg writes that although gender and sex are separate concepts, they are interlinked in that gender discrimination often results from stereotypes based on what is expected of members of each sex.
In J.E.B. v.
Alabama ex rel. T.B., United States Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia wrote:
The word 'gender' has acquired the new and useful connotation of cultural or attitudinal characteristics (as opposed to physical characteristics) distinctive to the sexes.
That is to say, gender is to sex as feminine is to female and masculine is to male.
As a grammatical category
The word was still widely used, however, in the specific sense of grammatical gender (the assignment of nouns to categories such as masculine, feminine and neuter). According to Aristotle, this concept was introduced by the Greek philosopher Protagoras.[page needed]
In 1926, Henry Watson Fowler stated that the definition of the word pertained to this grammar-related meaning: "Gender...is a grammatical term only.
To talk of persons...of the masculine or feminine g[ender], meaning of the male or female sex, is either a jocularity (permissible or not according to context) or a blunder."
As a social role
Sexologist John Money coined the term gender role, and was the first to use it in print in a scientific trade journal.
In a seminal 1955 paper he defined it as "all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman."
The modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates at least back to 1945, and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see § Feminism theory and gender studies below), which theorizes that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed.
In this context, matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of gender.
The popular use of gender simply as an alternative to sex (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction.
The American Heritage Dictionary (2000) uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference, noting that the distinction "is useful in principle, but it is by no means widely observed, and considerable variation in usage occurs at all levels."
The effectiveness of the medication appears to depend on the sex (not gender) of the patient.In peasant societies, gender (not sex) roles are likely to be more clearly defined.
Gender identity and gender roles
Main articles: Gender identity and Gender role
Part of a series onTransgender topics     
Gender identities
Androgyne
Cisgender
Gender bender
Non-binary (or genderqueer)
Third gender
Akava'ine
Bakla
Bissu
Calabai
Faʻafafine
Fakaleitī
Femminiello
Hijra
Kathoey
Khanith
Koekchuch
Māhū
Mak nyah
Mukhannathun
Muxe
Albanian sworn virgins
Takatāpui
Travesti
Two-spirit
Winkte
X-gender
Trans man
Trans woman
Transgender
Transsexual
History
Outline
Timeline
United Kingdom
United States
Compton's Cafeteria riot
Stonewall riots
Intersex
Health care
Gender clinic
Gender dysphoria
in children
Sex assignment
Sex reassignment therapy
Hormone therapy
feminizing
masculinizing
Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy
Sex reassignment surgery
female-to-male
male-to-female
Facial feminization surgery
Facial masculinization surgery
Hair removal
Pregnancy
Reproduction
Voice therapy
WPATH
Standards of Care
Rights and legal issues
Asylum
Discrimination
Anti-gender movement
Inequality
Non-binary
Transgender men
Transgender women
Transmisogyny
Transphobia
Legal status
Rights movement
Non-binary, third gender
Organizations
Military service
Toilets
Bathroom bills
Unisex
Violence
Trans bashing
Trans panic
Unlawful killings
Violence against LGBT people
Yogyakarta Principles
Society and culture
LGBT-related films
Events
Awareness Week
Day of Remembrance
Day of Visibility
March
LGBT
Flag
History
Media portrayals
Fictional characters
Literature
Film
Television
People
Non-binary
Publications
Religion
Sports
Gender transitioning
Gender detransitioning
Transgender youth
suicide
more
Theory and concepts
Ambiphilia, androphilia, gynephilia
Childhood gender nonconformity
Cisgender / cissexual
Cross-dressing
Deadnaming
Gender binary
Gender expression
Gender identity
Gender-sexuality questioning
Gender variance
Postgenderism
Transfeminism
Transmedicalism
Transmisogyny
By country
Argentina
Australia
Rights
Re Kevin
Brazil
Canada
Bill C-16, 2016
Rights
China
Colombia
Germany
India
Rights of Transgender Persons Bill, 2014
Tamil Nadu
Iran
Ireland
New Zealand
Singapore
South Africa
Turkey
United Kingdom
Rights
Gender Recognition Act 2004
History
United States
Cafeteria riot
Disenfranchisement
History
Legal history
Rights
Title IX
See also
Gender
Gender studies
Intersex
Queer heterosexuality
LGBT
Sex
sex assignment
Sex and gender distinction
Sexual orientation
Social construction of gender
LGBT portal Transgender portal
Gender depicted as an ambiguous phenomenon, by a young Swedish actor
Gender identity refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society.
The term woman has historically been used interchangeably with reference to the female body, though more recently this usage has been viewed as controversial by some feminists.
There are qualitative analyses that explore and present the representations of gender; however, feminists challenge these dominant ideologies concerning gender roles and biological sex.
One's biological sex is directly tied to specific social roles and the expectations.
Judith Butler considers the concept of being a woman to have more challenges, owing not only to society's viewing women as a social category but also as a felt sense of self, a culturally conditioned or constructed subjective identity.
Social identity refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned.
According to social identity theory, an important component of the self-concept is derived from memberships in social groups and categories; this is demonstrated by group processes and how inter-group relationships impact significantly on individuals' self perception and behaviors.
The groups people belong to therefore provide members with the definition of who they are and how they should behave within their social sphere.
A protester holding a flyer with the words "Gender is like that old jumper from my cousin.
It was given to me and it doesn't fit" at a rally for transgender equality in Washington D.C. in 2013
Categorizing males and females into social roles creates a problem for some individuals who feel they have to be at one end of a linear spectrum and must identify themselves as man or woman, rather than being allowed to choose a section in between.
Globally, communities interpret biological differences between men and women to create a set of social expectations that define the behaviors that are "appropriate" for men and women and determine their different access to rights, resources, power in society and health behaviors.
Although the specific nature and degree of these differences vary from one society to the next, they still tend to typically favor men, creating an imbalance in power and gender inequalities within most societies.
Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures.
Social roles of men and women in relation to each other is based on the cultural norms of that society, which lead to the creation of gender systems.
The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.
Philosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to "complex strategical situation". Because of this, "power" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc. and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels.
For example, being female characterizes one as a woman, and being a woman signifies one as weak, emotional, and irrational, and incapable of actions attributed to a "man". Butler said that gender and sex are more like verbs than nouns.
She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female. "I am not permitted to construct my gender and sex willy-nilly," she said. "[This] is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled.
Rather than 'woman' being something one is, it is something one does." More recent criticisms of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.
Social assignment and gender fluidity
See also: Sex assignment
According to gender theorist Kate Bornstein, gender can have ambiguity and fluidity.
There are two contrasting ideas regarding the definition of gender, and the intersection of both of them is definable as below:
The World Health Organization defines gender as the result of socially constructed ideas about the behavior, actions, and roles a particular sex performs.
The beliefs, values and attitude taken up and exhibited by them is as per the agreeable norms of the society and the personal opinions of the person is not taken into the primary consideration of assignment of gender and imposition of gender roles as per the assigned gender.
The assignment of gender involves taking into account the physiological and biological attributes assigned by nature followed by the imposition of the socially constructed conduct.
Gender is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as "masculine" or "feminine". Although a person's sex as male or female stands as a biological fact that is identical in any culture, what that specific sex means in reference to a person's gender role as a man or a woman in society varies cross-culturally according to what things are considered to be masculine or feminine.
These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media.
Learning gender roles starts from birth and includes seemingly simple things like what color outfits a baby is clothed in or what toys they are given to play with.
However, a person's gender does not always align with what has been assigned at birth.
Factors other than learned behaviors play a role in the development of gender.
Social categories
This article needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Gender" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Mary Frith ("Moll Cutpurse") scandalized 17th century society by wearing male clothing, smoking in public, and otherwise defying gender roles.
Sexologist John Money coined the term gender role in 1955. The term gender role is defined as the actions or responses that may reveal their status as boy, man, girl or woman, respectively.
Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex.
In contrast to taxonomic approaches, some feminist philosophers have argued that gender "is a vast orchestration of subtle mediations between oneself and others", rather than a "private cause behind manifest behaviours".
Non-binary and third genders
Main articles: Genderqueer and Third gender
Historically, most societies have recognized only two distinct, broad classes of gender roles, a binary of masculine and feminine, largely corresponding to the biological sexes of male and female.
When a baby is born, society allocates the child to one gender or the other, on the basis of what their genitals resemble.
However, some societies have historically acknowledged and even honored people who fulfill a gender role that exists more in the middle of the continuum between the feminine and masculine polarity.
For example, the Hawaiian māhū, who occupy "a place in the middle" between male and female, or the Ojibwe ikwekaazo, "men who choose to function as women", or ininiikaazo, "women who function as men". In the language of the sociology of gender, some of these people may be considered third gender, especially by those in gender studies or anthropology.
Contemporary Native American and FNIM people who fulfill these traditional roles in their communities may also participate in the modern, two-spirit community, however, these umbrella terms, neologisms, and ways of viewing gender are not necessarily the type of cultural constructs that more traditional members of these communities agree with.
The hijras of India and Pakistan are often cited as third gender.
Another example may be the muxe (pronounced [ˈmuʃe]), found in the state of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico.
The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.
In addition to these traditionally recognized third genders, many cultures now recognize, to differing degrees, various non-binary gender identities.
People who are non-binary (or genderqueer) have gender identities that are not exclusively masculine or feminine.
They may identify as having an overlap of gender identities, having two or more genders, having no gender, having a fluctuating gender identity, or being third gender or other-gendered.
Recognition of non-binary genders is still somewhat new to mainstream Western culture, and non-binary people may face increased risk of assault, harassment, and discrimination.
Measurement of gender identity
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Two instruments incorporating the multidimensional nature of masculinity and femininity have dominated gender identity research: The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) and the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ). Both instruments categorize individuals as either being sex typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits), cross sex-typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits), androgynous (either males or females who report themselves as high on both masculine and feminine traits) or undifferentiated (either males or females who report themselves as low on both masculine and feminine traits). Twenge (1997) noted that men are generally more masculine than women and women generally more feminine than men, but the association between biological sex and masculinity/femininity is waning.
Feminist theory and gender studies
Part of a series onFeminist philosophy
Major works
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792)
The Subjection of Women (1869)
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884)
The Second Sex (1949)
The Feminine Mystique (1963)
Sexual Politics (1969)
The Dialectic of Sex (1970)
Speculum of the Other Woman (1974)
This Sex Which is Not One (1977)
Gyn/Ecology (1978)
Throwing Like a Girl (1980)
In a Different Voice (1982)
The Politics of Reality (1983)
Women, Race, and Class (1983)
Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984)
The Creation of Patriarchy (1986)
Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989)
Gender Trouble (1990)
Black Feminist Thought (1990)
Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993)
Whipping Girl (2007)
The Promise of Happiness (2010)
Major thinkers
Bartky
Baier
de Beauvoir
Bebel
Boggs
Butler
Cixous
Cleyre
De la Cruz
Collins
Daly
Davis
Démar
Federici
Firestone
Fourier
Friedan
Frye
Gamond
Goldman
Haslanger
hooks
Irigaray
Jaggar
Kristeva
Lerner
Luxemburg
MacKinnon
Mama
Michel
Mill
Taylor Mill
Millett
Nussbaum
Pankhurst
Pateman
Plumwood
Rubin
Saadawi
Showalter
Spivak
Voilquin
Wollstonecraft
Young
Zetkin
Ideas
Feminism
analytical
epistemology
ethics
existentialism
metaphysics
science
Gender equality
Gender performativity
Social construction of gender
Care ethics
Intersectionality
Standpoint theory
Journals
Feminist Philosophy Quarterly
Hypatia
philoSOPHIA
Radical Philosophy
Signs
Category  Feminist philosophy
Biologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities.
The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one." In context, this is a philosophical statement.
However, it may be analyzed in terms of biology—a girl must pass puberty to become a woman—and sociology, as a great deal of mature relating in social contexts is learned rather than instinctive.
Within feminist theory, terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s.
In the 1974 edition of Masculine/Feminine or Human, the author uses "innate gender" and "learned sex roles", but in the 1978 edition, the use of sex and gender is reversed.
By 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using gender only for socioculturally adapted traits.
In gender studies the term gender refers to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities.
In this context, gender explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences.
This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, and American feminists such as Judith Butler.
Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as "performative".
Charles E. Hurst states that some people think sex will, "...automatically determine one's gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one's sexual orientation (sexual attractions and behavior). Gender sociologists believe that people have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender.
For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations.
Schwalbe comments that humans "are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas". People do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices.
Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them.
They need to place people into distinct categories to know how we should feel about them.
Hurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms.
Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation.
Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system because of societal prejudices.
Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is.
He says that "courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex". This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the "correct" gender.
Andrea Dworkin stated her "commitment to destroying male dominance and gender itself" while stating her belief in radical feminism.
Political scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship.
She notes that a transition occurred when several feminist scholars, such as Sandra Harding and Joan Scott, began to conceive of gender "as an analytic category within which humans think about and organize their social activity". Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted "social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts". However, Hawkesworth states "feminist political science has not become a dominant paradigm within the discipline".
American political scientist Karen Beckwith addresses the concept of gender within political science arguing that a "common language of gender" exists and that it must be explicitly articulated in order to build upon it within the political science discipline.
Beckwith describes two ways in which the political scientist may employ 'gender' when conducting empirical research: "gender as a category and as a process." Employing gender as a category allows for political scientists "to delineate specific contexts where behaviours, actions, attitudes and preferences considered masculine or feminine result in particular" political outcomes.
It may also demonstrate how gender differences, not necessarily corresponding precisely with sex, may "constrain or facilitate political" actors.
Gender as a process has two central manifestations in political science research, firstly in determining "the differential effects of structures and policies upon men and women," and secondly, the ways in which masculine and feminine political actors "actively work to produce favorable gendered outcomes".
With regard to gender studies, Jacquetta Newman states that although sex is determined biologically, the ways in which people express gender is not.
Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology.
Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc.
Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives.
She also points out that other non-Western cultures do not necessarily have the same views of gender and gender roles.
Newman also debates the meaning of equality, which is often considered the goal of feminism; she believes that equality is a problematic term because it can mean many different things, such as people being treated identically, differently, or fairly based on their gender.
Newman believes this is problematic because there is no unified definition as to what equality means or looks like, and that this can be significantly important in areas like public policy.
Social construction of sex hypotheses
See also: Sex and gender distinction
"Rosie the Riveter" was an iconic symbol of the American homefront in WWII and a departure from restrictive, "feminine", gender roles due to wartime necessity.
Sociologists generally regard gender as a social construct, and various researchers, including many feminists, consider sex to only be a matter of biology and something that is not about social or cultural construction.
For instance, sexologist John Money suggests the distinction between biological sex and gender as a role.
Moreover, Ann Oakley, a professor of sociology and social policy, says "the constancy of sex must be admitted, but so also must the variability of gender." The World Health Organization states, "'[s]ex' refers to the biological and physiological characteristics that define men and women," and "'gender' refers to the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for men and women." Thus, sex is regarded as a category studied in biology (natural sciences), while gender is studied in humanities and social sciences.
Lynda Birke, a feminist biologist, maintains "'biology' is not seen as something which might change." Therefore, it is stated that sex is something that does not change, while gender can change according to social structure.
However, there are scholars who argue that sex is also socially constructed.
For example, gender theorist Judith Butler states that "perhaps this construct called 'sex' is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns out to be no distinction at all."
She continues:It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category.
Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established. [...] This production of sex as the pre-discursive should be understood as the effect of the apparatus of cultural construction designated by gender.
Butler argues that "bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas," and sex is "no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies."
With regard to history, Linda Nicholson, a professor of history and women's studies, argues that the understanding of human bodies as sexually dimorphic was historically not recognised.
She states that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century.
At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree.
In other words, there was a belief in a gradation of physical forms, or a spectrum.
Scholars such as Helen King, Joan Cadden, and Michael Stolberg have criticized this interpretation of history.
Cadden notes that the "one-sex" model was disputed even in ancient and medieval medicine, and Stolberg points out that already in the sixteenth century, medicine had begun to move towards a two-sex model.
In addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of biology and gender studies, describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality.
She starts her argument with an example of the birth of an intersexual individual and maintains "our conceptions of the nature of gender difference shape, even as they reflect, the ways we structure our social system and polity; they also shape and reflect our understanding of our physical bodies." Then she adds how gender assumptions affects the scientific study of sex by presenting the research of intersexuals by John Money et al., and she concludes that "they never questioned the fundamental assumption that there are only two sexes, because their goal in studying intersexuals was to find out more about 'normal' development." She also mentions the language the doctors use when they talk with the parents of the intersexuals.
After describing how the doctors inform parents about the intersexuality, she asserts that because the doctors believe that the intersexuals are actually male or female, they tell the parents of the intersexuals that it will take a little bit more time for the doctors to determine whether the infant is a boy or a girl.
That is to say, the doctors' behavior is formulated by the cultural gender assumption that there are only two sexes.
Lastly, she maintains that the differences in the ways in which the medical professionals in different regions treat intersexual people also give us a good example of how sex is socially constructed.
In her Sexing the body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality, she introduces the following example: A group of physicians from Saudi Arabia recently reported on several cases of XX intersex children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetically inherited malfunction of the enzymes that aid in making steroid hormones. [...] In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls.
Saudi doctors trained in this European tradition recommended such a course of action to the Saudi parents of CAH XX children.
A number of parents, however, refused to accept the recommendation that their child, initially identified as a son, be raised instead as a daughter.
Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child. [...] This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with [...] the preference for male offspring.
Thus it is evident that culture can play a part in assigning gender, particularly in relation to intersex children.
The article Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years.
The researchers based their work on ideas previously mentioned by Hill and Lynch in their gender intensification hypothesis in that signals and messages from parents determine and affect their children's gender role identities.
This hypothesis argues that parents affect their children's gender role identities and that different interactions spent with either parents will affect gender intensification.
Priess and among other's study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated "that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors." However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.
Authors of "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations", Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll, argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through "social relational contexts." Ridgeway and Correll define "social relational contexts" as "any situation in which individuals define themselves in relation to others in order to act." They also point out that in addition to social relational contexts, cultural beliefs plays a role in the gender system.
The coauthors argue that daily people are forced to acknowledge and interact with others in ways that are related to gender.
Every day, individuals are interacting with each other and comply with society's set standard of hegemonic beliefs, which includes gender roles.
They state that society's hegemonic cultural beliefs sets the rules which in turn create the setting for which social relational contexts are to take place.
Ridgeway and Correll then shift their topic towards sex categorization.
The authors define sex categorization as "the sociocognitive process by which we label another as male or female."
The failure of an attempt to raise David Reimer from infancy through adolescence as a girl after his genitals were accidentally mutilated is cited as disproving the theory that gender identity is determined solely by parenting.
Reimer's case is used by organizations such as the Intersex Society of North America to caution against needlessly modifying the genitals of unconsenting minors.
Between the 1960s and 2000, many other male newborns and infants were surgically and socially reassigned as females if they were born with malformed penises, or if they lost their penises in accidents.
At the time, surgical reconstruction of the vagina was more advanced than reconstruction of the penis, leading many doctors and psychologists, including John Money who oversaw Reimer's case, to recommend sex reassignment based on the idea that these patients would be happiest living as women with functioning genitalia.  Available evidence indicates that in such instances, parents were deeply committed to raising these children as girls and in as gender-typical a manner as possible.: 72–73  A 2005 review of these cases found that about half of natal males reassigned female lived as women in adulthood, including those who knew their medical history, suggesting that gender assignment and related social factors has a major, though not determinative, influence on eventual gender identity.
In 2015, the American Academy of Pediatrics released a webinar series on gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender, etc.
In the first lecture Dr.
Sherer explains that parents' influence (through punishment and reward of behavior) can influence gender expression but not gender identity.
She cites a Smithsonian article that shows a photo of a 3 year old President Franklin D. Roosevelt with long hair, wearing a dress.
Children as old as 6 wore gender neutral clothing, consisting of white dresses, until the 1940s.
In 1927, Time magazine printed a chart showing sex-appropriate colors, which consisted of pink for boys and blue for girls.
Dr.
Sherer argued that kids will modify their gender expression to seek reward from their parents and society but this will not affect their gender identity (their internal sense of self).
Biological factors and views
See also: Sexual differentiation and Sexual differentiation in humans
Some gendered behavior is influenced by prenatal and early life androgen exposure.
This includes, for example, gender normative play, self-identification with a gender, and tendency to engage in aggressive behavior.
Males of most mammals, including humans, exhibit more rough and tumble play behavior, which is influenced by maternal testosterone levels.
These levels may also influence sexuality, with non-heterosexual persons exhibiting sex atypical behavior in childhood.
The biology of gender became the subject of an expanding number of studies over the course of the late 20th century.
One of the earliest areas of interest was what became known as "gender identity disorder" (GID) and which is now also described as gender dysphoria.
Studies in this, and related areas, inform the following summary of the subject by John Money.
He stated:
The term "gender role" appeared in print first in 1955. The term gender identity was used in a press release, 21 November 1966, to announce the new clinic for transsexuals at The Johns Hopkins Hospital.
It was disseminated in the media worldwide, and soon entered the vernacular.
The definitions of gender and gender identity vary on a doctrinal basis.
In popularized and scientifically debased usage, sex is what you are biologically; gender is what you become socially; gender identity is your own sense or conviction of maleness or femaleness; and gender role is the cultural stereotype of what is masculine and feminine.
Causality with respect to gender identity disorder is sub-divisible into genetic, prenatal hormonal, postnatal social, and post-pubertal hormonal determinants, but there is, as yet, no comprehensive and detailed theory of causality.
Gender coding in the brain is bipolar.
In gender identity disorder, there is discordance between the natal sex of one's external genitalia and the brain coding of one's gender as masculine or feminine.
Although causation from the biological—genetic and hormonal—to the behavioral has been broadly demonstrated and accepted, Money is careful to also note that understanding of the causal chains from biology to behavior in sex and gender issues is very far from complete.
There are studies concerning women who have a condition called congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which leads to the overproduction of the masculine sex hormone, androgen.
These women usually have ordinary female appearances (though nearly all girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have corrective surgery performed on their genitals). However, despite taking hormone-balancing medication given to them at birth, these females are statistically more likely to be interested in activities traditionally linked to males than female activities.
Psychology professor and CAH researcher Dr.
Sheri Berenbaum attributes these differences to an exposure of higher levels of male sex hormones in utero.
Non-human animals
According to biologist Michael J. Ryan, gender identity is a concept exclusively applied to humans.
Also, in a letter Ellen Ketterson writes, "[w]hen asked, my colleagues in the Department of Gender Studies agreed that the term gender could be properly applied only to humans, because it involves one's self-concept as man or woman.
Sex is a biological concept; gender is a human social and cultural concept." However, Poiani (2010) notes that the question of whether behavioural similarities across species can be associated with gender identity or not is "an issue of no easy resolution", and suggests that mental states, such as gender identity, are more accessible in humans than other species due to their capacity for language.
Polani suggests that the potential number of species with members possessing a gender identity must be limited due to the requirement for self-consciousness.
Jacques Balthazart suggests that "there is no animal model for studying sexual identity.
It is impossible to ask an animal, whatever its species, to what sex it belongs." He notes that "this would imply that the animal is aware of its own body and sex, which is far from proved", despite recent research demonstrating sophisticated cognitive skills among non-human primates and other species.
Hird (2006) has also stated that whether or not non-human animals consider themselves to be feminine or masculine is a "difficult, if not impossible, question to answer", as this would require "judgements about what constitutes femininity or masculinity in any given species". Nonetheless, she asserts that "non-human animals do experience femininity and masculinity to the extent that any given species' behaviour is gender segregated."
Despite this, Poiani and Dixson emphasise the applicability of the concept of gender role to non-human animals such as rodents throughout their book.
The concept of gender role has also been applied to non-human primates such as rhesus monkeys.
Gender studies
Main article: Gender studies
Gender studies is a field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender, gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis.
This field includes Women's studies (concerning women, feminity, their gender roles and politics, and feminism), Men's studies (concerning men, masculinity, their gender roles, and politics), and LGBT studies.
Sometimes Gender studies is offered together with Study of Sexuality.
These disciplines study gender and sexuality in the fields of literature and language, history, political science, sociology, anthropology, cinema and media studies, human development, law, and medicine.
It also analyses race, ethnicity, location, nationality, and disability.
Psychology and sociology
See also: Sex and psychology
Many of the more complicated human behaviors are influenced by both innate factors and by environmental ones, which include everything from genes, gene expression, and body chemistry, through diet and social pressures.
A large area of research in behavioral psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behavior and various possible antecedents such as genetics, gene regulation, access to food and vitamins, culture, gender, hormones, physical and social development, and physical and social environments.
A core research area within sociology is the way human behavior operates on itself, in other words, how the behavior of one group or individual influences the behavior of other groups or individuals.
Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.
Spain's desperate situation when invaded by Napoleon enabled Agustina de Aragón to break into a closely guarded male preserve and become the only female professional officer in the Spanish Army of her time (and long afterwards).
Social theorists have sought to determine the specific nature of gender in relation to biological sex and sexuality, with the result being that culturally established gender and sex have become interchangeable identifications that signify the allocation of a specific 'biological' sex within a categorical gender.
The second wave feminist view that gender is socially constructed and hegemonic in all societies, remains current in some literary theoretical circles, Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz publishing new perspectives as recently as 2008.
As the child grows, "...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other," which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender.
There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual's opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority, and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge.
Adults who do not perform these ascribed roles are perceived from this perspective as deviant and improperly socialized.
Some believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender.
Joan Acker believes gendering occurs in at least five different interacting social processes:
The construction of divisions along the lines of gender, such as those produced by labor, power, family, the state, even allowed behaviors and locations in physical space
The construction of symbols and images such as language, ideology, dress and the media, that explain, express and reinforce, or sometimes oppose, those divisions
Interactions between men and women, women and women and men and men that involve any form of dominance and submission.
Conversational theorists, for example, have studied the way that interruptions, turn taking and the setting of topics re-create gender inequality in the flow of ordinary talk
The way that the preceding three processes help to produce gendered components of individual identity, i.e., the way they create and maintain an image of a gendered self
Gender is implicated in the fundamental, ongoing processes of creating and conceptualising social structures.
Looking at gender through a Foucauldian lens, gender is transfigured into a vehicle for the social division of power.
Gender difference is merely a construct of society used to enforce the distinctions made between what is assumed to be female and male, and allow for the domination of masculinity over femininity through the attribution of specific gender-related characteristics. "The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature... far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities."
Gender conventions play a large role in attributing masculine and feminine characteristics to a fundamental biological sex.
Socio-cultural codes and conventions, the rules by which society functions, and which are both a creation of society as well as a constituting element of it, determine the allocation of these specific traits to the sexes.
These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference.
It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms.
Individuals are therefore socialized through their receipt of society's expectations of 'acceptable' gender attributes that are flaunted within institutions such as the family, the state and the media.
Such a notion of 'gender' then becomes naturalized into a person's sense of self or identity, effectively imposing a gendered social category upon a sexed body.
The conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler's theories of gender performativity.
Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does.
It follows then, that if gender is acted out in a repetitive manner it is in fact re-creating and effectively embedding itself within the social consciousness.
Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses masculinities and femininities in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.
The difference between the sociological and popular definitions of gender involve a different dichotomy and focus.
For example, the sociological approach to "gender" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay). However the popular sexual self-conception approach (self-conception: gay versus straight) focuses on the different self-conceptions and social conceptions of those who are gay/straight, in comparison with those who are straight (disregarding what might be vastly differing economic and power positions between female and male groups in each category). There is then, in relation to definition of and approaches to "gender", a tension between historic feminist sociology and contemporary homosexual sociology.
Legal status
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A person's sex as male or female has legal significance—sex is indicated on government documents, and laws provide differently for men and women.
Many pension systems have different retirement ages for men or women.
Marriage is usually only available to opposite-sex couples; in some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.
The question then arises as to what legally determines whether someone is female or male.
In most cases this can appear obvious, but the matter is complicated for intersex or transgender people.
Different jurisdictions have adopted different answers to this question.
Almost all countries permit changes of legal gender status in cases of intersexualism, when the gender assignment made at birth is determined upon further investigation to be biologically inaccurate—technically, however, this is not a change of status per se.
Rather, it is recognition of a status deemed to exist but unknown from birth.
Increasingly, jurisdictions also provide a procedure for changes of legal gender for transgender people.
Gender assignment, when there are indications that genital sex might not be decisive in a particular case, is normally not defined by a single definition, but by a combination of conditions, including chromosomes and gonads.
Thus, for example, in many jurisdictions a person with XY chromosomes but female gonads could be recognized as female at birth.
The ability to change legal gender for transgender people in particular has given rise to the phenomena in some jurisdictions of the same person having different genders for the purposes of different areas of the law.
For example, in Australia prior to the Re Kevin decisions, transsexual people could be recognized as having the genders they identified with under many areas of the law, including social security law, but not for the law of marriage.
Thus, for a period, it was possible for the same person to have two different genders under Australian law.
It is also possible in federal systems for the same person to have one gender under state or provincial law and a different gender under federal law.
Intersex people
Main article: Legal recognition of intersex people
For intersex people, who according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, "do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies", access to any form of identification document with a gender marker may be an issue.
For other intersex people, there may be issues in securing the same rights as other individuals assigned male or female; other intersex people may seek non-binary gender recognition.
Non-binary and third genders
Main article: Legal recognition of non-binary gender
Some countries now legally recognize non-binary or third genders, including Canada, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, India and Pakistan.
In the United States, Oregon was the first state to legally recognize non-binary gender in 2017, and was followed by California and the District of Columbia.
Gender and society
Languages
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Gender" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Grammatical gender is a property of some languages in which every noun is assigned a gender, often with no direct relation to its meaning.
For example, the word for "girl" is muchacha (grammatically feminine) in Spanish, Mädchen (grammatically neuter) in German, and cailín (grammatically masculine) in Irish.
The term "grammatical gender" is often applied to more complex noun class systems.
This is especially true when a noun class system includes masculine and feminine as well as some other non-gender features like animate, edible, manufactured, and so forth.
An example of the latter is found in the Dyirbal language.
Other gender systems exist with no distinction between masculine and feminine; examples include a distinction between animate and inanimate things, which is common to, amongst others, Ojibwe, Basque and Hittite; and systems distinguishing between people (whether human or divine) and everything else, which are found in the Dravidian languages and Sumerian.
A sample of the World Atlas of Language Structures by Greville G Corbett  found that fewer than half of the 258 languages sampled have any system of grammatical gender.
Of the remaining languages that feature grammatical gender, over half have more than the minimum requirement of two genders.
Grammatical gender may be based on biological sex (which is the most common basis for grammatical gender), animacy, or other features, and may be based on a combination of these classes.
One of the four genders of the Dyirbal language consists mainly of fruit and vegetables.
Languages of the Niger-Congo language family can have as many as twenty genders, including plants, places, and shapes.
Many languages include terms that are used asymmetrically in reference to men and women.
Concern that current language may be biased in favor of men has led some authors in recent times to argue for the use of a more gender-neutral vocabulary in English and other languages.
Several languages attest the use of different vocabulary by men and women, to differing degrees.
See, for instance, Gender differences in Japanese.
The oldest documented language, Sumerian, records a distinctive sub-language only used by female speakers.
Conversely, many Indigenous Australian languages have distinctive registers with a limited lexicon used by men in the presence of their mothers-in-law (see Avoidance speech). As well, quite a few sign languages have a gendered distinction due to boarding schools segregated by gender, such as Irish Sign Language.
Several languages such as Persian or Hungarian are gender-neutral.
In Persian the same word is used in reference to men and women.
Verbs, adjectives and nouns are not gendered. (See Gender-neutrality in genderless languages).
Several languages employ different ways to refer to people where there are three or more genders, such as Navajo or Ojibwe.
Science
Historically, science has been portrayed as a masculine pursuit in which women have faced significant barriers to participate.
Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science, nursing, and child psychology.
Women were also typically given tedious, low-paying jobs and denied opportunities for career advancement.
This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect.
Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious "hard science" fields such as physics, and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions, a situation global initiatives such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 are trying to rectify.
See also: Women in science
Religion
Further information: Gender and religion
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This topic includes internal and external religious issues such as gender of God and deities creation myths about human gender, roles and rights (for instance, leadership roles especially ordination of women, sex segregation, gender equality, marriage, abortion, homosexuality).
According to Kati Niemelä of the Church Research Institute, women are universally more religious than men.
They believe that the difference in religiosity between genders is due to biological differences, for instance usually people seeking security in life are more religious, and as men are considered to be greater risk takers than women, they are less religious.
Although religious fanaticism is more often seen in men than women.
Yin and yang
In Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively.
The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations.
Yin is female and yang is male.
They fit together as two parts of a whole.
The male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective.
Male toughness was balanced by female gentleness, male action and initiative by female endurance and need for completion, and male leadership by female supportiveness.
In Judaism, God is traditionally described in the masculine, but in the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah, the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence.
However, Judaism traditionally holds that God is completely non-corporeal, and thus neither male nor female.
Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism.
As well, traditional Jewish culture dictates that there are six genders.
In Christianity, God is traditionally described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms.
On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both men and women perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei.
In the New Testament, Jesus at several times mentions the Holy Spirit with the masculine pronoun i.e.
John 15:26 among other verses.
Hence, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (i.e.
Trinity) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contended.
In Hinduism, one of the several forms of the Hindu God Shiva, is Ardhanarishwar (literally half-female God). Here Shiva manifests himself so that the left half is Female and the right half is Male.
The left represents Shakti (energy, power) in the form of Goddess Parvati (otherwise his consort) and the right half Shiva.
Whereas Parvati is the cause of arousal of Kama (desires), Shiva is the killer.
Shiva is pervaded by the power of Parvati and Parvati is pervaded by the power of Shiva.
While the stone images may seem to represent a half-male and half-female God, the true symbolic representation is of a being the whole of which is Shiva and the whole of which is Shakti at the same time.
It is a 3-D representation of only shakti from one angle and only Shiva from the other.
Shiva and Shakti are hence the same being representing a collective of Jnana (knowledge) and Kriya (activity).
Adi Shankaracharya, the founder of non-dualistic philosophy (Advaita–"not two") in Hindu thought says in his "Saundaryalahari"—Shivah Shaktayaa yukto yadi bhavati shaktah prabhavitum na che devum devona khalu kushalah spanditam api " i.e., It is only when Shiva is united with Shakti that He acquires the capability of becoming the Lord of the Universe.
In the absence of Shakti, He is not even able to stir.
In fact, the term "Shiva" originated from "Shva," which implies a dead body.
It is only through his inherent shakti that Shiva realizes his true nature.
This mythology projects the inherent view in ancient Hinduism, that each human carries within himself both female and male components, which are forces rather than sexes, and it is the harmony between the creative and the annihilative, the strong and the soft, the proactive and the passive, that makes a true person.
Such thought, leave alone entail gender equality, in fact obliterates any material distinction between the male and female altogether.
This may explain why in ancient India we find evidence of homosexuality, bisexuality, androgyny, multiple sex partners and open representation of sexual pleasures in artworks like the Khajuraho temples, being accepted within prevalent social frameworks.
Poverty
Main article: Feminization of poverty
Gender inequality is most common in women dealing with poverty.
Many women must shoulder all the responsibility of the household because they must take care of the family.
Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking.
Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women.
Approximately 75% of world's women are unable to obtain bank loans because they have unstable jobs.
It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth.
In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in D+C Development and Cooperation.
In 1978 Diana M. Pearce coined the term feminization of poverty to describe the problem of women having higher rates of poverty.
Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income.
Resource allocation is typically gender-biased within households, and continue on a higher level regarding state institutions.
A bar graph comparing poverty differences based on age and gender in 2012.
Gender and Development (GAD) is a holistic approach to give aid to countries where gender inequality has a great effect of not improving the social and economic development.
It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.
The largest discrimination study of the transgender community, conducted in 2013, found that the transgender community is four times more likely to live in extreme poverty (income of less than $10,000 a year) than people who are cisgender.
General strain theory
According to general strain theory, studies suggest that gender differences between individuals can lead to externalized anger that may result in violent outbursts.
These violent actions related to gender inequality can be measured by comparing violent neighborhoods to non-violent neighborhoods.
By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it's possible to analyze gender roles.
The strain in the general strain theory is the removal of a positive stimulus and or the introduction of a negative stimulus, which would create a negative effect (strain) within individual, which is either inner-directed (depression/guilt) or outer-directed (anger/frustration), which depends on whether the individual blames themselves or their environment.
Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically.
Males are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger.
Females typically internalize their angers and tend to blame themselves instead.
Female internalized anger is accompanied by feelings of guilt, fear, anxiety and depression.
Women view anger as a sign that they've somehow lost control, and thus worry that this anger may lead them to harm others and/or damage relationships.
On the other end of the spectrum, men are less concerned with damaging relationships and more focused on using anger as a means of affirming their masculinity.
According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.
Economic development
Gender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues.
This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation, but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.
Climate change
Main article: Climate change and gender
Gender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science.
Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender-differentiated consequences of climate change, as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change.
Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it.
These differences, however, are mostly not due to biological or physical differences, but are formed by the social, institutional and legal context.
Subsequently, vulnerability is less an intrinsic feature of women and girls but rather a product of their marginalization.
Roehr notes that, while the United Nations officially committed to gender mainstreaming, in practice gender equality is not reached in the context of climate change policies.
This is reflected in the fact that discourses of and negotiations over climate change are mostly dominated by men.
Some feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in 'masculine' principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions.
This perception of climate change hides subjectivity and power relations that actually condition climate-change policy and science, leading to a phenomenon that Tuana terms 'epistemic injustice'.
Similarly, MacGregor attests that by framing climate change as an issue of 'hard' natural scientific conduct and natural security, it is kept within the traditional domains of hegemonic masculinity.
Social media
Gender roles and stereotypes have slowly started to change in society within the past few decades.
These changes occur mostly in communication, but more specifically during social interactions.
The ways in which people communicate and socialize have also started to change due to advancements in technology.
One of the biggest reasons for this change is the growth of social media.
Over the past few years, the use of social media globally has started to rise.
This rise can be attributed to the abundance of technology available for use among youth.
Recent studies suggest that men and women value and use technology differently.
Forbes published an article in 2010 that reported 57% of Facebook users are women, which was attributed to the fact that women are more active on social media.
On average women have 8% more friends and account for 62% of posts that are shared via Facebook.
Another study in 2010 found that in most Western cultures, women spend more time sending text messages compared to men as well as spending more time on social networking sites as a way to communicate with friends and family.
Hayat, Lesser and Samuel-Azran (2017) have further shown that while men write more posts in social networking sites, women commented on other people's posts more often.
They further showed that women's posts enjoyed higher popularity than men's posts.
Social media is more than just the communication of words.
With social media increasing in popularity, pictures have come to play a large role in how many people communicate.
Research conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention.
Moreover, 58% of women and 45% of men don't look into the camera, which creates an illusion of withdrawal.
Other factors to be considered are the poses in pictures such as women lying down in subordinate positions or even touching themselves in childlike ways.
Research has found that images shared online through social networking sites help establish personal self-reflections that individuals want to share with the world.
According to recent research, gender plays a strong role in structuring our social lives, especially since society assigns and creates "male" and "female" categories.
Individuals in society might be able to learn the similarities between gender rather than the differences.
Social media helps create more equality, because every individual is able to self-express however they like.
Every individual also has the right to express their opinion, even though some might disagree, but it still gives each gender an equal amount of power to be heard.
Young adults in the U.S. frequently use social networking sites as a way to connect and communicate with one another, as well as to satisfy their curiosity.
Adolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances.
Furthermore, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate.
Social networking sites have also given individuals access to create a space where they feel more comfortable about their sexuality.
Recent research has indicated that social media is becoming a stronger part of younger individuals' media culture, as more intimate stories are being told via social media and are being intertwined with gender, sexuality, and relationships.
Teens are avid internet and social media users in the United States.
Research has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults.
Of these teens, 80% have profiles on social media sites, as compared to only 64% of the online population aged 30 and older.
According to a study conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 11-to-18-year-olds spend on average over one and a half hours a day using a computer and 27 minutes per day visiting social network sites, i.e. the latter accounts for about one fourth of their daily computer use.
Teen girls and boys differ in what they post in their online profiles.
Studies have shown that female users tend to post more "cute" pictures, while male participants were more likely to post pictures of themselves in activities.
Women in the U.S. also tend to post more pictures of friends, while men tend to post more about sports and humorous links.
The study also found that males would post more alcohol and sexual references.
The roles were reversed however, when looking at a teenage dating site: women made sexual references significantly more often than males.
Boys share more personal information, such as their hometown and phone number, while girls are more conservative about the personal information they allow to go public on these social networking sites.
Boys, meanwhile, are more likely to orient towards technology, sports, and humor in the information they post to their profile.
Social media goes beyond the role of helping individuals express themselves, as it has grown to help individuals create relationships, particularly romantic relationships.
A large number of social media users have found it easier to create relationships in a less direct approach, compared to a traditional approach of awkwardly asking for someone's number.
Social media plays a big role when it comes to communication between genders.
Therefore, it's important to understand how gender stereotypes develop during online interactions.
Research in the 1990s suggested that different genders display certain traits, such as being active, attractive, dependent, dominant, independent, sentimental, sexy, and submissive, in online interaction.
Even though these traits continue to be displayed through gender stereotypes, recent studies show that this isn't necessarily the case any more.
See also
Androcentrism
Anti-gender movement
Biological determinism
Coloniality of gender
Gender and politics
Gender bender
Gender paradox
Gynocentrism
Postgenderism
Sexism
Sex ratio
References
a b c d Udry, J. Richard (November 1994). "The Nature of Gender". Demography. 31 (4): 561–573. doi:10.2307/2061790. JSTOR 2061790. PMID 7890091. S2CID 38476067.
a b c d e f g h Haig, David (April 2004). "The Inexorable Rise of Gender and the Decline of Sex: Social Change in Academic Titles, 1945–2001" (PDF). Archives of Sexual Behavior. 33 (2): 87–96. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.359.9143. doi:10.1023/B:ASEB.0000014323.56281.0d.
PMID 15146141. S2CID 7005542. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2012.
a b c "What do we mean by "sex" and "gender"?". World Health Organization.
Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
Sigelman, Carol K.; Rider, Elizabeth A. (14 March 2017). Life-Span Human Development.
Cengage Learning. p. 385. ISBN 978-1-337-51606-8. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021.
Maddux, James E.; Winstead, Barbara A. (11 July 2019). Psychopathology: Foundations for a Contemporary Understanding.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-429-64787-1. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021.
a b Kevin L. Nadal, The SAGE Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender (2017, ISBN 1483384276), page 401: "Most cultures currently construct their societies based on the understanding of gender binary—the two gender categorizations (male and female). Such societies divide their population based on biological sex assigned to individuals at birth to begin the process of gender socialization."
Heinemann, Isabel (May 2012). Inventing the Modern American Family: Family Values and Social Change in 20th Century United States.
Campus Verlag. p. 36. ISBN 978-3-593-39640-8. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2021.
MONEY J. Hermaphroditism, gender and precocity in hyperadrenocorticism: psychologic findings.
Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp. 1955 Jun;96(6):253-64. PMID 14378807.
Downing, Lisa (19 December 2014). Fuckology: critical essays on John Money's diagnostic concepts. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-226-18658-0. OCLC 902609808. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2021.
Bentley, Madison (April 1945). "Sanity and Hazard in Childhood". The American Journal of Psychology. 58 (2): 212–246. doi:10.2307/1417846. ISSN 0002-9556. JSTOR 1417846. Retrieved 17 August 2021.
Horley, James; Clarke, Jan (11 July 2016). Experience, Meaning, and Identity in Sexuality: A Psychosocial Theory of Sexual Stability and Change.
Springer. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-137-40096-3. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 17 August 2021.
Witt, Charlotte E. (2011). Feminist metaphysics: explorations in the ontology of sex, gender and identity.
Springer. p. 48. ISBN 978-90-481-3782-4. OCLC 780208834. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 6 September 2021.
Butler, Judith, "Sex and Gender in Simone de Beauvoir's Second Sex" in Yale French Studies, No. 72 (1986), pp. 35–49.
Kimmel, Michael S. (2017). The gendered society (Sixth ed.). New York. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-19-026031-6. OCLC 949553050.
"GENDER". Social Science Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 2 February 2011. Retrieved 20 March 2015.
Lindsey, Linda L. (2010). "Ch. 1. The Sociology of gender" (PDF). Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective.
Pearson.
ISBN 978-0-13-244830-7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2015.
Paludi, Michele Antoinette (2008). The Psychology of Women at Work: Challenges and Solutions for Our Female Workforce.
ABC-CLIO. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-275-99677-2. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021.
O'Halloran, Kerry (2020). Sexual orientation, gender identity and international human rights law: common law perspectives.
London. pp. 22–28, 328–329. ISBN 978-0-429-44265-0. OCLC 1110674742.
"Gender: definitions". 
"Guideline for the Study and Evaluation of Gender Differences in the Clinical Evaluation of Drugs" (PDF). Food and Drug Administration.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2014.
"Evaluation of Sex-Specific Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies – Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff". U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 26 February 2019.
Yudkin, M. (1978). "Transsexualism and women: A critical perspective". Feminist Studies. 4 (3): 97–106. doi:10.2307/3177542. JSTOR 3177542.
Ringe, Donald A. (2006). From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-1-4294-9182-2. OCLC 170965273. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 16 October 2021.
'Gen' Archived 19 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Your Dictionary.com
Skeat, Walter William (1882). An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 230.
a b Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction". Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy.
Oxford University Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 9780195380828. For as it turns out, what we call gender is a fairly recent concept.
It's not that people in Ancient Greece and Rome didn't talk and think and argue about the categories of male and female, masculine and feminine and the nature and extent of sexual difference.
They did in [ways] both similar to and very different from our own.
The problem is that they didn't have the concept of gender that has grown so influential in the humanities and the social sciences over the past four decades.
Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction". Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy.
Oxford University Press. pp. 3–4. ISBN 9780195380828. The concept of gender, as I've just said, is recent.
So what is it and where does it come from? Simone de Beauvoir famously wrote: 'one is not born, but rather becomes, woman'...But the term 'gender', which had long been associated with grammar, only started to move towards what she was describing in the later 1950s and 1960s.
Render, Meredith. (2006) "Misogyny, Androgyny, and Sexual Harassment: Sex Discrimination in a Gender-Deconstructed World". Harvard Journal of Law & Gender.
Vol. 29(1) (Winter). pp. 99–150.
Greenberg, Julie A (1999). "Defining Male and Female: Intersexuality and the Collision Between Law and Biology". Arizona Law Review. 41: 265.
J.E.B. v.
Ala. ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419, 1436 n.1 (1994)
Aristotle (2004) [1st pub.
Modern Library NY, 1954]. Rhetoric.
Translated by Roberts, William Rhys.
Mineola, NY: Dover.
ISBN 978-0-486-43793-4. OCLC 55616891. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2015. A fourth rule is to observe Protagoras' classification of nouns into male, female and inanimate.
Fowler's Modern English Usage, 1926: p. 211.
Money, John; Hampson, Joan G; Hampson, John (October 1955). "An Examination of Some Basic Sexual Concepts: The Evidence of Human Hermaphroditism". Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 97 (4): 301–19. PMID 13260820. By the term, gender role, we mean all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman, respectively.
It includes, but is not restricted to sexuality in the sense of eroticism.
Gender role is appraised in relation to the following: general mannerisms, deportment and demeanor, play preferences and recreational interests; spontaneous topics of talk in unprompted conversation and casual comment; content of dreams, daydreams, and fantasies; replies to oblique inquiries and projective tests; evidence of erotic practices and, finally, the person's own replies to direct inquiry.
"gender, n." Oxford English Dictionary Online.
Oxford English Dictionary. p. Sense 3(b). Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017.
Usage note: Gender, Archived 21 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, (2000).
Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008). "Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender." Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Stanford University.
a b c Butler (1990)
Snow, D.A. and Oliver, P.E. (1995). "Social Movements and Collective Behavior: Social Psychological Dimensions and Considerations", pp. 571–600 in Karen Cook, Gary A. Fine, and James S.House (eds.) Sociological Perspectives on Social Psychology.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Taifel, H. & Turner, J.C. (1986). "The social identity of intergroup relations", pp. 7–24 in S. Worchel & W.G. Austin (eds.) The psychology of intergroup relations.
Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
ISBN 0-8185-0278-9.
Terry, D.J.; Hogg, M.A. (1996). "Group norms and the attitude-behavior relationship: A role for group identification". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 22 (8): 776–793. doi:10.1177/0146167296228002. S2CID 145426706.
Pathak, Sunita, and Pathak, Surendra "Gender and the MDGs with Reference to Women as Human" Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine.
Academia.edu.
Galdas, P. M.; Johnson, J. L.; Percy, M.E.; Ratner, P.A. (2010). "Help seeking for cardiac symptoms: Beyond the masculine–feminine binary". Social Science & Medicine. 71 (1): 18–24. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.03.006. PMC 5142841. PMID 20398989.
a b Warnecke, T. (2013). "Entrepreneurship and Gender: An Institutional Perspective". Journal of Economic Issues. 47 (2): 455–464. doi:10.2753/JEI0021-3624470219. S2CID 153502466.
Spade, J., Valentine, C. (2011). The kaleidoscope of gender: prisms, patterns, and possibilities.
Pine Forge Press. 3rd edition
Tong, Rosemarie (2009). Feminist thought: a more comprehensive introduction / Rosemarie Tong.Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press ISBN 0-8133-4375-5.
Vigo, Julian. 'The Body in Gender Discourse: The Fragmentary Space of the Feminine.' La femme et l'écriture.
Meknès, Maroc, 1996.
Bornstein, Kate (1995). Gender Outlaw – On Men, Women and the rest of us, Vintage, ISBN 0-679-75701-5 pp. 51–52
"What Is Fluid?". WebMD. Reviewed by Dan Brennan. 28 June 2021. Retrieved 23 June 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Zheng, Lily (20 November 2020). "Transgender, Gender-Fluid, Nonbinary, and Gender-Nonconforming Employees Deserve Better Policies". Harvard Business Review.
ISSN 0017-8012. Retrieved 23 June 2022.
a b Birke, Lynda (2001). "Chapter 24, In Pursuit of Difference." The Gender and Science Reader.
New York: Routledge, pp. 309–22.
Ehrensaft, Diane (25 May 2017). "Gender nonconforming youth: current perspectives". Adolescent Health, Medicine and Therapeutics. 8: 57–67. doi:10.2147/ahmt.s110859. ISSN 1179-318X. PMC 5448699. PMID 28579848.
a b Money, J (1955). "Hermaphroditism, gender and precocity in hyperadrenocorticism: Psychologic findings". Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital. 96 (6): 253–264. PMID 14378807.
Laurie, Timothy (2014). "The Ethics of Nobody I Know: Gender and the Politics of Description". Qualitative Research Journal. 14 (1): 64–78. doi:10.1108/qrj-03-2014-0011. hdl:10453/44221. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
Maria Llorente, Culture, Heritage, and Diversity in Older Adult Mental Health Care (2018, ISBN 1615372059), page 184: "Historically, in many, if not most, cultures, gender traditionally has been conceived as binary, but the modern and preferred understanding is that gender actually occurs on a spectrum."
Marie L. Miville, Angela D. Ferguson, Handbook of Race-Ethnicity and Gender in Psychology (2014, ISBN 1461488605), page 47: "In Western societies, as in many regions of the world, gender has been historically conceptualized and constructed as a binary (being either "male" or "female") largely determined by both biological (genetic and hormonal) and social cognitive (social, cultural reinforcement, and modeling of gendered behaviour)."
"Hinaleimoana Wong-Kalu – TedxMaui". 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 May 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
"Intersections: Transgender, Queens, Mahu, Whatever': An Oral History from Hawai'i". Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
a b Treuer, Anton (2011). "Women and Gender". The Assassination of Hole in the Day.
Borealis Books.
ISBN 9780873518017. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 17 October 2016.
Gilbert Herdt, ed. (1996). Third Sex Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History.
ISBN 978-0-942299-82-3. OCLC 35293440.
Kehoe, Alice B. (2002). "Appropriate Terms". SAA Bulletin.
Society for American Archaeology 16(2), UC-Santa Barbara.
ISSN 0741-5672. Archived from the original on 5 November 2004. Retrieved 1 May 2019. At the conferences that produced the book, Two-Spirited People, I heard several First Nations people describe themselves as very much unitary, neither "male" nor "female," much less a pair in one body.
Nor did they report an assumption of duality within one body as a common concept within reservation communities; rather, people confided dismay at the Western proclivity for dichotomies.
Outside Indo-European-speaking societies, "gender" would not be relevant to the social personae glosses "men" and "women," and "third gender" likely would be meaningless.
The unsavory word "berdache" certainly ought to be ditched (Jacobs et al. 1997:3–5), but the urban American neologism "two-spirit" can be misleading.
Nanda, Serena (1998). Neither Man Nor Woman: The Hijras of India.
Wadsworth Publishing.
ISBN 0-534-50903-7
Reddy, Gayatri (2005). With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra Identity in South India. (Worlds of Desire: The Chicago Series on Sexuality, Gender, and Culture), University of Chicago Press (1 July 2005). ISBN 0-226-70756-3
"A lifestyle distinct: the Muxe of Mexico," Archived 24 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine New York Times, 6 December 2008.
Graham, Sharyn (April–June 2001) Sulawesi's Fifth Gender Archived 18 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
Inside Indonesia.
McGee, R. Jon and Richard L. Warms (2011). Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History.
New York, McGraw Hill.
Jack Harrison; Jaime Grant; Jody L. Herman (2011–2012). "A Gender Not Listed Here: Genderqueers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF). LGBTQ Policy Journal. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2017.
Palan, K. (2001). "Gender Identity in Consumer Research: A Literature Review and Research Agenda" (PDF). Academy of Marketing Science Review. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2012.
Twenge, Jean M. (1997). "Changes in masculine and feminine traits over time: A meta-analysis". Sex Roles. 36 (5–6): 305–325. doi:10.1007/BF02766650. S2CID 144858334.
Anne Fausto-Sterling (1992) Myths of Gender: Biological Theories about Men and Women.
New York: Basic Books. p. 8 ISBN 0-465-04792-0.
de Beauvoir, Simone (1949) The Second Sex.
Fausto-Sterling (2000) Chapter 3 "Of Gender and Genitals", pp. 44–77
Chafetz, J.S. (1974). Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles.
Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock.
Chafetz, J.S. (1978). Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles.
Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock.
ISBN 978-0-87581-231-1. OCLC 4348310.
Garrett, Stephanie (1992). Gender Archived 11 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Routledge, p. vii ISBN 0-422-60570-0.
Butler (1990) p. 9.
a b Hurst, C. (2007) Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and Consequences. 6th Edition. pp. 131, 139–142
Schwalbe, M. (2005). The Sociologically Examined Life: Pieces of the Conversation Third Edition. pp. 22–23 ISBN 0-07-282579-0
Smith, N. and Stanley, E. (2011). Captive Genders. 1st ed.
Edinburgh: AK Press.
Center for American Progress, (2016). Unjust: How The Broken Criminal Justice System Fails LGBT People.
Washington.
Lydon et al., "Coming Out of Concrete Closets: A Report on Black & Pink's National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey."
Dworkin, Andrea (1995). "My Life as a Writer", pp. 33–34 in Dworkin, Andrea Life and Death: Unapologetic Writings on the Continuing War Against Women.
New York: Free Press.
ISBN 0-7432-3626-2
Hawkesworth, Mary (2005). "Engendering political science: An immodest proposal". Politics & Gender. 1 (1): 141–156. doi:10.1017/s1743923x0523101x.
S2CID 146467636.
Karen, Beckwith (2005). "A Common Language of Gender?". Politics & Gender. 1 (1): 132. doi:10.1017/s1743923x05211017. S2CID 146644541.
White, Linda (1964). Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed.
Oxford Press. pp. 6–7.
White, Linda (1964). Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed.
Oxford Press. pp. 11–12.
Oakley, Ann (1972). Sex, Gender and Society.
London: Temple Smith. p. 16 ISBN 0-85117-020-X.
World Health Organization (2002). "Gender and Reproductive Rights: Working Definitions". Retrieved 15 November 2012.
Birke, Lynda (2001). "In Pursuit of Difference: Scientific Studies of Women and Men," Muriel Lederman and Ingrid Bartsch eds., The Gender and Science Reader, New York: Routledge. p. 320.
Butler (1990) p. 7.
Butler (1990) p. 10.
Butler (1993) p. xi.
Butler (1993) pp. 2–3.
Nicholson, Linda (1994). ""Interpreting Gender". Signs". Journal of Women in Culture and Society. 20 (1): 79–105. doi:10.1086/494955. JSTOR 3174928. S2CID 225085688.
Helen King. 2013. The One-Sex Body on Trial: The Classical and Early Modern Evidence.
Farnham: Ashgate. 978-1-4094-6335-1
Joan Cadden. 1993. Meanings of Sex Difference in the Middle Ages: Medicine, Science, and Culture.
Cambridge University Press.
Michael Stolberg. 2003. "A Woman Down to her Bones.
The Anatomy of Sexual Difference in the Sixteenth and Early Seventeenth Centuries." Isis, 94: 274-299.
Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 45.
Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 46.
a b Fausto-Sterling (2000)
Fausto-Sterling (2000) pp. 58–59.
Priess, Heather A.; Lindberg, Sara M.; Hyde, Janet Shibley (2009). "Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited". Child Development. 80 (5): 1531–1544. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01349.x.
JSTOR 25592088. PMC 4244905. PMID 19765016.
a b Ridgeway, Cecilia L.; Correll, Shelley J. (2004). "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations". Gender. 18 (4): 510–531. doi:10.1177/0891243204265269. JSTOR 4149448. S2CID 8797797.
"David Reimer, subject of 'sex reassignment,' dead at 38". Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
Colapinto J (2001). As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as a Girl.
Harper Perennial.
ISBN 0-06-092959-6. Revised in 2006[page needed]
Intersex Society of North America | A world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgery
a b Meyer-Bahlburg, Heino F. L. (1 August 2005). "Gender Identity Outcome in Female-Raised 46,XY Persons with Penile Agenesis, Cloacal Exstrophy of the Bladder, or Penile Ablation". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 34 (4): 423–438. doi:10.1007/s10508-005-4342-9. ISSN 1573-2800. PMID 16010465. S2CID 34971769.
a b Bailey JM, Vasey PL, Diamond LM, Breedlove SM, Vilain E, Epprecht M (September 2016). "Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science". Psychological Science in the Public Interest. 17 (2): 45–101. doi:10.1177/1529100616637616. PMID 27113562. S2CID 42281410.
"American Academy of Pediatrics, Education, LGBT Health and Wellness". 
"American Academy of Pediatrics Webinar Series - What is Gender?" (PDF). American Academy of Pediatrics. 11 September 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
Dr.
Sherer (15 September 2015). "SOLGBTHW Webinar - What is Gender Terminology and Definitions". American Academy of Pediatrics.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2019.
a b c "When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink?". Smithsonian.
Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2017.
a b c Hayat, Tsahi (Zack); Lesser, Ofrit; Samuel-Azran, Tal (2017). "Gendered discourse patterns on online social networks: A social network analysis perspective". Computers in Human Behavior. 77: 132–139. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.08.041.
a b c Lesser, Ofrit; Hayat, Tsahi (Zack); Elovici, Yuval (2 November 2017). "The role of network setting and gender in online content popularity". Information, Communication & Society. 20 (11): 1607–1624. doi:10.1080/1369118x.2016.1252411. ISSN 1369-118X. S2CID 151946083.
Hines, Melissa; Constantinescu, Mihaela; Spencer, Debra (26 February 2015). "Early androgen exposure and human gender development". Biology of Sex Differences. 6: 3. doi:10.1186/s13293-015-0022-1. ISSN 2042-6410. PMC 4350266. PMID 25745554.
Hines, Melissa (6 February 2017). "Prenatal endocrine influences on sexual orientation and on sexually differentiated childhood behavior". Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 32 (2): 170–182. doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.02.006. ISSN 0091-3022. PMC 3296090. PMID 21333673.
Money, J (1994). "The concept of gender identity disorder in childhood and adolescence after 39 years". Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy. 20 (3): 163–177. doi:10.1080/00926239408403428. PMID 7996589.
Abrams, Michael (June 2007). "The Real Story on Gay Genes: Homing in on the science of homosexuality—and sexuality itself". Discover.
Archived from the original on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2007.
Beattie-Moss, Melissa (8 June 2005). "Are gender differences predetermined?". Penn State University.
Archived from the original on 13 January 2006. Retrieved 30 August 2010.
Ryan, Michael J. (25 June 2019). A Taste for the Beautiful: The Evolution of Attraction.
Princeton University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-691-19139-3. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2021.
KETTERSON, ELLEN D. (2005). "Evolution's Rainbow: Diversity, Gender, and Sexuality in Nature and People". BioScience. 55 (2): 178. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0178:dahg]2.0.co;2. ISSN 0006-3568.
a b Poiani 2010, p. 2.
Poiani, Aldo (2010). Animal homosexuality: a biosocial perspective. A. F. Dixson.
New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-511-78958-8. OCLC 665835558. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2021.
Poiani 2010, p. 36.
Balthazart, Jacques (2012). The Biology of Homosexuality.
Oxford University Press, USA. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-19-983882-0. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2021.
Balthazart 2012.
Hird, Myra J. (2006). "Animal Transex". Australian Feminist Studies. 21 (49): 35–50. doi:10.1080/08164640500470636. ISSN 0816-4649. S2CID 214614711. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021.
Poiani 2010, p. 141,164.
Poiani 2010, p. 20,105,110.
Sex and the brain.
Gillian Einstein.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 2007. pp. 34:"While the exact forms of play that characterize prepubertal male humans and prepubertal male rhesus may not be identical, both of these primates show a clear division of preadolescent activities into gender roles.". ISBN 978-0-262-27224-7. OCLC 181029707. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2021.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Goy, Robert W.; Uno, Hideo; Sholl, Samuel A. (14 April 2020), "Psychological and Anatomical Consequences of Prenatal Exposure to Androgens in Female Rhesus*", Toxicity of Hormones in Perinatal Life, CRC Press, pp. 127–142, doi:10.1201/9780429283116-9, ISBN 9780429283116, S2CID 81167171, archived from the original on 17 February 2022, retrieved 8 September 2021
"Gender Studies". Whitman College.
Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
"About – Center for the Study of Gender and Sexuality (CSGS)". The University of Chicago.
Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
"Department of Gender Studies". Indiana University (IU Bloomington). Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
Healey, J.F. (2003). "Race, Ethnicity, Gender and Class: the Sociology of Group Conflict and Change", Pine Forge Press ISBN 1-4129-1521-X
Landecker, Hannah; Panofsky, Aaron (30 July 2013). "From Social Structure to Gene Regulation, and Back: A Critical Introduction to Environmental Epigenetics for Sociology". Annual Review of Sociology. 39 (1): 333–357. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-071312-145707. ISSN 0360-0572.
England, Paula (May 1998). "The Impact of Feminist Thought on Sociology" (PDF). Contemporary Sociology. 28 (3): 263–268. doi:10.2307/2654137. JSTOR 2654137. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2021.
Little, William (6 November 2014). "Chapter 12. Gender, Sex, and Sexuality". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
a b Mayer, Lawrence S.; McHugh, Paul R. (2016). "Sexuality and Gender: Findings from the Biological, Psychological, and Social Sciences". The New Atlantis (50): 10–143. ISSN 1543-1215. JSTOR 43893424.
Gender Articulated.
Routledge. 1995. ISBN 978-0-415-91399-7. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2008.
Connell, R. (1987) Gender & Power.
Polity Press, Cambridge.
ISBN 0-8047-1430-4.
Ogli, Burxonov Baxodirjon Botirali (2020). "Gender Can Vary Across Related Languages". JournalNX (in Ukrainian). 6 (11): 416–418.
Satz, Debra (2004). "Feminist Perspectives on Reproduction and the Family". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanford University.
Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 6 February 2015.
Lorber, J & Farrell, S (eds.) (1990) The Social Construction of Gender.
Sage, Newbury Park.
ISBN 0-8039-3956-6
Wearing, B (1996). Gender: The Pain and Pleasure of Difference.
Longman, Melbourne ISBN 0-582-86903-X.
Acker, J. (1990). "Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered Organizations" (PDF). Gender & Society. 4 (2): 139–158. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.693.1964. doi:10.1177/089124390004002002. JSTOR 189609. S2CID 40897237. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2015.
Deji, Olanike F. (2012) Gender Concepts and Theories.
Gender and Rural Development.
Berlin: Lit. N..
a b Glover, D and Kaplan, C (2000) Genders Archived 17 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Routledge, New York ISBN 0-415-44243-5, p. xxi.
Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008). "Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.). Stanford University.
Archived from the original on 25 January 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2016.
Lloyd, M. (1999). "Performativity, Parody, Politics". Theory, Culture & Society. 16 (2): 195–213. doi:10.1177/02632769922050476. S2CID 145251297.
Ingraham, Chrys (1994). "The Heterosexual Imaginary: Feminist Sociology and Theories of Gender". Sociological Theory. 12 (2): 203–219. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.470.737. doi:10.2307/201865. JSTOR 201865.
"Free & Equal Campaign Fact Sheet: Intersex" (PDF). United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2016.
Migiro, Katy (5 December 2014). "Kenya takes step toward recognizing intersex people in landmark ruling". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions (June 2016). Promoting and Protecting Human Rights in relation to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Sex Characteristics.
Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions.
ISBN 978-0-9942513-7-4. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2016.
a b c d Berger, Miriam (15 December 2019). "A Guide to How Gender-Neutral Language is Developing Around the World". The Washington Post.
Archived from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
Levin, Sam (15 June 2017). "'Huge validation': Oregon becomes first state to allow official third gender option". The Guardian.
Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2019.
"Fact Sheet - California's Gender Recognition Act". Transgender Law Center.
Archived from the original on 25 December 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021.
Siegel, Rachel (21 June 2017). "New gender-neutral identifiers on IDs signal to nonbinary D.C. residents that they belong". The Washington Post.
Archived from the original on 8 April 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2021.
a b The expression of gender.
Greville G. Corbett.
Berlin. 2014. p. 124. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
The expression of gender.
Greville G. Corbett.
Berlin. 2014. p. 110. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
The expression of gender.
Greville G. Corbett.
Berlin. 2014. p. 115. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2021.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
The expression of gender.
Greville G. Corbett.
Berlin. 2014. ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7. OCLC 913049820.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Schiebinger, Londa (2001). "Has Feminism Changed Science?". Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 25 (4): 1171–5. doi:10.1086/495540. ISBN 978-0-674-00544-0. PMID 17089478. S2CID 225088475.
a b c Sheffield, Suzanne Le-May (2006). Women and Science: Social Impact and Interaction.
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. pp. 129–134. ISBN 978-0-8135-3737-5.
Eisenhart, Margaret A.; Finkel, Elizabeth (1998). "Women's Science: Learning and Succeeding from the Margins". Science Education.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 84 (6): 34–36. Bibcode:2000SciEd..84..793A. doi:10.1002/1098-237X(200011)84:6<793::AID-SCE6>3.0.CO;2-K. ISBN 978-0-226-19544-5.
"Sustainable Development Goal 5: Gender equality". UN Women.
Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
Women More Religious than Men Archived 1 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine. yle.fi (29 August 2010)
Deason, Rachel (24 February 2018). "The Hidden Meaning Behind Yin and Yang". Culture Trip.
Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
Tuchman, Lauren (18 January 2012). "The Shekhinah or The Divine Presence or Divine Feminine in Judaism". State of Formation.
Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
"Arhanarishvara: Hindu deity". Britannica.
Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2021.
Vohra, Ashok (8 March 2005), "The Male-Female Hologram," Times of India, p. 9.
a b Gender and Poverty Reduction Archived 29 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
UNPD.org. 29 October 2014
Peterson, Janice (1987). "The Feminization of Poverty". Journal of Economic Issues. 21 (1): 329–337. doi:10.1080/00213624.1987.11504613. JSTOR 4225831.
Stoiljkovic, Nena.
Smart finance Archived 17 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine. D+C Development and Cooperation
Christopher, Karen, et al.
The Gender Gap in Poverty in Modern Nations: Single Motherhood, The Market, and the State.
University of California Press.
a b Cagatay, Nilufer. "Trade, Gender and Poverty." pp. 4–8. United Nations.
Chant, Sylvia (2008). "The 'Feminisation of Poverty' and the 'Feminisation' of Anti-Poverty Programmes: Room for Revision?". Journal of Development Studies. 44 (2): 165–197. doi:10.1080/00220380701789810. S2CID 154939529.
"Archived copy". Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
"Transgender FAQ". 8 November 2013. Archived from the original on 8 May 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2015.
a b c d Agnew, R. (2012). "Reflection on "A Revised Strain Theory of Delinquency"". Social Forces. 91: 33–38. doi:10.1093/sf/sos117. S2CID 145274165.
a b c Grothoff, G. E.; Kempf-Leonard, K.; Mullins, C. (2014). "Gender and Juvenile Drug Abuse: A General Strain Theory Perspective". Women & Criminal Justice. 24: 22–43. doi:10.1080/08974454.2013.842519. S2CID 144473355.
a b c Moon, B.; Blurton, D.; McCluskey, J.D. (2007). "General Strain Theory and Delinquency: Focusing on the Influences of Key Strain Characteristics on Delinquency". Crime & Delinquency. 54 (4): 582–613. doi:10.1177/0011128707301627. S2CID 145118032.
Adema, W., Ali, N., Frey, V., Kim, H., Lunati, M., Piacentini, M. and Queisser, M. (2014). Enhancing Women's Economic Empowerment Through Entrepreneurship and Business leadership in OECD Countries.
OECD.
Archived 2 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine OECD, ILO, IMF and WBG, (2014). Achieving stronger growth by promoting a more genderbalanced economy.
Report prepared for the G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting.
Melbourne, Australia: G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting.
Olsson, Lennart et al. (2014) "Livelihoods and Poverty" Archived 28 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 793–832 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Ed. C.B. Field et al.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Birkmann, Joern et al. (2014)"Emergent Risks and Key Vulnerabilities" Archived 23 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 1039–1099 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Ed. C.B. Field et al.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Roehr, Ulrike (2007). "Gender, Climate Change and Adaptation.
Introduction to the Gender Dimensions" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Library of Congress Web Archives. unep.org
a b c MacGregor, S. (2010). "A stranger silence still: The need for feminist social research on climate change". The Sociological Review. 57 (2_suppl): 124–140. doi:10.1111/j.1467-954X.2010.01889.x.
S2CID 141663550.
a b c Tuana, N. (2013). "Gendering Climate Knowledge for Justice: Catalyzing a New Research Agenda". Research, Action and Policy: Addressing the Gendered Impacts of Climate Change. pp. 17–31. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5518-5_2. ISBN 978-94-007-5517-8.
a b Boyd, Emily (2009). "The Noel Kempff Project in Bolivia: Gender, Power, and Decision-Making in Climate Mitigation", pp. 101–110 in Climate Change and Gender Justice.
Geraldine Terry and Caroline Sweetman (eds.). Warwickshire: Practical Action Publishing, Oxfam GB.
Bamman, David; Eisenstein, Jacob; Schnoebelen, Tyler (April 2014). "Gender identity and lexical variation in social media". Journal of Sociolinguistics. 18 (2): 135–160. arXiv:1210.4567. doi:10.1111/josl.12080. S2CID 10906164.
Clipson, T.W.; Wilson, S.A.; DuFrene, D.D. (14 October 2011). "The Social Networking Arena: Battle of the Sexes". Business Communication Quarterly. 75 (1): 64–67. doi:10.1177/1080569911423961. S2CID 167866592.
Gourdreau, Jenna (26 April 2010). "What men and women are doing on Facebook". Forbes.
Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 12 April 2016.
Tufekci, Zeynep (31 July 2008). "Gender, social capital and social network(ing) sites: Women bonding, men searching". American Sociological Association.
Archived from the original on 3 March 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
a b c d Tortajada-Giménez, Iolanda; Araüna-Baró, Núria; Martínez-Martínez, Inmaculada José (1 June 2013). "Advertising Stereotypes and Gender Representation in Social Networking Sites". Comunicar. 21 (41): 177–186. doi:10.3916/C41-2013-17.
Hodkinson, P. (22 September 2015). "Bedrooms and beyond: Youth, identity and privacy on social network sites" (PDF). New Media & Society. 19 (2): 272–288. doi:10.1177/1461444815605454. S2CID 1281232. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2022.
Rose, Jessica; Mackey-Kallis, Susan; Shyles, Len; Barry, Kelly; Biagini, Danielle; Hart, Colleen; Jack, Lauren (November 2012). "Face it: The Impact of Gender on Social Media Images". Communication Quarterly. 60 (5): 588–607. doi:10.1080/01463373.2012.725005. S2CID 54211699.
Schwartz, HA; Eichstaedt, JC; Kern, ML; Dziurzynski, L; Ramones, SM; Agrawal, M; Shah, A; Kosinski, M; Stillwell, D; Seligman, ME; Ungar, LH (2013). "Personality, gender, and age in the language of social media: the open-vocabulary approach". PLOS ONE. 8 (9): e73791. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...873791S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073791. PMC 3783449. PMID 24086296.
Urista, M.A; Dong, Q; Day, K.D (2009). Explaining why young adults use MySpace and Facebook through uses and gratifications theory (2 ed.). pp. 215–229.
Barker, V (2009). "Older adolescents' motivations for social network site use: The influence of gender, group identity, and collective self-esteem". Cyberpsychology & Behavior (2 ed.). 12 (2): 209–213. doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0228. PMID 19250021.
a b c de Ridder, Sander; van Bauwel, Sofie (1 January 2015). "Youth and intimate media cultures: Gender, sexuality, relationships, and desire as storytelling practices in social networking sites" (PDF). Communications. 40 (3). doi:10.1515/commun-2015-0012. hdl:1854/LU-5889652. S2CID 199487985. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 20 April 2018.
a b Herring, Susan; Kapidzic, Sanja (2015). Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media (2 ed.). International encyclopedia of social and behavioral sciences.
Malin, Sveningsson Elm (1 January 2007). "Doing and undoing gender in a Swedish Internet community". Cambridge.
Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
The Role of Facebook in Romantic Relationship Development: An Exploration of Knapp's Relational Stage Model.
Conference Papers – International Communication Association. 2012. pp. 1–32.
Gauntlett, D (18 March 2008). Media, Gender and Identity: An Introduction.
Media, Gender and Identity.
ISBN 978-1-134-15502-6. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
Herring, I. "Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media.
Sciences" (PDF). Oxford.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016.
Bibliography
Butler, Judith (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity.
Thinking Gender'. New York & London: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-38955-6.
Butler, Judith (1993). Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of "Sex". New York: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-61015-5.
Fausto-Sterling, Anne (2000). Sexing the body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality.
New York: Basic Books.
ISBN 978-0-465-07714-4.
Hayat, T.; Lesser, O.; Samuel-Azran, T. (2017). "Gendered discourse patterns on online social networks:a social network analysis perspective". Computers in Human Behavior. 77: 132–159. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.08.041.
External links
Gender  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteResources from Wikiversity
Look up gender in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
GenPORT: Your gateway to gender and science resources
Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook
Gender and sexual identitiesGenderidentitiesGenders
Man
Woman
Male
Female
Androgyne
Boi
Cisgender
Cross-dresser
Gender bender
Gender neutrality
Gender variance
Non-binary (or genderqueer)
Postgenderism
Transgender
Trans man
Trans woman
Transsexual
Third gendersor Third sexes
Androgynos
Akava'ine
Apwint
Bakla
Binabinaaine
Bugis genders
Bissu
Calabai
Calalai
Chibados
Enaree
Eunuch
Fa'afafine
Fakafifine
Fakaleitī
Femminiello
Galli
Güevedoce
Hijra
Kathoey
Khanith
Köçek
Koekchuch
Lhamana
Māhū
Mak nyah
Mukhannathun
Muxe
Nádleehi
Nullo
Rae-rae
Sipiniq
Sworn virgin
Takatāpui
Travesti
Tumtum
Two-spirit
Vakasalewalewa
Winkte
X-gender
SexualorientationidentitiesSexual orientations
Asexual
Bisexual
Heterosexual
Homosexual
Alternative labels
Banjee
Bi-curious
Ex-gay
Ex-ex-gay
Gay
Gay men
Gray asexual
Demisexual
Heteroflexible
Lesbian
Non-heterosexual
Pansexual
Polysexual
Queer
Questioning
Same gender loving
Social aspects
Sociosexuality
Antisexuality
Monogamy
Non-monogamy
Polyamorous
Asociality
Homosociality
Heterosociality
Other
Analloeroticism
Androphilia and gynephilia
Attraction to transgender people
Kinsey scale
Monosexuality
Romantic orientation
See also
Gender roles
Intersex
Queer heterosexuality
Sex as a biological variable
Sex and gender distinction
Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
Social construction of gender
Gender studiesOverview
Gender studies
Anti-gender movement
Postgenderism
Identity
Gender
Cisgender
Transgender
Non-binary gender (or Genderqueer)
Gender variance
Gender identity
Gender binary
Gender expression
Gender role
Gender neutrality
Gender inlanguage
Binnen-I
Feminist language reform
Feminization of language
Gender neutrality in
English
Genderless languages
Language
Languages with gendered third-person pronouns
Languages with grammatical gender
Pronouns
Gender paradox
Grammatical gender
Gender-specific and gender-neutral pronouns
Genderless language
Gender marking in job titles
Language and gender
Lavender linguistics
Male as norm
Preferred gender pronoun
GenderinequalityGeneral
Gender apartheid
Gender-related violence
Gender bias
Gender bias on Wikipedia
Sexism
The NeuroGenderings Network
FinancialGeneral
Gender pay gap
Development
Gender and development
Gender Empowerment Measure
Gender Development Index
International Center for Research on Women (ICRW)
AcademiaAcademics
Gender studies academics
Journals
Gender studies journals
Women's studies journals
Religion
Gender and religion
Gender in Bible translation
God and gender in Hinduism
Discrimination
Feminism
Gender and sexual identities
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat (via VIAF)
National libraries
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Poland
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsMeta-WikiWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 18:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
