Glacier - Wikipedia
Glacier
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the geological formation.
For other uses, see Glacier (disambiguation).
"Ice river" redirects here.
For the Chinese ski course, see Ice River (ski course).
Persistent body of ice that is moving under its own weight
The glacier of the Geikie Plateau in Greenland.
With 7,253 known glaciers, Pakistan contains more glacial ice than any other country on earth outside the polar regions.
At 62 kilometres (39 mi) in length, its Baltoro Glacier is one of the world's longest alpine glaciers.
Aerial view of a glacier in Chugach State Park, Alaska, United States of America
A glacier (US:  /ˈɡleɪʃər/; UK: /ˈɡlæsiər, ˈɡleɪsiər/) is a persistent body of dense ice that is constantly moving under its own weight.
A glacier forms where the accumulation of snow exceeds its ablation over many years, often centuries.
It acquires distinguishing features, such as crevasses and seracs, as it slowly flows and deforms under stresses induced by its weight.
As it moves, it abrades rock and debris from its substrate to create landforms such as cirques, moraines, or fjords.
Although a glacier may flow into a body of water, it forms only on land and is distinct from the much thinner sea ice and lake ice that form on the surface of bodies of water.
On Earth, 99% of glacial ice is contained within vast ice sheets (also known as "continental glaciers") in the polar regions, but glaciers may be found in mountain ranges on every continent other than the Australian mainland, including Oceania's high-latitude oceanic island countries such as New Zealand.
Between latitudes 35°N and 35°S, glaciers occur only in the Himalayas, Andes, and a few high mountains in East Africa, Mexico, New Guinea and on Zard-Kuh in Iran.
With more than 7,000 known glaciers, Pakistan has more glacial ice than any other country outside the polar regions.
Glaciers cover about 10% of Earth's land surface.
Continental glaciers cover nearly 13 million km2 (5 million sq mi) or about 98% of Antarctica's 13.2 million km2 (5.1 million sq mi), with an average thickness of 2,100 m (7,000 ft). Greenland and Patagonia also have huge expanses of continental glaciers.
The volume of glaciers, not including the ice sheets of Antarctica and Greenland, has been estimated at 170,000 km3.
Glacial ice is the largest reservoir of fresh water on Earth, holding with ice sheets about 69 percent of the world's freshwater.
Many glaciers from temperate, alpine and seasonal polar climates store water as ice during the colder seasons and release it later in the form of meltwater as warmer summer temperatures cause the glacier to melt, creating a water source that is especially important for plants, animals and human uses when other sources may be scant.
However, within high-altitude and Antarctic environments, the seasonal temperature difference is often not sufficient to release meltwater.
Since glacial mass is affected by long-term climatic changes, e.g., precipitation, mean temperature, and cloud cover, glacial mass changes are considered among the most sensitive indicators of climate change and are a major source of variations in sea level.
A large piece of compressed ice, or a glacier, appears blue, as large quantities of water appear blue.
This is because water molecules absorb other colors more efficiently than blue.
The other reason for the blue color of glaciers is the lack of air bubbles.
Air bubbles, which give a white color to ice, are squeezed out by pressure increasing the created ice's density.
Contents
Etymology and related terms
The word glacier is a loanword from French and goes back, via Franco-Provençal, to the Vulgar Latin glaciārium, derived from the Late Latin glacia, and ultimately Latin glaciēs, meaning "ice". The processes and features caused by or related to glaciers are referred to as glacial.
The process of glacier establishment, growth and flow is called glaciation.
The corresponding area of study is called glaciology.
Glaciers are important components of the global cryosphere.
Ice calving from the terminus of the Perito Moreno Glacier in western Patagonia, Argentina.
The Aletsch Glacier, the largest glacier of the Alps, in Switzerland.
The Quelccaya Ice Cap is the second-largest glaciated area in the tropics, in Peru.
Types
Classification by size, shape and behavior
Further information: Glacier morphology
Glaciers are categorized by their morphology, thermal characteristics, and behavior.
Alpine glaciers form on the crests and slopes of mountains.
A glacier that fills a valley is called a valley glacier, or alternatively, an alpine glacier or mountain glacier.
A large body of glacial ice astride a mountain, mountain range, or volcano is termed an ice cap or ice field.
Ice caps have an area less than 50,000 km2 (19,000 sq mi) by definition.
Glacial bodies larger than 50,000 km2 (19,000 sq mi) are called ice sheets or continental glaciers.
Several kilometers deep, they obscure the underlying topography.
Only nunataks protrude from their surfaces.
The only extant ice sheets are the two that cover most of Antarctica and Greenland.
They contain vast quantities of freshwater, enough that if both melted, global sea levels would rise by over 70 m (230 ft). Portions of an ice sheet or cap that extend into water are called ice shelves; they tend to be thin with limited slopes and reduced velocities.
Narrow, fast-moving sections of an ice sheet are called ice streams.
In Antarctica, many ice streams drain into large ice shelves.
Some drain directly into the sea, often with an ice tongue, like Mertz Glacier.
Tidewater glaciers are glaciers that terminate in the sea, including most glaciers flowing from Greenland, Antarctica, Baffin, Devon, and Ellesmere Islands in Canada, Southeast Alaska, and the Northern and Southern Patagonian Ice Fields.
As the ice reaches the sea, pieces break off or calve, forming icebergs.
Most tidewater glaciers calve above sea level, which often results in a tremendous impact as the iceberg strikes the water.
Tidewater glaciers undergo centuries-long cycles of advance and retreat that are much less affected by climate change than other glaciers.
Mouth of the Schlatenkees Glacier near Innergschlöß, Austria.
The Grotta del Gelo is a cave of Etna volcano, the southernmost glacier in Europe.
Sightseeing boat in front of a tidewater glacier, Kenai Fjords National Park, Alaska.
Classification by thermal state
Webber Glacier on Grant Land (northern Ellesmere Island) is an advancing polar glacier and frozen to the glacier bed.
Debris rich layers of the ground moraine are sheared and folded into the ice.
The steep icefront shows waterfalls.
The glacier front is 6 km broad and up to 40 m high (July 20, 1978)
Thermally, a temperate glacier is at a melting point throughout the year, from its surface to its base.
The ice of a polar glacier is always below the freezing threshold from the surface to its base, although the surface snowpack may experience seasonal melting.
A subpolar glacier includes both temperate and polar ice, depending on the depth beneath the surface and position along the length of the glacier.
In a similar way, the thermal regime of a glacier is often described by its basal temperature.
A cold-based glacier is below freezing at the ice-ground interface and is thus frozen to the underlying substrate.
A warm-based glacier is above or at freezing at the interface and is able to slide at this contact.
This contrast is thought to a large extent to govern the ability of a glacier to effectively erode its bed, as sliding ice promotes plucking at rock from the surface below.
Glaciers which are partly cold-based and partly warm-based are known as polythermal.
Formation
Glaciers form where the accumulation of snow and ice exceeds ablation.
A glacier usually originates from a cirque landform (alternatively known as a "corrie" or as a "cwm") – a typically armchair-shaped geological feature (such as a depression between mountains enclosed by arêtes) – which collects and compresses through gravity the snow that falls into it.
This snow accumulates and the weight of the snow falling above compacts it, forming névé (granular snow). Further crushing of the individual snowflakes and squeezing the air from the snow turns it into "glacial ice". This glacial ice will fill the cirque until it "overflows" through a geological weakness or vacancy, such as a gap between two mountains.
When the mass of snow and ice reaches sufficient thickness, it begins to move by a combination of surface slope, gravity, and pressure.
On steeper slopes, this can occur with as little as 15 m (50  ft) of snow-ice.
In temperate glaciers, snow repeatedly freezes and thaws, changing into granular ice called firn.
Under the pressure of the layers of ice and snow above it, this granular ice fuses into denser firn.
Over a period of years, layers of firn undergo further compaction and become glacial ice.
Glacier ice is slightly more dense than ice formed from frozen water because glacier ice contains fewer trapped air bubbles.
Glacial ice has a distinctive blue tint because it absorbs some red light due to an overtone of the infrared OH stretching mode of the water molecule. (Liquid water appears blue for the same reason.
The blue of glacier ice is sometimes misattributed to Rayleigh scattering of bubbles in the ice.)
Gorner Glacier in Switzerland.
An aerial photograph of the Gorner Glacier (left side of image) together with the Grenzgletscher (r.) flowing into it, both framing the Monte Rosa massif in the middle
A packrafter passes a wall of freshly exposed blue ice on Spencer Glacier, in Alaska.
Glacial ice acts like a filter on light, and the more time light spends traveling through the ice, the bluer it becomes.
A glacier cave located on the Perito Moreno Glacier in Argentina.
Structure
A glacier originates at a location called its glacier head and terminates at its glacier foot, snout, or terminus.
Glaciers are broken into zones based on surface snowpack and melt conditions.
The ablation zone is the region where there is a net loss in glacier mass.
The upper part of a glacier, where accumulation exceeds ablation, is called the accumulation zone.
The equilibrium line separates the ablation zone and the accumulation zone; it is the contour where the amount of new snow gained by accumulation is equal to the amount of ice lost through ablation.
In general, the accumulation zone accounts for 60–70% of the glacier's surface area, more if the glacier calves icebergs.
Ice in the accumulation zone is deep enough to exert a downward force that erodes underlying rock.
After a glacier melts, it often leaves behind a bowl- or amphitheater-shaped depression that ranges in size from large basins like the Great Lakes to smaller mountain depressions known as cirques.
The accumulation zone can be subdivided based on its melt conditions.
The dry snow zone is a region where no melt occurs, even in the summer, and the snowpack remains dry.
The percolation zone is an area with some surface melt, causing meltwater to percolate into the snowpack.
This zone is often marked by refrozen ice lenses, glands, and layers.
The snowpack also never reaches the melting point.
Near the equilibrium line on some glaciers, a superimposed ice zone develops.
This zone is where meltwater refreezes as a cold layer in the glacier, forming a continuous mass of ice.
The wet snow zone is the region where all of the snow deposited since the end of the previous summer has been raised to 0 °C.
The health of a glacier is usually assessed by determining the glacier mass balance or observing terminus behavior.
Healthy glaciers have large accumulation zones, more than 60% of their area is snow-covered at the end of the melt season, and they have a terminus with a vigorous flow.
Following the Little Ice Age's end around 1850, glaciers around the Earth have retreated substantially.
A slight cooling led to the advance of many alpine glaciers between 1950 and 1985, but since 1985 glacier retreat and mass loss has become larger and increasingly ubiquitous.
Motion
Main article: Ice-sheet dynamics
Shear or herring-bone crevasses on Emmons Glacier (Mount Rainier); such crevasses often form near the edge of a glacier where interactions with underlying or marginal rock impede flow.
In this case, the impediment appears to be some distance from the near margin of the glacier.
Glaciers move, or flow, downhill by the force of gravity and the internal deformation of ice.
Ice behaves like a brittle solid until its thickness exceeds about 50 m (160 ft). The pressure on ice deeper than 50 m causes plastic flow.
At the molecular level, ice consists of stacked layers of molecules with relatively weak bonds between layers.
When the stress on the layer above exceeds the inter-layer binding strength, it moves faster than the layer below.
Glaciers also move through basal sliding.
In this process, a glacier slides over the terrain on which it sits, lubricated by the presence of liquid water.
The water is created from ice that melts under high pressure from frictional heating.
Basal sliding is dominant in temperate or warm-based glaciers.
Although evidence in favor of glacial flow was known by the early 19th century, other theories of glacial motion were advanced, such as the idea that meltwater, refreezing inside glaciers, caused the glacier to dilate and extend its length.
As it became clear that glaciers behaved to some degree as if the ice were a viscous fluid, it was argued that "regelation", or the melting and refreezing of ice at a temperature lowered by the pressure on the ice inside the glacier, was what allowed the ice to deform and flow.
James Forbes came up with the essentially correct explanation in the 1840s, although it was several decades before it was fully accepted.
Fracture zone and cracks
The top 50 m (160 ft) of a glacier are rigid because they are under low pressure.
This upper section is known as the fracture zone and moves mostly as a single unit over the plastic-flowing lower section.
When a glacier moves through irregular terrain, cracks called crevasses develop in the fracture zone.
Crevasses form because of differences in glacier velocity.
If two rigid sections of a glacier move at different speeds or directions, shear forces cause them to break apart, opening a crevasse.
Crevasses are seldom more than 46 m (150 ft) deep but, in some cases, can be at least 300 m (1,000 ft) deep.
Beneath this point, the plasticity of the ice prevents the formation of cracks.
Intersecting crevasses can create isolated peaks in the ice, called seracs.
Crevasses can form in several different ways.
Transverse crevasses are transverse to flow and form where steeper slopes cause a glacier to accelerate.
Longitudinal crevasses form semi-parallel to flow where a glacier expands laterally.
Marginal crevasses form near the edge of the glacier, caused by the reduction in speed caused by friction of the valley walls.
Marginal crevasses are largely transverse to flow.
Moving glacier ice can sometimes separate from the stagnant ice above, forming a bergschrund.
Bergschrunds resemble crevasses but are singular features at a glacier's margins.
Crevasses make travel over glaciers hazardous, especially when they are hidden by fragile snow bridges.
Below the equilibrium line, glacial meltwater is concentrated in stream channels.
Meltwater can pool in proglacial lakes on top of a glacier or descend into the depths of a glacier via moulins.
Streams within or beneath a glacier flow in englacial or sub-glacial tunnels.
These tunnels sometimes reemerge at the glacier's surface.
Ice cracks in the Titlis Glacier.
Crossing a crevasse on the Easton Glacier, Mount Baker, in the North Cascades, United States.
An exposed glacier tube that once transported water down the interior of the glacier.
Track of mountaineers on skis to the Wildspitze (3.768 m, left top) in Tyrolia in Austria, leading over the glacier Taschachferner (whole middle section). In the middle of the image, an area with open crevasses can be seen due to which the mountaineers made a slight left curve.
Speed
The speed of glacial displacement is partly determined by friction.
Friction makes the ice at the bottom of the glacier move more slowly than ice at the top.
In alpine glaciers, friction is also generated at the valley's sidewalls, which slows the edges relative to the center.
Mean glacial speed varies greatly but is typically around 1 m (3 ft) per day.
There may be no motion in stagnant areas; for example, in parts of Alaska, trees can establish themselves on surface sediment deposits.
In other cases, glaciers can move as fast as 20–30 m (70–100 ft) per day, such as in Greenland's Jakobshavn Isbræ. Glacial speed is affected by factors such as slope, ice thickness, snowfall, longitudinal confinement, basal temperature, meltwater production, and bed hardness.
A few glaciers have periods of very rapid advancement called surges.
These glaciers exhibit normal movement until suddenly they accelerate, then return to their previous movement state.
These surges may be caused by the failure of the underlying bedrock, the pooling of meltwater at the base of the glacier — perhaps delivered from a supraglacial lake — or the simple accumulation of mass beyond a critical "tipping point". Temporary rates up to 90 m (300 ft) per day have occurred when increased temperature or overlying pressure caused bottom ice to melt and water to accumulate beneath a glacier.
In glaciated areas where the glacier moves faster than one km per year, glacial earthquakes occur.
These are large scale earthquakes that have seismic magnitudes as high as 6.1. The number of glacial earthquakes in Greenland peaks every year in July, August, and September and increased rapidly in the 1990s and 2000s.
In a study using data from January 1993 through October 2005, more events were detected every year since 2002, and twice as many events were recorded in 2005 as there were in any other year.
Ogives
Forbes bands on the Mer de Glace glacier in France
Ogives (or Forbes bands) are alternating wave crests and valleys that appear as dark and light bands of ice on glacier surfaces.
They are linked to seasonal motion of glaciers; the width of one dark and one light band generally equals the annual movement of the glacier.
Ogives are formed when ice from an icefall is severely broken up, increasing ablation surface area during summer.
This creates a swale and space for snow accumulation in the winter, which in turn creates a ridge.
Sometimes ogives consist only of undulations or color bands and are described as wave ogives or band ogives.
Geography
Further information on this topic: List of glaciers
Black ice glacier near Aconcagua, Argentina
Fox Glacier in New Zealand finishes near a rainforest.
Glaciers are present on every continent and in approximately fifty countries, excluding those (Australia, South Africa) that have glaciers only on distant subantarctic island territories.
Extensive glaciers are found in Antarctica, Argentina, Chile, Canada, Alaska, Greenland and Iceland.
Mountain glaciers are widespread, especially in the Andes, the Himalayas, the Rocky Mountains, the Caucasus, Scandinavian mountains, and the Alps.
Snezhnika glacier in Pirin Mountain, Bulgaria with a latitude of 41°46′09″ N is the southernmost glacial mass in Europe.
Mainland Australia currently contains no glaciers, although a small glacier on Mount Kosciuszko was present in the last glacial period.
In New Guinea, small, rapidly diminishing, glaciers are located on Puncak Jaya.
Africa has glaciers on Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, on Mount Kenya, and in the Rwenzori Mountains.
Oceanic islands with glaciers include Iceland, several of the islands off the coast of Norway including Svalbard and Jan Mayen to the far north, New Zealand and the subantarctic islands of Marion, Heard, Grande Terre (Kerguelen) and Bouvet.
During glacial periods of the Quaternary, Taiwan, Hawaii on Mauna Kea and Tenerife also had large alpine glaciers, while the Faroe and Crozet Islands were completely glaciated.
The permanent snow cover necessary for glacier formation is affected by factors such as the degree of slope on the land, amount of snowfall and the winds.
Glaciers can be found in all latitudes except from 20° to 27° north and south of the equator where the presence of the descending limb of the Hadley circulation lowers precipitation so much that with high insolation snow lines reach above 6,500 m (21,330 ft). Between 19˚N and 19˚S, however, precipitation is higher, and the mountains above 5,000 m (16,400 ft) usually have permanent snow.
Even at high latitudes, glacier formation is not inevitable.
Areas of the Arctic, such as Banks Island, and the McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica are considered polar deserts where glaciers cannot form because they receive little snowfall despite the bitter cold.
Cold air, unlike warm air, is unable to transport much water vapor.
Even during glacial periods of the Quaternary, Manchuria, lowland Siberia, and central and northern Alaska, though extraordinarily cold, had such light snowfall that glaciers could not form.
In addition to the dry, unglaciated polar regions, some mountains and volcanoes in Bolivia, Chile and Argentina are high (4,500 to 6,900 m or 14,800 to 22,600 ft) and cold, but the relative lack of precipitation prevents snow from accumulating into glaciers.
This is because these peaks are located near or in the hyperarid Atacama Desert.
Glacial geology
Diagram of glacial plucking and abrasion
Glacially plucked granitic bedrock near Mariehamn, Åland
Glaciers erode terrain through two principal processes: abrasion and plucking.
As glaciers flow over bedrock, they soften and lift blocks of rock into the ice.
This process, called plucking, is caused by subglacial water that penetrates fractures in the bedrock and subsequently freezes and expands.
This expansion causes the ice to act as a lever that loosens the rock by lifting it.
Thus, sediments of all sizes become part of the glacier's load.
If a retreating glacier gains enough debris, it may become a rock glacier, like the Timpanogos Glacier in Utah.
Abrasion occurs when the ice and its load of rock fragments slide over bedrock and function as sandpaper, smoothing and polishing the bedrock below.
The pulverized rock this process produces is called rock flour and is made up of rock grains between 0.002 and 0.00625 mm in size.
Abrasion leads to steeper valley walls and mountain slopes in alpine settings, which can cause avalanches and rock slides, which add even more material to the glacier.
Glacial abrasion is commonly characterized by glacial striations.
Glaciers produce these when they contain large boulders that carve long scratches in the bedrock.
By mapping the direction of the striations, researchers can determine the direction of the glacier's movement.
Similar to striations are chatter marks, lines of crescent-shape depressions in the rock underlying a glacier.
They are formed by abrasion when boulders in the glacier are repeatedly caught and released as they are dragged along the bedrock.
The rate of glacier erosion varies.
Six factors control erosion rate:
Velocity of glacial movement
Thickness of the ice
Shape, abundance and hardness of rock fragments contained in the ice at the bottom of the glacier
Relative ease of erosion of the surface under the glacier
Thermal conditions at the glacier base
Permeability and water pressure at the glacier base
When the bedrock has frequent fractures on the surface, glacial erosion rates tend to increase as plucking is the main erosive force on the surface; when the bedrock has wide gaps between sporadic fractures, however, abrasion tends to be the dominant erosive form and glacial erosion rates become slow.
Glaciers in lower latitudes tend to be much more erosive than glaciers in higher latitudes, because they have more meltwater reaching the glacial base and facilitate sediment production and transport under the same moving speed and amount of ice.
Material that becomes incorporated in a glacier is typically carried as far as the zone of ablation before being deposited.
Glacial deposits are of two distinct types:
Glacial till: material directly deposited from glacial ice.
Till includes a mixture of undifferentiated material ranging from clay size to boulders, the usual composition of a moraine.
Fluvial and outwash sediments: sediments deposited by water.
These deposits are stratified by size.
Larger pieces of rock that are encrusted in till or deposited on the surface are called "glacial erratics". They range in size from pebbles to boulders, but as they are often moved great distances, they may be drastically different from the material upon which they are found.
Patterns of glacial erratics hint at past glacial motions.
Moraines
Glacial moraines above Lake Louise, Alberta, Canada
Glacial moraines are formed by the deposition of material from a glacier and are exposed after the glacier has retreated.
They usually appear as linear mounds of till, a non-sorted mixture of rock, gravel, and boulders within a matrix of fine powdery material.
Terminal or end moraines are formed at the foot or terminal end of a glacier.
Lateral moraines are formed on the sides of the glacier.
Medial moraines are formed when two different glaciers merge and the lateral moraines of each coalesce to form a moraine in the middle of the combined glacier.
Less apparent are ground moraines, also called glacial drift, which often blankets the surface underneath the glacier downslope from the equilibrium line.
The term moraine is of French origin.
It was coined by peasants to describe alluvial embankments and rims found near the margins of glaciers in the French Alps.
In modern geology, the term is used more broadly and is applied to a series of formations, all of which are composed of till.
Moraines can also create moraine-dammed lakes.
Drumlins
A drumlin field forms after a glacier has modified the landscape.
The teardrop-shaped formations denote the direction of the ice flow.
Drumlins are asymmetrical, canoe-shaped hills made mainly of till.
Their heights vary from 15 to 50 meters, and they can reach a kilometer in length.
The steepest side of the hill faces the direction from which the ice advanced (stoss), while a longer slope is left in the ice's direction of movement (lee). Drumlins are found in groups called drumlin fields or drumlin camps.
One of these fields is found east of Rochester, New York; it is estimated to contain about 10,000 drumlins.
Although the process that forms drumlins is not fully understood, their shape implies that they are products of the plastic deformation zone of ancient glaciers.
It is believed that many drumlins were formed when glaciers advanced over and altered the deposits of earlier glaciers.
Glacial valleys, cirques, arêtes, and pyramidal peaks
Features of a glacial landscape
Before glaciation, mountain valleys have a characteristic "V" shape, produced by eroding water.
During glaciation, these valleys are often widened, deepened and smoothed to form a "U"-shaped glacial valley or glacial trough, as it is sometimes called.
The erosion that creates glacial valleys truncates any spurs of rock or earth that may have earlier extended across the valley, creating broadly triangular-shaped cliffs called truncated spurs.
Within glacial valleys, depressions created by plucking and abrasion can be filled by lakes, called paternoster lakes.
If a glacial valley runs into a large body of water, it forms a fjord.
Typically glaciers deepen their valleys more than their smaller tributaries.
Therefore, when glaciers recede, the valleys of the tributary glaciers remain above the main glacier's depression and are called hanging valleys.
At the start of a classic valley glacier is a bowl-shaped cirque, which have escarped walls on three sides but is open on the side that descends into the valley.
Cirques are where ice begins to accumulate in a glacier.
Two glacial cirques may form back to back and erode their backwalls until only a narrow ridge, called an arête is left.
This structure may result in a mountain pass.
If multiple cirques encircle a single mountain, they create pointed pyramidal peaks; particularly steep examples are called horns.
Roches moutonnées
Passage of glacial ice over an area of bedrock may cause the rock to be sculpted into a knoll called a roche moutonnée, or "sheepback" rock.
Roches moutonnées may be elongated, rounded and asymmetrical in shape.
They range in length from less than a meter to several hundred meters long.
Roches moutonnées have a gentle slope on their up-glacier sides and a steep to vertical face on their down-glacier sides.
The glacier abrades the smooth slope on the upstream side as it flows along, but tears rock fragments loose and carries them away from the downstream side via plucking.
Alluvial stratification
As the water that rises from the ablation zone moves away from the glacier, it carries fine eroded sediments with it.
As the speed of the water decreases, so does its capacity to carry objects in suspension.
The water thus gradually deposits the sediment as it runs, creating an alluvial plain.
When this phenomenon occurs in a valley, it is called a valley train.
When the deposition is in an estuary, the sediments are known as bay mud.
Outwash plains and valley trains are usually accompanied by basins known as "kettles". These are small lakes formed when large ice blocks that are trapped in alluvium melt and produce water-filled depressions.
Kettle diameters range from 5 m to 13 km, with depths of up to 45 meters.
Most are circular in shape because the blocks of ice that formed them were rounded as they melted.
Glacial deposits
Landscape produced by a receding glacier
When a glacier's size shrinks below a critical point, its flow stops and it becomes stationary.
Meanwhile, meltwater within and beneath the ice leaves stratified alluvial deposits.
These deposits, in the forms of columns, terraces and clusters, remain after the glacier melts and are known as "glacial deposits". Glacial deposits that take the shape of hills or mounds are called kames.
Some kames form when meltwater deposits sediments through openings in the interior of the ice.
Others are produced by fans or deltas created by meltwater.
When the glacial ice occupies a valley, it can form terraces or kames along the sides of the valley.
Long, sinuous glacial deposits are called eskers.
Eskers are composed of sand and gravel that was deposited by meltwater streams that flowed through ice tunnels within or beneath a glacier.
They remain after the ice melts, with heights exceeding 100 meters and lengths of as long as 100 km.
Loess deposits
Very fine glacial sediments or rock flour is often picked up by wind blowing over the bare surface and may be deposited great distances from the original fluvial deposition site.
These eolian loess deposits may be very deep, even hundreds of meters, as in areas of China and the Midwestern United States.
Katabatic winds can be important in this process.
Climate change
Further information: Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Glaciers are a valuable resource for tracking climate change over long periods of time because they can be hundreds of thousands of years old.
To study the patterns over time through glaciers, ice cores are taken, providing continuous information including evidence for climate change, trapped in the ice for scientists to break down and study.
Glaciers are studied to give information about the history of climate change due to natural or human causes.
Human activity has caused an increase in greenhouse gases creating a global warming trend, causing these valuable glaciers to melt.
Glaciers have an albedo effect and the melting of glaciers means less albedo.
In the Alps the summer of 2003 was compared to the summer of 1988. Between 1998 and 2003 the albedo value is 0.2 lower in 2003. When glaciers begin to melt, they also cause a rise in sea level, "which in turn increases coastal erosion and elevates storm surge as warming air and ocean temperatures create more frequent and intense coastal storms like hurricanes and typhoons." Thus, human causes to climate change creates a positive feedback loop with the glaciers: The rise in temperature causes more glacier melt, leading to less albedo, higher sea levels and many other climate issues to follow.
From 1972 all the way up to 2019 NASA has used a Landsat satellite that has been used to record glaciers in Alaska, Greenland and Antarctica.
This Landsat project has found that since around 2000, glacier retreat has increased substantially.
South Cascade Glacier in Washington documented from 1928 to 2003 showing the recent rapid glacier retreating.
By looking at this photo it's clear to see how quickly the glaciers are retreating in the modern world.
This kind of retreating is the result of climate change which has significantly increased due to human impacts.
This photo was taken from USGS U.S. Department of Interior research looking at the last 50 years of glacier change.
Isostatic rebound
Isostatic pressure by a glacier on the Earth's crust
Large masses, such as ice sheets or glaciers, can depress the crust of the Earth into the mantle.
The depression usually totals a third of the ice sheet or glacier's thickness.
After the ice sheet or glacier melts, the mantle begins to flow back to its original position, pushing the crust back up.
This post-glacial rebound, which proceeds very slowly after the melting of the ice sheet or glacier, is currently occurring in measurable amounts in Scandinavia and the Great Lakes region of North America.
A geomorphological feature created by the same process on a smaller scale is known as dilation-faulting.
It occurs where previously compressed rock is allowed to return to its original shape more rapidly than can be maintained without faulting.
This leads to an effect similar to what would be seen if the rock were hit by a large hammer.
Dilation faulting can be observed in recently de-glaciated parts of Iceland and Cumbria.
On Mars
Main article: Glaciers on Mars
Northern polar ice cap on Mars.
The polar ice caps of Mars show geologic evidence of glacial deposits.
The south polar cap is especially comparable to glaciers on Earth.
Topographical features and computer models indicate the existence of more glaciers in Mars' past.
At mid-latitudes, between 35° and 65° north or south, Martian glaciers are affected by the thin Martian atmosphere.
Because of the low atmospheric pressure, ablation near the surface is solely caused by sublimation, not melting.
As on Earth, many glaciers are covered with a layer of rocks which insulates the ice.
A radar instrument on board the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter found ice under a thin layer of rocks in formations called lobate debris aprons (LDAs).
The pictures below illustrate how landscape features on Mars closely resemble those on the Earth.
Romer Lake's Elephant Foot Glacier in the Earth's Arctic, as seen by Landsat 8. This picture shows several glaciers that have the same shape as many features on Mars that are believed to also be glaciers.
The next three images from Mars show shapes similar to the Elephant Foot Glacier.
Mesa in Ismenius Lacus quadrangle, as seen by CTX. Mesa has several glaciers eroding it.
One of the glaciers is seen in greater detail in the next two images from HiRISE. Image from Ismenius Lacus quadrangle.
Glacier as seen by HiRISE under the HiWish program.
Area in the rectangle is enlarged in the next photo.
Zone of accumulation of snow at the top.
Glacier is moving down valley, then spreading out on plain.
Evidence for flow comes from the many lines on surface.
Location is in Protonilus Mensae in Ismenius Lacus quadrangle.
Enlargement of area in rectangle of the previous image.
On Earth, the ridge would be called the terminal moraine of an alpine glacier.
Picture taken with HiRISE under the HiWish program.
Image from Ismenius Lacus quadrangle.
Maps
Location of glaciers according to GLIMS ID, identifier assigned to glaciers by the Global Land Ice Measurements from Space service at NSIDC. (See Wikidata query)
See also
Glacial landform – Landform created by the action of glaciers
Glacial motion – Geological phenomenon
Glacier growing
Glacier morphology – Geomorphology of glaciers
Ice jam
Notes
a b Craig, Tim (2016-08-12). "Pakistan has more glaciers than almost anywhere on Earth.
But they are at risk". The Washington Post.
ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2020-09-04. With 7,253 known glaciers, including 543 in the Chitral Valley, there is more glacial ice in Pakistan than anywhere on Earth outside the polar regions, according to various studies.
Post, Austin; LaChapelle, Edward R (2000). Glacier ice.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
ISBN 978-0-295-97910-6.
Staff (June 9, 2020). "Millions at risk as melting Pakistan glaciers raise flood fears". 
National Geographic Almanac of Geography, 2005, ISBN 0-7922-3877-X, p. 149.
"170'000 km cube d'eau dans les glaciers du monde". ArcInfo.
Aug 6, 2015. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017.
"Ice, Snow, and Glaciers and the Water Cycle". 
Brown, Molly Elizabeth; Ouyang, Hua; Habib, Shahid; Shrestha, Basanta; Shrestha, Mandira; Panday, Prajjwal; Tzortziou, Maria; Policelli, Frederick; Artan, Guleid; Giriraj, Amarnath; Bajracharya, Sagar R.; Racoviteanu, Adina (November 2010). "HIMALA: Climate Impacts on Glaciers, Snow, and Hydrology in the Himalayan Region". Mountain Research and Development.
International Mountain Society. 30 (4): 401–404. doi:10.1659/MRD-JOURNAL-D-10-00071.1. hdl:2060/20110015312. S2CID 129545865.
Simpson, D.P. (1979). Cassell's Latin Dictionary (5 ed.). London: Cassell Ltd. p. 883. ISBN 978-0-304-52257-6.
"Glossary of Glacier Terminology". USGS. Retrieved 2017-03-13.
"Retreat of Alaskan glacier Juneau icefield". Nichols.edu.
Retrieved 2009-01-05.
"Glossary of Meteorology". American Meteorological Society.
Archived from the original on 2012-06-23. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Department of Geography and Geology, University of Wisconsin (2015). "Morphological Classification of Glaciers" (PDF). 
"Sea Level and Climate". USGS FS 002-00. USGS. 2000-01-31. Retrieved 2009-01-05.
"Types of Glaciers". National Snow and Ice Data Center.
Archived from the original on 2010-04-17.
Bindschadler, R.A.; Scambos, T.A. (1991). "Satellite-image-derived velocity field of an Antarctic ice stream". Science. 252 (5003): 242–46. Bibcode:1991Sci...252..242B. doi:10.1126/science.252.5003.242. PMID 17769268. S2CID 17336434.
"Description of Ice Streams". British Antarctic Survey.
Archived from the original on 2009-02-11. Retrieved 2009-01-26.
"What types of glaciers are there? | National Snow and Ice Data Center". nsidc.org.
Retrieved 2017-08-12.
a b Lorrain, Reginald D.; Fitzsimons, Sean J. (2017). "Cold-Based Glaciers".  In Singh, Vijay P.; Singh, Pratap; Haritashya, Umesh K. (eds.). Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers.
Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series.
Springer Netherlands. pp. 157–161. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-2642-2_72. ISBN 978-90-481-2641-5.
Boulton, G.S.  "Processes and patterns of glacial erosion", (In Coates, D.R. ed., Glacial Geomorphology.
A Proceedings Volume of the Fifth Annual Geomorphology Symposia Series, held at Binghamton, New York, September 26–28, 1974. Binghamton, NY, State University of New York, pp. 41–87. (Publications in Geomorphology))
"What causes the blue color that sometimes appears in snow and ice?". Webexhibits.org.
Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Benson, C.S., 1961, "Stratigraphic studies in the snow and firn of the Greenland Ice Sheet", Res.
Rep. 70, U.S. Army Snow, Ice and Permafrost Res Establ., Corps of Eng., 120 pp.
"Glacier change and related hazards in Switzerland". UNEP. Archived from the original on 2012-09-25. Retrieved 2009-01-05.
Paul, Frank; Kääb, Andreas; Maisch, Max; Kellenberger, Tobias; Haeberli, Wilfried (2004). "Rapid disintegration of Alpine glaciers observed with satellite data" (PDF). Geophysical Research Letters. 31 (21): L21402. Bibcode:2004GeoRL..3121402P. doi:10.1029/2004GL020816.
"Recent Global Glacier Retreat Overview" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Greve, R.; Blatter, H. (2009). Dynamics of Ice Sheets and Glaciers.
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03415-2. ISBN 978-3-642-03414-5. S2CID 128734526.
W.S.B. Paterson, Physics of ice
Clarke, Garry K.C. (1987). "A short history of scientific investigations on glaciers". Journal of Glaciology.
Special issue (S1): 4–5. Bibcode:1987JGlac..33S...4C. doi:10.3189/S0022143000215785.
"Moulin 'Blanc': NASA Expedition Probes Deep Within a Greenland Glacier". NASA. 2006-12-11. Retrieved 2009-01-05.
"Glaciers". 
T. Strozzi et al.: The Evolution of a Glacier Surge Observed with the ERS Satellites Archived 2014-11-11 at the Wayback Machine (pdf, 1.3 Mb)
"The Brúarjökull Project: Sedimentary environments of a surging glacier.
The Brúarjökull Project research idea". Hi.is.
Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Meier & Post (1969)
"Seasonality and Increasing Frequency of Greenland Glacial Earthquakes" Archived 2008-10-07 at the Wayback Machine, Ekström, G., M. Nettles, and V.C. Tsai (2006) Science, 311, 5768, 1756–1758, doi:10.1126/science.1122112
a b "Analysis of Glacial Earthquakes" Archived 2008-10-07 at the Wayback Machine Tsai, V. C. and G. Ekström (2007). J. Geophys.
Res., 112, F03S22, doi:10.1029/2006JF000596
Summerfield, Michael A. (1991). Global Geomorphology. p. 269.
Easterbrook, D.J. (1999). Surface Processes and Landforms (2 ed.). New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. p. 546. ISBN 978-0-13-860958-0.
"Glossary of Glacier Terminology". Pubs.usgs.gov. 2012-06-20. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Grunewald, p. 129.
"C.D. Ollier: Australian Landforms and their History, National Mapping Fab, Geoscience Australia". Ga.gov.au. 2010-11-18. Archived from the original on 2008-08-08. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Kincaid, Joni L.; Klein, Andrew G. (2004). Retreat of the Irian Jaya Glaciers from 2000 to 2002 as Measured from IKONOS Satellite Images (PDF). Portland, Maine, USA. pp. 147–157. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-05-17. Retrieved 2009-01-05.
"Hawaiian Glaciers Reveal Clues to Global Climate Change". Geology.com. 2007-01-26. Archived from the original on 2013-01-27. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
"French Colonies – Crozet Archipelago". Discoverfrance.net. 2010-12-09. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Collins, Henry Hill; Europe and the USSR; p. 263. OCLC 1573476
"Yukon Beringia Interpretive Center". Beringia.com. 1999-04-12. Archived from the original on 2012-10-31. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
"Earth History 2001" (PDF). July 28, 2017. p. 15. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 28, 2017.
"On the Zoogeography of the Holarctic Region". Wku.edu.
Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Dühnforth, Miriam; Anderson, Robert S.; Ward, Dylan; Stock, Greg M. (2010-05-01). "Bedrock fracture control of glacial erosion processes and rates". Geology. 38 (5): 423–426. Bibcode:2010Geo....38..423D. doi:10.1130/G30576.1. ISSN 0091-7613.
Koppes, Michéle; Hallet, Bernard; Rignot, Eric; Mouginot, Jérémie; Wellner, Julia Smith; Boldt, Katherine (2015). "Observed latitudinal variations in erosion as a function of glacier dynamics". Nature. 526 (7571): 100–103. Bibcode:2015Natur.526..100K. doi:10.1038/nature15385. PMID 26432248. S2CID 4461215.
Glacial Landforms: Trough
'Glaciers & Glaciation' (Arnold, London 1998) Douglas Benn and David Evans, pp324-326
"Kettle geology". Britannica Online.
Retrieved 2009-03-12.
"Glaciers and climate change | National Snow and Ice Data Center". nsidc.org.
Retrieved 2020-03-31.
a b "Climate Change: Glacier Mass Balance | NOAA Climate.gov". 
Paul, Frank (February 2005). "On the Impact of Glacier Albedo Under Conditions of Extreme Glacier Melt: The Summer of 2003 in the Alps" (PDF). EARSeL EProceedings. 4: 139–149 – via University of Zurich, Department of Geography, Zurich, Switzerland.
"Why are glaciers and sea ice melting?". World Wildlife Fund.
Retrieved 2020-03-31.
Center, By Kate Ramsayer, NASA's Goddard Space Flight. "Ice in Motion: Satellites Capture Decades of Change". Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet.
Retrieved 2020-03-31.
"USGS Fact Sheet 2009–3046: Fifty-Year Record of Glacier Change Reveals Shifting Climate in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska, USA". pubs.usgs.gov.
Retrieved 2020-03-31.
Casper, Julie Kerr (2010). Global Warming Cycles: Ice Ages and Glacial Retreat.
Infobase Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8160-7262-0.
"Kargel, J.S. et al.:Martian Polar Ice Sheets and Mid-Latitude Debris-Rich Glaciers, and Terrestrial Analogs, Third International Conference on Mars Polar Science and Exploration, Alberta, Canada, October 13–17, 2003 (pdf 970 Kb)" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-01-04.
"Martian glaciers: did they originate from the atmosphere? ESA Mars Express, 20 January 2006". Esa.int. 2006-01-20. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Head, J. et al.  2005.  Tropical to mid-latitude snow and ice accumulation, flow and glaciation on Mars.  Nature: 434. 346–350
Source: Brown University Posted Monday, October 17, 2005 (2005-10-17). "Mars' climate in flux: Mid-latitude glaciers | SpaceRef – Your Space Reference". Marstoday.com.
Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved 2013-01-04.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Richard Lewis (2008-04-23). "Glaciers Reveal Martian Climate Has Been Recently Active | Brown University News and Events". News.brown.edu.
Retrieved 2013-01-04.
Plaut, J. et al.  2008. Radar Evidence for Ice in Lobate Debris Aprons in the Mid-Northern Latitudes of Mars.
Lunar and Planetary Science XXXIX.  2290.pdf
Holt, J. et al.  2008. Radar Sounding Evidence for Ice within Lobate Debris Aprons near Hellas Basin, Mid-Southern Latitudes of Mars.  Lunar and Planetary Science XXXIX.  2441.pdf
References
This article draws heavily on the corresponding article in the Spanish-language Wikipedia, which was accessed in the version of 24 July 2005.
Hambrey, Michael; Alean, Jürg (2004). Glaciers (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-82808-6. OCLC 54371738. An excellent less-technical treatment of all aspects, with superb photographs and firsthand accounts of glaciologists' experiences.
All images of this book can be found online (see Weblinks: Glaciers-online)
Benn, Douglas I.; Evans, David J.A. (1999). Glaciers and Glaciation.
Arnold.
ISBN 978-0-470-23651-2. OCLC 38329570.
Bennett, M.R.; Glasser, N.F. (1996). Glacial Geology: Ice Sheets and Landforms.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-471-96344-8. OCLC 33359888.
Hambrey, Michael (1994). Glacial Environments.
University of British Columbia Press, UCL Press.
ISBN 978-0-7748-0510-0. OCLC 30512475. An undergraduate-level textbook.
Knight, Peter G (1999). Glaciers.
Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes.
ISBN 978-0-7487-4000-0. OCLC 42656957. A textbook for undergraduates avoiding mathematical complexities
Walley, Robert (1992). Introduction to Physical Geography.
Wm. C. Brown Publishers.
A textbook devoted to explaining the geography of our planet.
W.S.B. Paterson (1994). Physics of Glaciers (3rd ed.). Pergamon Press.
ISBN 978-0-08-013972-2. OCLC 26188. A comprehensive reference on the physical principles underlying formation and behavior.
Further reading
Moon, Twila.
Saying goodbye to glaciers, Science, 12 May 2017, Vol. 356, Issue 6338, pp. 580–581, doi:10.1126/science.aam9625
External links
The Wikibook Historical Geology has a page on the topic of: Glaciers
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Glacier.
Look up glacier in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
"Global Glacier Changes: Facts and Figures". United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2008. Archived from the original on 2018-12-25. Retrieved 2014-11-10., a report in the Global Environment Outlook (GEO) series.
Glacial structures – photo atlas
NOW on PBS "On Thin Ice"
Photo project tracks changes in Himalayan glaciers since 1921
Short radio episode California Glaciers from The Mountains of California by John Muir, 1894. California Legacy Project
Dynamics of Glaciers
GletscherVergleiche.ch – Before/After Images by Simon Oberli
Climate changeOverview
Attribution of recent climate change
Effects of climate change
Climate change mitigation
Climate change adaptation
By country and region
CausesOverview
Attribution of recent climate change
Extreme event attribution
Greenhouse effect
Scientific consensus on climate change
Sources
Greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gas emissions
Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture
Fossil fuel
Deforestation and climate change
Land use, land-use change, and forestry
History
History of climate change science
History of climate change policy and politics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
United Nations conferences
Effects and issuesPhysical
Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic methane emissions
Drought
Glacier retreat
Oceans
Ocean acidification
Ocean heat content
Ozone depletion
Tipping points in the climate system
Sea level rise
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
Tropical cyclones
Water cycle
Wildfires
Flora and fauna
Ecosystems
Mass mortality event
Invasive species
Plant biodiversity
Marine life
Terrestrial animals
Birds
Extinction risk from climate change
Forest dieback
Social impacts
Agriculture
Cities
Children
Disability
Economic impacts
Fisheries
Gender
Health
Human rights
Indigenous peoples
Mental health
Migration
Poverty
Risk assessments
Security and conflict
Climate vulnerability
By country & region
Africa
Americas
Antarctica
Arctic
Australia
Caribbean
Europe
Middle East and North Africa
Small island countries
South Asia
by individual country
Society and climate changeSociety
Business responses
Climate action
Climate grief
Climate movement
school strike
Climate emergency declaration
Denial
Soft denial
Tobacco industry playbook
conspiracy theories
Controversy
Ethics
Governance
Litigation
Climate justice
Politics
Public opinion
Women
Communication
Education
Climate spiral
Popular culture depictions
art
climate fiction
games
Climate Change Performance Index
Climate crisis (term)
Media coverage
Warming stripes
International agreements
Glasgow Climate Pact
Kyoto Protocol
Paris Agreement
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
MitigationEconomics and finance
Carbon credit
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Climate debt
Climate risk
Climate risk insurance
Climate finance
Fossil fuel divestment
Economics of mitigation
Emissions trading
Low-carbon economy
Energy
Carbon capture and storage
Energy transition
Fossil fuel phase-out
Low-carbon energy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
Personal
Carbon neutrality
Individual action on climate change
Other
Blue carbon
Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon capture and storage
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Solar geoengineering
Nature-based solutions
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Background and theoryMeasurements
Satellite measurements
Theory
Albedo
Carbon sink
Climate sensitivity
Climate variability and change
Cloud forcing
Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis
Iris hypothesis
Feedbacks
Earth's energy budget
Effective temperature
Global warming potential
Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change
Orbital forcing
Radiative forcing
Research
Climate model
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Climate change portal
Glossary
Index
Category
GlaciersTypes
Aufeis
Cirque
Ice cap
Ice field
Ice sheet
Ice shelf
Ice stream
Ledoyom
Outlet glacier
Piedmont glacier
Rock glacier
Valley glacier
Anatomy
Ablation zone
Accumulation zone
Bergschrund
Blue ice
Crevasse
Dirt cone
Firn
Glacier cave
Glacier head
Ice divide
Ice tongue
Icefall
Lateral moraine
Medial moraine
Moraine
Moulin
Penitente
Randkluft
Sérac
Terminus
Processes
Ablation
Accumulation
Basal sliding
Calving
Creep
Motion
Outburst flood
Overdeepening
Plucking
Retreat
Starvation
Surge
Measurements
Ice core
Mass balance
Volcanic relations
Jökulhlaup
Subglacial eruption
Subglacial volcano
Tuya
LandformsErosional
Arête
Cirque
Cirque stairway
Crag and tail
Finger lake
Fjord
Glacial horn
Glacial lake
Glacial striae
Hanging valley
P-form
Ribbon lake
Roche moutonnée
Suncup
Tarn
Trough lake
Trough valley
Tunnel valley
U-valley
Valley step
Zungenbecken
Depositional
Drumlin
Erratic block
Moraine
Moraine-dammed lake
Pulju moraine
Rogen moraine
Sevetti moraine
Terminal moraine
Till plain
Veiki moraine
Glaciofluvial
Alpentor
Diluvium
Esker
Giant current ripples
Kame
Kame delta
Kettle hole
Outwash fan
Sandur
Urstromtal
Glaciology
Category
List
Template:Periglacial environment
Icethe solid state of waterCrystalline types
Ih
Ic
II
III
IV
VI
VII
VIII
IX
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
Formations andphenomena
Amorphous solid
Anchor
Black
Clathrate hydrates
Cap
Cave
Circle or disc
Clear
Crystals
Dam (roof)
Depth hoar
Diamond dust
Drift
Dune
Field
Firn
Fog
Frazil
Frost
Frost heave
Frost flower (sea ice)
Glacier
Glaze
Hail
Hair ice
Iceberg (calving)
Icicle
Jacking
Jam
Nucleus
Sheet
Shove
Spike
Stalactites
Macroscopic quantum phenomena
Névé
Needle
Rime
Sea
Slurry
Slush
Snow
Storm
Superionic
Volcano
Ice-relatedactivities
Bathing
Blasting
Blocking
Climbing
Fishing
Rafting
Sculpture
Skating
Sports
Bandy
Iceboating
Cricket
Curling
Cycling
Figure skating
Hockey
Racing
Tour skating
Constructions
Bar
Bridge
Hotel
Igloo
Palace
Pier
Pykrete
Road
Work
Cutting
Icebox
Icehouse
Iceman (occupation)
Pick
Trade
Yakhchāl
Other uses
Chips
Core
Cream
Cube
Pack
Ice ages
Glaciology
Little Ice Age
Pleistocene
Category
Wikimedia Commons
Wiktionary
Portal: Mountains
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiversityWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 17:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
