Jakarta - Wikipedia
Jakarta
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Capital of Indonesia
For other uses, see Jakarta (disambiguation).
"Jacatra" redirects here.
For the genus of cicada, see Jacatra (cicada).
Special Capital Region in IndonesiaJakartaSpecial Capital RegionSpecial Capital Region of JakartaDaerah Khusus Ibukota JakartaFrom top, left to right:Skyline of Golden Triangle of Jakarta viewed from South JakartaCar-free day in Bundaran HIMerdeka PalaceNational Museum of IndonesiaGelora Bung Karno StadiumJakarta History Museum in the Jakarta Old TownMonas
FlagCoat of armsMotto(s): Jaya Raya (Kawi)"Victorious and Great"Interactive map of JakartaJakartaLocation in Java and IndonesiaShow map of JavaJakartaJakarta (Indonesia)Show map of IndonesiaJakartaJakarta (Southeast Asia)Show map of Southeast AsiaJakartaJakarta (Asia)Show map of AsiaJakartaJakarta (Earth)Show map of EarthCoordinates: 6°10′30″S 106°49′39″E﻿ / ﻿6.17500°S 106.82750°E﻿ / -6.17500; 106.82750Coordinates: 6°10′30″S 106°49′39″E﻿ / ﻿6.17500°S 106.82750°E﻿ / -6.17500; 106.82750CountryIndonesiaAdministrative cities and regencies
List
Central JakartaNorth JakartaSouth JakartaWest JakartaEast JakartaThousand Islands
Founded22 June 1527Established as Batavia1619City status4 March 1621Province status28 August 1961Government • TypeSpecial administrative area • BodyDKI Jakarta Provincial Government • GovernorAnies Baswedan • Vice GovernorAhmad Riza Patria • LegislativeJakarta Regional People's Representative CouncilArea • Special Capital Region664.01 km2 (256.38 sq mi) • Urban3,540 km2 (1,367 sq mi) • Metro7,062.5 km2 (2,726.8 sq mi) • Rank34th in IndonesiaElevation8 m (26 ft)Population (mid 2021 estimate) • Special Capital Region10,609,681 • Rank6th in Indonesia • Density15,978.2/km2 (41,383/sq mi) • Urban34,540,000 • Urban density9,756/km2 (25,270/sq mi) • Metro33,430,285 • Metro density4,733/km2 (12,260/sq mi)DemonymJakartanDemographics • Ethnic groups36.17% Javanese28.29% Betawi14.61% Sundanese6.62% Chinese3.42% Batak2.85% Minangkabau0.96% Malay7.08% Others • Religion (2021)83.68% Islam8.6% Protestantism3.93% Catholicism3.59% Buddhism0.18% Hinduism0.02% ConfucianismTime zoneUTC+07:00 (Indonesia Western Time)ZIP Codes10110–14540, 19110–19130Area code+62 21ISO 3166 codeID-JKVehicle registrationBGDP (nominal)2019 - TotalRp 2,840.8 trillion (1st)$ 200.9 billion$ 660.3 billion (PPP) - Per capitaRp 269,074 thousand (1st)$ 19,029$ 55,184 (PPP) - Growth 5.9%HDI (2021) 0.811 (1st) – very highGeoTLD.idMajor airportsSHIA (CGK)Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport (HLP)Commuter rail Rapid transitWebsite
Jakarta (/dʒəˈkɑːrtə/; Indonesian pronunciation: [dʒaˈkarta] (listen)), officially the Special Capital Region of Jakarta (Indonesian: Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta), is the Largest City of Indonesia.
Lying on the northwest coast of Java, the world's most populous island, Jakarta is the largest city in Southeast Asia and serves as the diplomatic capital of ASEAN.
The city is the centre of the economy, culture, and politics of Indonesia.
It has a province level status which has a population of 10,609,681 as of mid 2021. Although Jakarta extends over only 664.01 km2 (256.38 sq mi), and thus has the smallest area of any Indonesian province, its metropolitan area covers 9,957.08 km2 (3,844.45 sq mi), which includes the satellite cities Bogor, Depok, Tangerang, South Tangerang, and Bekasi, and has an estimated population of 35 million as of 2021[update], making it the largest urban area in Indonesia and the second-largest in the world (after Tokyo). Jakarta ranks first among the Indonesian provinces in human development index.
Jakarta's business opportunities, and its ability to offer a potentially higher standard of living than is available in other parts of the country, have attracted migrants from across the Indonesian archipelago, making it a melting pot of numerous cultures.
Jakarta is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in Southeast Asia.
Established in the fourth century as Sunda Kelapa, the city became an important trading port for the Sunda Kingdom.
At one time, it was the de facto capital of the Dutch East Indies, when it was known as Batavia.
Jakarta was officially a city within West Java until 1960, when its official status was changed to a province with special capital region distinction.
As a province, its government consists of five administrative cities and one administrative regency.
Jakarta is an alpha world city and is the seat of the ASEAN secretariat, Financial institutions such as the Bank of Indonesia, Indonesia Stock Exchange, and corporate headquarters of numerous Indonesian companies and multinational corporations are located in the city.
In 2017, the city's GRP PPP was estimated at US$483.4 billion.
Jakarta's primary challenges include rapid urban growth, ecological breakdown, gridlocked traffic, congestion, and flooding.
Jakarta is sinking up to 17 cm (6.7 inches) per year, which, coupled with the rising of sea levels, has made the city more prone to flooding.
It is one of the fastest-sinking capitals in the world.
Because of these challenges, in August 2019, President Joko Widodo announced that the capital of Indonesia would be moved from Jakarta to the planned city of Nusantara, in the province of East Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
Contents
Name
Replica of the Padrão of Sunda Kalapa (1522), a stone pillar with a cross of the Order of Christ commemorating a treaty between the Portuguese Empire and the Hindu Sunda Kingdom, at Jakarta History Museum.
Jakarta has been home to multiple settlements.
Below is the list of names used during its existence.
Sunda Kelapa (397–1527)
Jayakarta (1527–1619)
Batavia (1619–1942)
Djakarta (1942–1972)
Jakarta (1972–present)
The name 'Jakarta' is derived from the word Jayakarta (Devanagari: जयकर्त) which is ultimately derived from the Sanskrit जय jaya (victorious), and कृत krta (accomplished, acquired), thus Jayakarta translates as 'victorious deed', 'complete act' or 'complete victory'. It was named after Muslim troops of Fatahillah successfully defeated and drove out the Portuguese away from the city in 1527. Before it was called Jayakarta, the city was known as 'Sunda Kelapa'. Tomé Pires, a Portuguese apothecary during his journey to East Indies, wrote the city name on his magnum opus as Jacatra or Jacarta.
In the 17th century, the city was known as Koningin van het Oosten (Queen of the Orient), a name that was given for the urban beauty of downtown Batavia's canals, mansions and ordered city layout.
After expanding to the south in the 19th century, this nickname came to be more associated with the suburbs (e.g.
Menteng and the area around Merdeka Square), with their wide lanes, green spaces and villas.
During the Japanese occupation, the city was renamed as Jakaruta Tokubetsu-shi (ジャカルタ特別市, Jakarta Special City).
The official name used is Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta, which literally means Jakarta Special Capital Region.
History
Main article: History of Jakarta
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Jakarta.
Precolonial era
Further information: Sunda Kelapa
The 5th-century Tugu inscription discovered in Tugu district, North Jakarta
The north coast area of western Java including Jakarta was the location of prehistoric Buni culture that flourished from 400 BC to 100 AD. The area in and around modern Jakarta was part of the 4th-century Sundanese kingdom of Tarumanagara, one of the oldest Hindu kingdoms in Indonesia.
The area of North Jakarta around Tugu became a populated settlement in the early 5th century.
The Tugu inscription (probably written around 417 AD) discovered in Batutumbuh hamlet, Tugu village, Koja, North Jakarta, mentions that King Purnawarman of Tarumanagara undertook hydraulic projects; the irrigation and water drainage project of the Chandrabhaga river and the Gomati river near his capital.
Following the decline of Tarumanagara, its territories, including the Jakarta area, became part of the Hindu Kingdom of Sunda.
From the 7th to the early 13th century, the port of Sunda was under the Srivijaya maritime empire.
According to the Chinese source, Chu-fan-chi, written circa 1225, Chou Ju-kua reported in the early 13th century that Srivijaya still ruled Sumatra, the Malay peninsula and western Java (Sunda). The source says the port of Sunda as strategic and thriving, mentioning pepper from Sunda as among the best in quality.
The people worked in agriculture, and their houses were built on wooden piles.
The harbour area became known as Sunda Kelapa, (Sundanese: ᮞᮥᮔ᮪ᮓ ᮊᮨᮜᮕ) and by the 14th century, it was an important trading port for the Sunda Kingdom.
The first European fleet, four Portuguese ships from Malacca, arrived in 1513 while looking for a route for spices.
The Sunda Kingdom made an alliance treaty with the Portuguese by allowing them to build a port in 1522 to defend against the rising power of Demak Sultanate from central Java.
In 1527, Fatahillah, a Javanese general from Demak attacked and conquered Sunda Kelapa, driving out the Portuguese.
Sunda Kelapa was renamed Jayakarta, and became a fiefdom of the Banten Sultanate, which became a major Southeast Asian trading centre.
Through the relationship with Prince Jayawikarta of Banten Sultanate, Dutch ships arrived in 1596. In 1602, the British East India Company's first voyage, commanded by Sir James Lancaster, arrived in Aceh and sailed on to Banten where they were allowed to build a trading post.
This site became the centre of British trade in the Indonesian archipelago until 1682. Jayawikarta is thought to have made trading connections with the British merchants, rivals of the Dutch, by allowing them to build houses directly across from the Dutch buildings in 1615.
Colonial era
See also: Batavia, Dutch East Indies and List of colonial buildings and structures in Jakarta
Batavia around 1780
When relations between Prince Jayawikarta and the Dutch deteriorated, his soldiers attacked the Dutch fortress.
His army and the British, however, were defeated by the Dutch, in part owing to the timely arrival of Jan Pieterszoon Coen.
The Dutch burned the British fort and forced them to retreat on their ships.
The victory consolidated Dutch power, and they renamed the city Batavia in 1619.
The City Hall of Batavia (Stadhuis van Batavia), the seat of the governor-general of the VOC in the late 18th century by Johannes Rach c. 1770. The building now houses the Jakarta History Museum, Jakarta Old Town.
Commercial opportunities in the city attracted native and especially Chinese and Arab immigrants.
This sudden population increase created burdens on the city.
Tensions grew as the colonial government tried to restrict Chinese migration through deportations.
Following a revolt, 5,000 Chinese were massacred by the Dutch and natives on 9 October 1740, and the following year, Chinese inhabitants were moved to Glodok outside the city walls.
At the beginning of the 19th century, around 400 Arabs and Moors lived in Batavia, a number that changed little during the following decades.
Among the commodities traded were fabrics, mainly imported cotton, batik and clothing worn by Arab communities.
The city began to expand further south as epidemics in 1835 and 1870 forced residents to move away from the port.
The Koningsplein, now Merdeka Square was completed in 1818, the housing park of Menteng was started in 1913, and Kebayoran Baru was the last Dutch-built residential area.
By 1930, Batavia had more than 500,000 inhabitants, including 37,067 Europeans.
On 5 March 1942, the Japanese wrested Batavia from Dutch control, and the city was named Jakarta (Jakarta Special City (ジャカルタ特別市, Jakaruta tokubetsu-shi), under the special status that was assigned to the city). After the war, the Dutch name Batavia was internationally recognised until full Indonesian independence on 27 December 1949. The city, now renamed Jakarta, was officially proclaimed the national capital of Indonesia.
Independence era
One of the most monumental projects launched by Sukarno was the demolition of government buildings in Merdeka Square to make way for the National Monument.
After World War II ended, Indonesian nationalists declared independence on 17 August 1945, and the government of Jakarta City was changed into the Jakarta National Administration in the following month.
During the Indonesian National Revolution, Indonesian Republicans withdrew from Allied-occupied Jakarta and established their capital in Yogyakarta.
After securing full independence, Jakarta again became the national capital in 1950. With Jakarta selected to host the 1962 Asian Games, Soekarno, envisaging Jakarta as a great international city, instigated large government-funded projects with openly nationalistic and modernist architecture.
Projects included a cloverleaf interchange, a major boulevard (Jalan MH Thamrin-Sudirman), monuments such as The National Monument, Hotel Indonesia, a shopping centre, and a new building intended to be the headquarters of CONEFO. In October 1965, Jakarta was the site of an abortive coup attempt in which six top generals were killed, precipitating a violent anti-communist purge which killed at least 500,000 people, including some ethnic Chinese.
The event marked the beginning of Suharto's New Order.
The first government was led by a mayor until the end of 1960 when the office was changed to that of a governor.
The last mayor of Jakarta was Soediro until he was replaced by Soemarno Sosroatmodjo as governor.
Based on law No. 5 of 1974 relating to regional governments, Jakarta was confirmed as the capital of Indonesia and one of the country's then 26 provinces.
In 1966, Jakarta was declared a 'special capital region' (Daerah Khusus Ibukota), with a status equivalent to that of a province.
Lieutenant General Ali Sadikin served as governor from 1966 to 1977; he rehabilitated roads and bridges, encouraged the arts, built hospitals and a large number of schools.
He cleared out slum dwellers for new development projects — some for the benefit of the Suharto family,— and attempted to eliminate rickshaws and ban street vendors.
He began control of migration to the city to stem overcrowding and poverty.
Foreign investment contributed to a real estate boom that transformed the face of Jakarta.
The boom ended with the 1997 Asian financial crisis, putting Jakarta at the centre of violence, protest, and political manoeuvring.
After three decades in power, support for President Suharto began to wane.
Tensions peaked when four students were shot dead at Trisakti University by security forces.
Four days of riots and violence in 1998 ensued that killed an estimated 1,200, and destroyed or damaged 6,000 buildings, forcing Suharto to resign.
Much of the rioting targeted Chinese Indonesians.
In the post-Suharto era, Jakarta has remained the focal point of democratic change in Indonesia.
Jemaah Islamiah-connected bombings occurred almost annually in the city between 2000 and 2005, with another in 2009. In August 2007, Jakarta held its first-ever election to choose a governor as part of a nationwide decentralisation program that allows direct local elections in several areas.
Previously, governors were elected by the city's legislative body.
During the Jokowi presidency, the Government adopted a plan to move Indonesia's capital to East Kalimantan.
Geography
Main articles: Geography of Jakarta, Floods in Jakarta, Jakarta Flood Canal, and Giant Sea Wall Jakarta
Jakarta covers 699.5 km2 (270.1 sq mi), the smallest among any Indonesian provinces.
However, its metropolitan area covers 6,392 km2 (2,468 sq mi), which extends into two of the bordering provinces of West Java and Banten.
The Greater Jakarta area includes three bordering regencies (Bekasi Regency, Tangerang Regency and Bogor Regency) and five adjacent cities (Bogor, Depok, Bekasi, Tangerang and South Tangerang).
Central Jakarta View from Monas
Aerial view of North Jakarta
Ancol beach
Jakarta is situated on the northwest coast of Java, at the mouth of the Ciliwung River on Jakarta Bay, an inlet of the Java Sea.  It is strategically located near the Sunda Strait.
The northern part of Jakarta is plain land, some areas of which are below sea level, and subject to frequent flooding.
The southern parts of the city are hilly.
It is one of only two Asian capital cities located in the southern hemisphere (along with East Timor's Dili). Officially, the area of the Jakarta Special District is 662 km2 (256 sq mi) of land area and 6,977 km2 (2,694 sq mi) of sea area.
The Thousand Islands, which are administratively a part of Jakarta, are located in Jakarta Bay, north of the city.
Jakarta lies in a low and flat alluvial plain, ranging from −2 to 91 m (−7 to 299 ft) with an average elevation of 8 m (26 ft) above sea level with historically extensive swampy areas.
Some parts of the city have been constructed on reclaimed tidal flats that occur in around the area.
Thirteen rivers flow through Jakarta.
They are Ciliwung River, Kalibaru, Pesanggrahan, Cipinang, Angke River, Maja, Mookervart, Krukut, Buaran, West Tarum, Cakung, Petukangan, Sunter River and Grogol River.
They flow from the Puncak highlands to the south of the city, then across the city northwards towards the Java Sea.
The Ciliwung River divides the city into the western and eastern districts.
These rivers, combined with the wet season rains and insufficient drainage due to clogging, make Jakarta prone to flooding.
Moreover, Jakarta is sinking about 5 to 10 cm (2.0 to 3.9 in) each year, and up to 20 cm (7.9 in) in the northern coastal areas.
After a feasibility study, a ring dyke known as Giant Sea Wall Jakarta is under construction around Jakarta Bay to help cope with the threat from the sea.
The dyke will be equipped with a pumping system and retention areas to defend against seawater and function as a toll road.
The project is expected to be completed by 2025. In January 2014, the central government agreed to build two dams in Ciawi, Bogor and a 1.2 km (0.75 mi) tunnel from Ciliwung River to Cisadane River to ease flooding in the city.
Nowadays, a 1.2 km (0.75 mi), with capacity 60 m3 (2,100 cu ft) per second, underground water tunnel between Ciliwung River and the East Flood Canal is being worked on to ease the Ciliwung River overflows.
Environmental advocates point out that subsidence is driven by the extraction of groundwater, much of it illegal.
This could be halted by stopping extraction (as the city of Tokyo has done), increasing efficiency, and finding other sources for water use.
The rivers of Jakarta are highly polluted and currently unsuitable for drinking water.
Architecture
See also: Colonial architecture in Jakarta, List of tallest buildings in Jakarta, and Golden Triangle of Jakarta
Facade of the Museum Bank Indonesia in Kota Tua
Jakarta has architecturally significant buildings spanning distinct historical and cultural periods.
Architectural styles reflect Malay, Javanese, Arabic, Chinese and Dutch influences.
External influences inform the architecture of the Betawi house.
The houses were built of nangka wood (Artocarpus integrifolia) and comprise three rooms.
The shape of the roof is reminiscent of the traditional Javanese joglo.
Additionally, the number of registered cultural heritage buildings has increased.
Colonial buildings and structures include those that were constructed during the colonial period.
The dominant colonial styles can be divided into three periods: the Dutch Golden Age (17th to late 18th century), the transitional style period (late 18th century – 19th century), and Dutch modernism (20th century). Colonial architecture is apparent in houses and villas, churches, civic buildings and offices, mostly concentrated in the Jakarta Old Town and Central Jakarta.
Architects such as J.C. Schultze and Eduard Cuypers designed some of the significant buildings.
Schultze's works include Jakarta Art Building, the Indonesia Supreme Court Building and Ministry of Finance Building, while Cuypers designed Bank Indonesia Museum and Bank Mandiri Museum.
Wisma 46 in post-modernist architecture, the fourth tallest building in Jakarta
In the early 20th century, most buildings were built in Neo-Renaissance style.
By the 1920s, the architectural taste had begun to shift in favour of rationalism and modernism, particularly art deco architecture.
The elite suburb Menteng, developed during the 1910s, was the city's first attempt at creating ideal and healthy housing for the middle class.
The original houses had a longitudinal organisation, with overhanging eaves, large windows and open ventilation, all practical features for a tropical climate.
These houses were developed by N.V. de Bouwploeg, and established by P.A.J. Moojen.
After independence, the process of nation-building in Indonesia and demolishing the memory of colonialism was as important as the symbolic building of arterial roads, monuments, and government buildings.
The National Monument in Jakarta, designed by Sukarno, is Indonesia's beacon of nationalism.
In the early 1960s, Jakarta provided highways and super-scale cultural monuments as well as Senayan Sports Stadium.
The parliament building features a hyperbolic roof reminiscent of German rationalist and Corbusian design concepts.
Built-in 1996, Wisma 46 soars to a height of 262 m (860 ft) and its nib-shaped top celebrates technology and symbolises stereoscopy.
The urban construction booms continued during the 21st century.
The Golden Triangle of Jakarta is one of the fastest evolving CBD's in the Asia-Pacific region.
According to CTBUH and Emporis, there are 88 skyscrapers that reach or exceed 150 m (490 ft), which puts the city in the top 10 of world rankings.
It has more buildings taller than 150 metres than any other Southeast Asian or Southern Hemisphere cities.
Landmarks
view of Monas, Jakarta's landmark
Bundaran HI, a 1960s landmark of Jakarta located at the west end of Menteng District.
Most landmarks, monuments and statues in Jakarta were begun in the 1960s during the Sukarno era, then completed in the Suharto era, while some date from the colonial period.
Although many of the projects were completed after his presidency, Sukarno, who was an architect, is credited for planning Jakarta's monuments and landmarks, as he desired the city to be the beacon of a powerful new nation.
Among the monumental projects were built, initiated, and planned during his administration are the National Monument, Istiqlal mosque, the Legislature Building, and the Gelora Bung Karno stadium.
Sukarno also built many nationalistic monuments and statues in the capital city.
The most famous landmark, which became the symbol of the city, is the 132 m-tall (433 ft) obelisk of the National Monument (Monumen Nasional or Monas) in the centre of Merdeka Square.
On its southwest corner stands a Mahabharata-themed Arjuna Wijaya chariot statue and fountain.
Further south through Jalan M.H. Thamrin, one of the main avenues, the Selamat Datang monument stands on the fountain in the centre of the Hotel Indonesia roundabout.
Other landmarks include the Istiqlal Mosque, Jakarta Cathedral and the Immanuel Church.
The former Batavia Stadhuis, Sunda Kelapa port in Jakarta Old Town is another landmark.
The Gama Tower building in South Jakarta, at 310 metres, is the tallest building in Indonesia.
The most recent landmark built is the Jakarta International Stadium.
Some of statues and monuments are nationalist, such as the West Irian Liberation Monument, the Tugu Tani, the Youth statue and the Dirgantara statue.
Some statues commemorate Indonesian national heroes, such as the Diponegoro and Kartini statues in Merdeka Square.
The Sudirman and Thamrin statues are located on the streets bearing their names.
There is also a statue of Sukarno and Hatta at the Proclamation Monument at the entrance to Soekarno–Hatta International Airport.
Parks and lakes
Boat ride at Indonesian archipelago lake in Taman Mini Indonesia Indah
In June 2011, Jakarta had only 10.5% green open spaces (Ruang Terbuka Hijau), although this grew to 13.94%. Public parks are included in public green open spaces.
There are about 300 integrated child-friendly public spaces (RPTRA) in the city in 2019. As of 2014, 183 water reservoirs and lakes supported the greater Jakarta area.
Merdeka Square (Medan Merdeka) is an almost 1 km2 field housing the symbol of Jakarta, Monas or Monumen Nasional (National Monument). Until 2000, it was the world's largest city square.
The square was created by Dutch Governor-General Herman Willem Daendels (1810) and was originally named Koningsplein (King's Square). On 10 January 1993, President Soeharto started the beautification of the square.
Features including a deer park and 33 trees that represent the 33 provinces of Indonesia.
Lapangan Banteng (Buffalo Field) is located in Central Jakarta near Istiqlal Mosque, Jakarta Cathedral, and Jakarta Central Post Office.
It covers about 4.5 hectares.
Initially, it was called Waterlooplein and functioned as a ceremonial square during the colonial period.
Colonial monuments and memorials erected on the square during the colonial period were demolished during the Sukarno era.
The most notable monument in the square is the Monumen Pembebasan Irian Barat (Monument of the Liberation of West Irian). During the 1970s and 1980s, the park was used as a bus terminal.
In 1993, the park was again turned into a public space.
It became a recreation place for people and now serves as an exhibition place or for other events. 'Jakarta Flona' (Flora dan Fauna), a flower and decoration plants and pet exhibition, is held in this park around August annually.
Ancol Gondola
Taman Mini Indonesia Indah (Miniature Park of Indonesia), in East Jakarta, has ten mini-parks.
Suropati Park is located in Menteng, Central Jakarta.
The park is surrounded by Dutch colonial buildings.
Taman Suropati was known as Burgemeester Bisschopplein during the colonial time.
The park is circular-shaped with a surface area of 16,322 m2 (175,690 sq ft). Several modern statues were made for the park by artists of ASEAN countries, which contributes to its nickname 'Taman persahabatan seniman ASEAN' ('Park of the ASEAN artists friendship').
Menteng Park was built on the site of the former Persija football stadium.
Situ Lembang Park is also located nearby, which has a lake at the centre.
Kalijodo Park is the newest park, in Penjaringan subdistrict, with 3.4 ha (8.4 acres) beside the Krendang River.
It formally opened on 22 February 2017. The park is open 24 hours as green open space (RTH) and child-friendly integrated public space (RPTRA) and has international-standard skateboard facilities.
Muara Angke Wildlife Sanctuary and Angke Kapuk Nature Tourism Park at Penjaringan in North Jakarta.
Ragunan Zoo is located in Pasar Minggu, South Jakarta.
It is the world's third-oldest zoo and is the second-largest with the most diverse animal and plant populations.
Setu Babakan is a 32-hectare lake surrounded by Betawi cultural village, located at Jagakarsa, South Jakarta.
Dadap Merah Park is also found in this area.
Ancol Dreamland is the largest integrated tourism area in Southeast Asia.
It is located along the bay, at Ancol in North Jakarta.
Taman Waduk Pluit/Pluit Lake park and Putra Putri Park at Pluit, North Jakarta.
Tebet Honda Park, Puring Park, Mataram Park, Langsat Park, Ayodya Park and Swadharma Park in South Jakarta.
Climate
Jakarta
Climate chart (explanation)
Average max. and min. temperatures in °C
Precipitation totals in mmSource: BMKG
Imperial conversion
JFMAMJJASOND
7.5
4.3
2.6
2.1
2.4
4.4
4.9
7.7
Average max. and min. temperatures in °F
Precipitation totals in inches
Jakarta has a tropical monsoon climate (Am) according to the Köppen climate classification system.
The wet season in Jakarta covers seven months: November to May.
The remaining five months (June to October) constitute the city's drier season (save for June having an average monthly rainfall of less than 100 mm (3.9 in). August qualifies as the genuine dry season month, as it has less than 60 mm (2.4 in) of rainfall.
As across the western part of Java the wet season rainfall peaks in January and February with average monthly rainfall of 297.7 mm (11.72 in), and its dry season's low point is in August with a monthly average of 43.2 mm (1.70 in).
Climate data for Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport, Jakarta, Indonesia (temperature: 1924–1994, precipitation: 1931–1994)
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
Daily mean °C (°F)
Average low °C (°F)
Record low °C (°F)
Average rainfall mm (inches)
1,816(71.5)
Average rainy days
Average relative humidity (%)
Mean monthly sunshine hours
2,975
Source 1: Sistema de Clasificación Bioclimática Mundial
Source 2: Danish Meteorological Institute (humidity and sun only)
Climate data for Jakarta
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Average sea temperature °C (°F)
Mean daily daylight hours
Average Ultraviolet index
Source: Weather Atlas
Demographics
Historical populationYearPop.±%187065,000—    187599,100+52.5%1880102,900+3.8%188397,000−5.7%1886100,500+3.6%1890105,100+4.6%1901115,900+10.3%1905138,600+19.6%1918234,700+69.3%1920253,800+8.1%1925290,400+14.4%1928311,000+7.1%1930435,184+39.9%1940530,000+21.8%1945600,000+13.2%19501,800,000+200.0%19592,814,000+56.3%19602,678,740−4.8%19612,906,533+8.5%19703,915,406+34.7%19806,700,000+71.1%19857,900,000+17.9%19908,174,756+3.5%20008,389,759+2.6%20109,625,579+14.7%202010,562,088+9.7%202110,609,681+0.5%Note: Census figures (1950 and 1980) cover the actual and projected populations of the largest asian urban agglomerations.
According to the Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics, 23 per cent of urban residents live in poverty.
With a population of 7.9 million in 1985, Jakarta accounted for 19 per cent of the total Indonesia urban population.Source:  Jakarta attracts people from across Indonesia, often in search of employment.
The 1961 census showed that 51% of the city's population was born in Jakarta.
Inward immigration tended to negate the effect of family planning programs.  Ministry of Home Affairs (Kemendagri) tabulates its own data, which has improved since id card requirements in last decade, lists Jakarta's population at 11,261,595 in yearend 2021.
Between 1961 and 1980, the population of Jakarta doubled, and during the period 1980–1990, the city's population grew annually by 3.7%. The 2010 census counted some 9.58 million people, well above government estimates.
The population rose from 4.5 million in 1970 to 9.5 million in 2010, counting only legal residents, while the population of Greater Jakarta rose from 8.2 million in 1970 to 28.5 million in 2010. As of 2014, the population of Jakarta stood at 10 million, with a population density of 15,174 people/km2. In 2014, the population of Greater Jakarta was 30 million, accounting for 11% of Indonesia's overall population.
It is predicted to reach 35.6 million people by 2030 to become the world's biggest megacity.
The gender ratio was 102.8 (males per 100 females) in 2010, and 101.3 in 2014.
Ethnicity
Ethnic Groups in Jakarta
Javanese (36.17%)  Betawi (28.29%)  Sundanese (14.61%)  Chinese (6.62%)  Batak (3.42%)  Minang (2.85%)  Malay (0.96%)  Others (7.06%)
Jakarta is pluralistic and religiously diverse, without a majority ethnic group.
As of 2010, 36.17% of the city's population were Javanese, 28.29% Betawi (locally established mixed race, cemented by diverse creole), 14.61% Sundanese, 6.62% Chinese, 3.42% Batak, 2.85% Minangkabau, 0.96% Malays, Indo and others 7.08%.
Chinese in Jakarta praying during Chinese New Year in Glodok, Jakarta
The 'Betawi' (Orang Betawi, or 'people of Batavia') are immigrant-descendants of the old city who became widely recognised as an ethnic group by the mid-19th century.
They mostly descend from an eclectic mix of Southeast Asians brought or attracted to meet labour needs.
They are thus a creole ethnic group who came from much of Indonesia.
Over generations, most have intermarried with one or more ethnicities, especially people of Chinese, Arab and European descent.
Most Betawis lived in the fringe zones with few Betawi-majority zones of central Jakarta.
It is thus a conundrum for some Javanese people, especially multi-generational Jakarta residents, to identify as either Javanese or Betawi, since living in a Betawi-majority district and speaking more of that creole and adapting is a matter of preference for such families.
A significant Chinese community has lived in Jakarta for many centuries.
They traditionally reside around old urban areas, such as Pinangsia, Pluit and Glodok (Jakarta's Chinatown) areas.
They also can be found in the old Chinatowns of Senen and Jatinegara.
As of 2001 they self-identified as being 5.5%, which was thought of as under-reported; this explains the 6.6% figure ten years later.
The Sumatran residents are diverse.
According to the 2010 census, roughly 346,000 Batak, 305,000 Minangkabau and 155,000 Malays lived in the city.
The number of Batak people has grown in ranking, from eighth in 1930 to fifth in 2000. Toba Batak is the largest subset in Jakarta.
Working Minangkabau in the 1980s in high proportions were well-embedded merchants, peddlers, artisans, doctors, teachers or journalists.
Language
Indonesian is the official and dominant language of Jakarta, while many elderly people speak Dutch or Chinese, depending on their upbringing.
English is used for communication, especially in Central and South Jakarta.
Each of the ethnic groups uses their mother tongue at home, such as Betawi, Javanese, and Sundanese.
The Betawi language is distinct from those of the Sundanese or Javanese, forming itself as a language island in the surrounding area.
It is mostly based on the East Malay dialect and enriched by loan words from Dutch, Portuguese, Sundanese, Javanese, Chinese, and Arabic, the Betawi language transform into Jakarta slang, which is all Jakartans used till today no matter which ethnic they are come from.
The Chinese in Jakarta mainly speak Indonesian and English, due to strict language-ban during Soeharto's new order era, the older may be fluent in Hokkien dialect and Mandarin, meanwhile the youngster are only fluent in Indonesian and English, some are educated in Mandarin.
With recent urbanization within chinese around several rural areas from Indonesia, it bringing other Chinese dialects into the Chinese community in Jakarta such as Hakka, Teochew and Cantonese.
The Hokkien which is mainly from Sumatra (Medan, Bagansiapiapi, Batam) are mostly spoken in Northern Jakarta, such as Pantai Indah Kapuk, Pluit, and Glodok, meanwhile Hakka and Teochew which is derived from Chinese community from Pontianak and Singkawang are mainly spoken in West Jakarta like Tambora and Grogol Petamburan.
The Batak in Jakarta mostly speak Indonesian, while the older generation tend to speak their native languages such as Batak and Karo, depending on which ancestral town and places from North Sumatra they come from.
The Minangkabau mainly speak Minangkabau language aside from Indonesian.
Religion
Religion in Jakarta (2021)
Islam (83.68%)  Protestantism (8.6%)  Catholicism (3.93%)  Buddhism (3.59%)  Hinduism (0.18%)  Confucianism (0.02%)
In 2017, Jakarta's religious composition was distributed over Islam (83.43%), Protestantism (8.63%), Catholicism (4.0%), Buddhism (3.74%), Hinduism (0.19%), and Confucianism (0.01%). About 231 people claimed to follow folk religions.
Most pesantren (Islamic boarding schools) in Jakarta are affiliated with the traditionalist Nahdlatul Ulama, modernist organisations mostly catering to a socioeconomic class of educated urban elites and merchant traders.
They give priority to education, social welfare programs and religious propagation.
Many Islamic organisations have headquarters in Jakarta, including Nahdlatul Ulama, Indonesian Ulema Council, Muhammadiyah, and Jaringan Islam Liberal.
The Roman Catholic community has a Metropolis, the Archdiocese of Jakarta that includes West Java as part of the ecclesiastical province.
Jakarta also host the largest Buddhism adherent in Java Island, where most of the followers are the Chinese, The city also has Hindu community, which mainly are from Balinese and Indian people.
There is also a Sikh and Baháʼí Faith community presence in Jakarta.
Istiqlal Mosque, the largest mosque in Indonesia.
The Jakarta Cathedral, one of the oldest churches in Jakarta.
Kim Tek Ie, the oldest Taoist and Buddhist temple in Jakarta.
Aditya Jaya Hindu temple, Rawamangun, East Jakarta.
Economy
See also: Category:Companies of Indonesia
The Indonesian Stock Exchange (Bursa Efek Indonesia) building in Jakarta, one of the oldest in Asia.
Indonesia is the largest economy of ASEAN, and Jakarta is the economic nerve centre of the Indonesian archipelago.
Jakarta's nominal GDP was US$483.8 billion in 2016, which is about 17.5% of Indonesia's.
Jakarta ranked at 21 in the list of Cities Of Economic Influence Index in 2020 by CEOWORLD magazine.
According to the Japan Center for Economic Research, GRP per capita of Jakarta will rank 28th among the 77 cities in 2030 from 41st in 2015, the largest in Southeast Asia.
Savills Resilient Cities Index has predicted Jakarta to be within the top 20 cities in the world by 2028.
Jakarta's economy depends highly on manufacturing and service sectors such as banking, trading and financial.
Industries include electronics, automotive, chemicals, mechanical engineering and biomedical sciences.
The head office of Bank Indonesia and Indonesia Stock Exchange are located in the city.
Most of the SOEs include Pertamina, PLN, Angkasa Pura, and Telkomsel operate head offices in the city, as do major Indonesian conglomerates, such as Salim Group, Sinar Mas Group, Astra International, Gudang Garam, Kompas-Gramedia, and MNC Group.
The headquarters of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Indonesian Employers Association are also located in the city.
As of 2017, the city is home to six Forbes Global 2000, two Fortune 500 and seven Unicorn companies.
Google and Alibaba have regional cloud centers in Jakarta.
Bank Indonesia head office
As of 2018, Jakarta contributes about 17% of Indonesia's GRDP (Gross Regional Domestic Product). In 2017, the economic growth was 6.22%. Throughout the same year, the total value of investment was Rp 108.6 trillion (US$8 billion), an increase of 84.7% from the previous year.
In 2015, GDP per capita was estimated at Rp 194.87 million (US$14,570). The most significant contributions to GRDP were by finance, ownership and business services (29%); trade, hotel and restaurant sector (20%), and manufacturing industry sector (16%). In 2007, the increase in per capita GRDP of Jakarta inhabitants was 11.6% compared to the previous year.
Both GRDP by at current market price and GRDP by at 2000 constant price in 2007 for the Municipality of Central Jakarta, which was Rp 146 million and Rp 81 million, was higher than other municipalities in Jakarta.
The Wealth Report 2015 by Knight Frank reported that 24 individuals in Indonesia in 2014 had wealth at least US$1 billion and 18 live in Jakarta.
The cost of living continues to rise.
Both land price and rents have become expensive.
Mercer's 2017 Cost of Living Survey ranked Jakarta as 88th costliest city in the world for expatriates.
Industrial development and the construction of new housing thrive on the outskirts, while commerce and banking remain concentrated in the city centre.
Jakarta has a bustling luxury property market.
Knight Frank, a global real estate consultancy based in London, reported in 2014 that Jakarta offered the highest return on high-end property investment in the world in 2013, citing a supply shortage and a sharply depreciated currency as reasons.
Golden Triangle, extending from Central Jakarta to South Jakarta.
Most of the city's foreign embassies and tallest skyscrapers are located in the area, which is the main CBD of Jakarta.
Shopping
See also: List of shopping malls in Jakarta
Gandaria City Mall in South Jakarta
As of 2015, with a total of 550 hectares, Jakarta had the largest shopping mall floor area within a single city.
Malls include Plaza Indonesia, Grand Indonesia, Plaza Senayan, Senayan City, Pacific Place, Gandaria City, ÆON Mall Tanjung Barat, Mall Taman Anggrek, and Pondok Indah Mall.
Fashion retail brands in Jakarta include Debenhams, in Senayan City and Lippo Mall Kemang Village, Japanese Sogo, Seibu in Grand Indonesia Shopping Town, and French brand, Galeries Lafayette, at Pacific Place.
The new Satrio-Casablanca shopping belt includes centres such as Kuningan City, Mal Ambassador, Kota Kasablanka, and Lotte Shopping Avenue.
Shopping malls are also located at Grogol and Puri Indah in West Jakarta.
Traditional markets include Blok M, Pasar Mayestik, Tanah Abang, Senen, Pasar Baru, Glodok, Mangga Dua, Cempaka Mas, and Jatinegara.
Special markets sell antique goods at Surabaya Street and gemstones in Rawabening Market.
Tourism
Further information: Tourism in Indonesia and List of museums and cultural institutions in Indonesia
Jakarta Old City Post Office at Fatahillah Square, Central Jakarta
Though Jakarta has been named the most popular location as per tag stories, and ranked eighth most-posted among the cities in the world in 2017 on image-sharing site Instagram, it is not a top international tourist destination.
The city, however, is ranked as the fifth fastest-growing tourist destination among 132 cities according to MasterCard Global Destination Cities Index.
The World Travel and Tourism Council also listed Jakarta as among the top ten fastest-growing tourism cities in the world in 2017 and categorised it as an emerging performer, which will see a significant increase in tourist arrivals in less than ten years.
According to Euromonitor International's latest Top 100 City Destinations Ranking of 2019, Jakarta ranked at 57th among 100 most visited cities of the world.
Most visitors to Jakarta are domestic tourists, and Taman Mini Indonesia Indah is aimed at supporting national identity and patriotism.Most of the visitors attracted to Jakarta are domestic tourists.
As the gateway of Indonesia, Jakarta often serves as a stop-over for foreign visitors on their way to other Indonesian tourist destinations such as Bali, Lombok, Komodo Island and Yogyakarta.
Jakarta is trying to attract more international tourist by MICE tourism, by arranging increasing numbers of conventions.
In 2012, the tourism sector contributed Rp. 2.6 trillion (US$268.5 million) to the city's total direct income of Rp. 17.83 trillion (US$1.45 billion), a 17.9% increase from the previous year 2011.
Education
See also: List of universities in Indonesia and List of schools in Indonesia
Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia campus at Semanggi
Jakarta is home to numerous educational institutions.
The University of Indonesia (UI) is the largest and oldest tertiary-level educational institution in Indonesia.
It is a public institution with campuses in Salemba (Central Jakarta) and in Depok.
The three other public universities in Jakarta are Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic University Jakarta, the State University of Jakarta  (UNJ), and the University of Pembangunan Nasional 'Veteran' Jakarta (UPN "Veteran" Jakarta). There is a vocational higher education, Politeknik Negeri Jakarta (PNJ). Some major private universities in Jakarta are Trisakti University, The Christian University of Indonesia, Mercu Buana University, Tarumanagara University, Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia, Pelita Harapan University, Pertamina University, Bina Nusantara University, Jayabaya University, and Pancasila University.
University of Indonesia Salemba campus
STOVIA (School tot Opleiding van Indische Artsen, now Universitas Indonesia) was the first high school in Jakarta, established in 1851. Jakarta houses many students from around Indonesia, many of whom reside in dormitories or home-stay residences.
For basic education, a variety of primary and secondary schools are available, tagged with the public (national), private (national and bi-lingual national plus) and international labels.
Four of the major international schools are the Gandhi Memorial International School, IPEKA International Christian School, Jakarta Intercultural School and the British School Jakarta.
Other international schools include the Jakarta International Korean School, Bina Bangsa School, Jakarta International Multicultural School, Australian International School, New Zealand International School, Singapore International School, Jakarta Japanese School, and Sekolah Pelita Harapan.
Culture and contemporary life
As the capital of Indonesia, Jakarta is a melting pot of cultures from all ethnic groups of the country.
Though Betawi people are an indigenous community of Jakarta, the city's culture represents many languages and ethnic groups, support differences regarding religion, traditions and linguistics, rather than any single and dominant culture.
Arts and festivals
Tanjidor music of Betawi culture demonstrate European influence
The Betawi culture is distinct from those of the Sundanese or Javanese, forming a language island in the surrounding area.
Betawi arts have a low profile in Jakarta, and most Betawi people have moved to the suburbs.
The cultures of the Javanese and other Indonesian ethnic groups have a higher profile than that of the Betawi.
There is a significant Chinese influence in Betawi culture, reflected in the popularity of Chinese cakes and sweets, firecrackers and Betawi wedding attire that demonstrates Chinese and Arab influences.
Some festivals such as the Jalan Jaksa Festival, Kemang Festival, Festival Condet and Lebaran Betawi include efforts to preserve Betawi arts by inviting artists to display performances.
Jakarta has several performing art centres, such as the classical concert hall Aula Simfonia Jakarta in Kemayoran, Taman Ismail Marzuki (TIM) art centre in Cikini, Gedung Kesenian Jakarta near Pasar Baru, Balai Sarbini in the Plaza Semanggi area, Bentara Budaya Jakarta in the Palmerah area, Pasar Seni (Art Market) in Ancol, and traditional Indonesian art performances at the pavilions of some provinces in Taman Mini Indonesia Indah.
Traditional music is often found at high-class hotels, including Wayang and Gamelan performances.
Javanese Wayang Orang performances can be found at Wayang Orang Bharata theatre.
Arts and culture festivals and exhibitions include the annual ARKIPEL – Jakarta International Documentary and Experimental Film Festival, Jakarta International Film Festival (JiFFest), Djakarta Warehouse Project, Jakarta Fashion Week, Jakarta Fashion & Food Festival (JFFF), Jakarnaval, Jakarta Night Festival, Kota Tua Creative Festival, Indonesia International Book Fair (IIBF), Indonesia Creative Products and Jakarta Arts and Crafts exhibition.
Art Jakarta is a contemporary art fair, which is held annually.
Flona Jakarta is a flora-and-fauna exhibition, held annually in August at Lapangan Banteng Park, featuring flowers, plant nurseries, and pets.
Jakarta Fair is held annually from mid-June to mid-July to celebrate the anniversary of the city and is mostly centred around a trade fair.
However, this month-long fair also features entertainment, including arts and music performances by local musicians.
Jakarta International Java Jazz Festival (JJF) is one of the largest jazz festivals in the world, the biggest in the Southern hemisphere, and is held annually in March.
Several foreign art and culture centres in Jakarta promote culture and language through learning centres, libraries and art galleries.
These include the Chinese Confucius Institute, the Dutch Erasmus Huis, the British Council, the French Alliance Française, the German Goethe-Institut, the Japan Foundation, and the Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Center.
Ondel-ondel, often used as a symbol of Betawi culture
Chinese paifang in Mangga Dua, Central Jakarta
The Golden Snail IMAX theatre at Taman Mini Indonesia Indah
Jakarta Fair of 2007
Japanese community celebrating Ennichisai in Blok M, South Jakarta
Traditional Betawi dance, Tari Yapong
Cuisine
Main article: Betawi cuisine
Gado-gado is a popular Indonesian salad dish.
All varieties of Indonesian cuisine have a presence in Jakarta.
The local cuisine is Betawi cuisine, which reflects various foreign culinary traditions.
Betawi cuisine is heavily influenced by Malay-Chinese Peranakan cuisine, Sundanese and Javanese cuisine, which is also influenced by Indian, Arabic and European cuisines.
One of the most popular local dishes of Betawi cuisine is Soto Betawi which is prepared from chunks of beef and offal in rich and spicy cow's milk or coconut milk broth.
Other popular Betawi dishes include soto kaki, nasi uduk, kerak telor (spicy omelette), nasi ulam, asinan, ketoprak, rujak and gado-gado Betawi (salad in peanut sauce).
Jakarta cuisine can be found in modest street-side warung food stalls and kaki lima (five legs) travelling vendors to high-end fine dining restaurants.
Live music venues and exclusive restaurants are abundant.
Many traditional foods from far-flung regions in Indonesia can be found in Jakarta.
For example, traditional Padang restaurants and low-budget Warteg (Warung Tegal) food-stalls are ubiquitous in the capital.
Other popular street foods include nasi goreng (fried rice), sate (skewered meats), pecel lele (fried catfish), bakso (meatballs), bakpau (Chinese bun) and siomay (fish dumplings).
Jalan Sabang, Jalan Sidoarjo, Jalan Kendal at Menteng area, Kota Tua, Blok S, Blok M, Jalan Tebet, are all popular destinations for street-food lovers.
Trendy restaurants, cafe and bars can be found at Menteng, Kemang, Jalan Senopati, Kuningan, Senayan, Pantai Indah Kapuk, and Kelapa Gading.
Chinese street-food is plentiful at Jalan Pangeran, Manga Besar and Petak Sembilan in the old Jakarta area, while the Little Tokyo area of Blok M has many Japanese style restaurants and bars.
Lenggang Jakarta is a food court, accommodating small traders and street vendors, where Indonesian foods are available within a single compound.
At present, there are two such food courts, located at Monas and Kemayoran.
Thamrin 10 is a food and creative park located at Menteng, where varieties of food stall are available.
Global fast-food chains are present, and usually found in Shopping malls, along with local brands like J'CO, Es Teler 77, Kebab Turki, CFC, and Japanese HokBen and Yoshinoya.
Foreign cuisines such as Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Singaporean, Indian, American, Australian, Malaysian, French, Mediterranean cuisines like Maghrebi, Turkish, Italian, Middle Eastern cuisine, and modern fusion food restaurants can all be found in Jakarta.
Sports
Football match at Gelora Bung Karno Stadium
Jakarta hosted the 1962 Asian Games, and the 2018 Asian Games, co-hosted by Palembang.
Jakarta also hosted the Southeast Asian Games in 1979, 1987, 1997 and 2011 (supporting Palembang). Gelora Bung Karno Stadium hosted the group stage, quarterfinal and final of the 2007 AFC Asian Cup along with Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam.
The largest capacity retractable roof stadium in Asia JIS is located at Tanjung Priok district, completed in 2022.
The Senayan sports complex has several sports venues, including the Bung Karno football stadium, Madya Stadium, Istora Senayan, aquatic arena, baseball field, basketball hall, a shooting range, several indoor and outdoor tennis courts.
The Senayan complex was built in 1960 to accommodate the 1962 Asian Games.
For basketball, the Kelapa Gading Sport Mall in Kelapa Gading, North Jakarta, with a capacity of 7,000 seats, is the home arena of the Indonesian national basketball team.
The BritAma Arena serves as a playground for Satria Muda Pertamina Jakarta, the 2017 runner-up of the Indonesian Basketball League.
Jakarta International Velodrome is a sporting facility located at Rawamangun, which was used as a venue for the 2018 Asian Games.
It has a seating capacity of 3,500 for track cycling, and up to 8,500 for shows and concerts, which can also be used for various sports activities such as volleyball, badminton and futsal.
Jakarta International Equestrian Park is an equestrian sports venue located at Pulomas, which was also used as a venue for 2018 Asian Games.
Asian Games 2018 opening ceremony in Gelora Bung Karno Stadium, 2018
The Jakarta Car-Free Days are held weekly on Sunday on the main avenues of the city, Jalan Sudirman, and Jalan Thamrin, from 6 AM to 11 AM. The briefer Car-Free Day, which lasts from 6 AM to 9 AM, is held on every other Sunday.
The event invites local pedestrians to do sports and exercise and have their activities on the streets that are usually full of traffic.
Along the road from the Senayan traffic circle on Jalan Sudirman, South Jakarta, to the "Selamat Datang" Monument at the Hotel Indonesia traffic circle on Jalan Thamrin, north to the National Monument in Central Jakarta, cars are blocked from entering.
During the event, morning gymnastics, callisthenics and aerobic exercises, futsal games, jogging, bicycling, skateboarding, badminton, karate, on-street library and musical performances take over the roads and the main parks.
Jakarta's most popular home football club is Persija, which plays in Indonesia Super League.
Another football team in Jakarta is Persitara who compete in 2nd Division Football League and play in Kamal Muara Stadium and Soemantri Brodjonegoro Stadium.
Jakarta Marathon each November is recognised by AIMS and IAAF. It was established in 2013. It brings sports tourism.
In 2015, more than 15,000 runners from 53 countries participated.
Jakarta successfully hosted the first Jakarta ePrix race of the Formula E championship in June 2022 at Ancol Circuit, North Jakarta.
Media and entertainment
The main TV tower of TVRI at its headquarters in Jakarta
See also: List of newspapers in Indonesia, List of radio stations in Jakarta, and List of television stations in Indonesia
Jakarta is home to most of Indonesian national newspapers, besides some local-based newspapers.
Daily local newspapers in Jakarta are Pos Kota and Warta Kota, as well as the now-defunct Indopos.
National newspapers based in Jakarta include Kompas, Koran Tempo, Media Indonesia and Republika, most of them has a news segment covering the city.
A bunch of business newspapers (Bisnis Indonesia, Investor Daily and Kontan) and sports newspapers (TopSkor and Super Ball) are also published.
Newspapers other than in Indonesian, mainly for a national and global audience, are also published daily.
Examples are English-language newspapers The Jakarta Post and online-only The Jakarta Globe.
Chinese language newspapers also circulate, such as Indonesia Shang Bao (印尼商报), Harian Indonesia (印尼星洲日报), and Guo Ji Ri Bao (国际日报). The only Japanese language newspaper is The Daily Jakarta Shimbun (じゃかるた新聞).
Around 75 radio stations broadcast in Jakarta, 52 on the FM band, and 23 on the AM band.
Radio entities are based in Jakarta, for example, national radio networks MNC Trijaya FM, Prambors FM, Trax FM, I-Radio, Hard Rock FM, Delta FM, Global FM  and the public radio RRI; as well as local stations Gen FM, Radio Elshinta and Z99,9.
Jakarta is the headquarters for Indonesia's public television TVRI as well as private national television networks, such as Metro TV, tvOne, Kompas TV, RCTI and NET. Jakarta has local television channels such as TVRI Jakarta, JakTV, Elshinta TV and KTV. Many TV stations are analogue PAL, but some are now converting to digital signals using DVB-T2 following a government plan to digital television migration.
Government and politics
Main article: Governor of Jakarta
Jakarta Merdeka Palace
Jakarta is administratively equal to a province with special status.
The executive branch is headed by an elected governor and a vice governor, while the Jakarta Regional People's Representative Council (Indonesian: Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah Provinsi Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta, DPRD DKI Jakarta) is the legislative branch with 106 directly elected members.
The Jakarta City Hall at the south of Merdeka Square houses the office of the governor and the vice governor, and serves the main administrative office.
Executive governance consists of five administrative cities (Indonesian: Kota Administrasi), each headed by a mayor and one administrative regency (Indonesian: Kabupaten Administrasi) headed by a regent (bupati). Unlike other cities and regencies in Indonesia where the mayor or regent are directly elected, Jakarta's mayors and regents are chosen by the governor.
Each city and regency is divided into administrative districts.
Aside from representatives to the provincial parliament, Jakarta sends 21 delegates to the national lower house parliament.
The representatives are elected from Jakarta's three national electoral districts, which also includes overseas voters.
It also sends 4 delegates, just like other provinces, to the national upper house parliament.
The Jakarta Smart City (JSC) program was launched on 14 December 2014 with a goal for smart governance, smart people, smart mobility, smart economy, smart living and a smart environment in the city using the web and various smartphone-based apps.
Public safety
The Greater Jakarta Metropolitan Regional Police (Indonesian: Polda Metro Jaya) is the police force that is responsible to maintain law, security, and order for the Jakarta metropolitan area.
It is led by a two-star police general (Inspector General of Police) with the title of "Greater Jakarta Regional Police Chief" (Indonesian: Kepala Kepolisian Daerah Metro Jaya, abbreviated Kapolda Metro Jaya). Its office is located at Jl.
Jenderal Sudirman Kav. 55, Senayan, Kebayoran Baru, South Jakarta and their hotline-emergency number is 110.
The Jayakarta Military Regional Command (Indonesian: Komando Daerah Militer Jayakarta, abbreviated Kodam Jaya) is the territorial army of the Indonesian Army, which serves as a defence component for Jakarta and its surrounding areas (Greater Jakarta). It is led by an army Major General with the title of "Jakarta Military Regional Commander" (Indonesian: Panglima Daerah Militer Kodam Jaya, abbreviated Pangdam Jaya). The Jakarta Military Command is located at East Jakarta and oversees several military battalions ready for defending the capital city and its vital installations.
It also assists the Jakarta Metropolitan Police during certain tasks, such as supporting security during state visits, VVIP security, and riot control.
Municipal finances
The Jakarta provincial government relies on transfers from the central government for the bulk of its income.
Local (non-central government) sources of revenue are incomes from various taxes such as vehicle ownership and vehicle transfer fees, among others.
The ability of the regional government to respond to Jakarta's many problems is constrained by limited finances.
The provincial government consistently runs a surplus of between 15 and 20% of planned spending, primarily because of delays in procurement and other inefficiencies.
Regular under-spending is a matter of public comment.
In 2013, the budget was around Rp 50 trillion ($US5.2 billion), equivalent to around $US380 per citizen.
Spending priorities were on education, transport, flood control, environment and social spending (such as health and housing). Jakarta's regional budget (APBD) was Rp 77.1 trillion ($US5.92 billion), Rp 83.2 trillion ($US6.2 billion), and Rp 89 trillion ($US6.35 billion) for the year of 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively.
Administrative divisions
Map of the administrative cities (Kota administratif) in Jakarta province.
The Thousand Islands Regency (to the north) is not shown.
Each administrative city is further divided into districts (Kecamatan).
Jakarta consists of five Kota Administratif (Administrative cities/municipalities), each headed by a mayor, and one Kabupaten Administratif (Administrative regency). Each city and regency is divided into districts/Kecamatan.
The administrative cities/municipalities of Jakarta are:
Central Jakarta (Jakarta Pusat) is Jakarta's smallest city and the administrative and political centre.
It is divided into eight districts.
It is characterised by large parks and Dutch colonial buildings.
Landmarks include the National Monument (Monas), Istiqlal Mosque, Jakarta Cathedral and museums.
West Jakarta (Jakarta Barat) has the city's highest concentration of small-scale industries.
It has eight districts.
The area includes Jakarta's Chinatown and Dutch colonial landmarks such as the Chinese Langgam building and Toko Merah.
It contains part of Jakarta Old Town.
South Jakarta (Jakarta Selatan), originally planned as a satellite city, is now the location of upscale shopping centres and affluent residential areas.
It has ten districts and functions as Jakarta's groundwater buffer, but recently the green belt areas are threatened by new developments.
Much of the central business district is concentrated in Kebayoran Baru, Setiabudi, a small part in Tebet, Pancoran, & Mampang Prapatan, bordering the Tanah Abang/Sudirman area of Central Jakarta.
The area is known as the Jakarta Golden Triangle.
East Jakarta (Jakarta Timur) territory is characterised by several industrial sectors.
Also located in East Jakarta are Taman Mini Indonesia Indah and Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport.
This city has ten districts.
North Jakarta (Jakarta Utara) is bounded by the Java Sea.
It is the location of Port of Tanjung Priok.
Large- and medium-scale industries are concentrated there.
It contains part of Jakarta Old Town, which was the centre of VOC trade activity during the colonial era.
Also located in North Jakarta is Ancol Dreamland (Taman Impian Jaya Ancol), the largest integrated tourism area in Southeast Asia.
North Jakarta is divided into six districts.
The only administrative regency (kabupaten) of Jakarta is the Thousand Islands (Kepulauan Seribu), formerly a district within North Jakarta.
It is a collection of 105 small islands located on the Java Sea.
It is of high conservation value because of its unique ecosystems.
Marine tourism, such as diving, water bicycling, and windsurfing, are the primary tourist activities in this territory.
The main mode of transportation between the islands is speed boats or small ferries.
Jakarta's cities/municipalities (Kota Administratif)
City/regency
Area (km2)
Total population (2010 census)
Total population (2020 census)
Total population (mid 2021 estimate)
Population density(per km2)in mid 2021
HDI 2021 estimates
South Jakarta
2,062,232
2,226,812
2,233,855
East Jakarta
2,693,896
3,037,139
3,056,300
Central Jakarta
1,056,896
1,066,460
West Jakarta
2,281,945
2,434,511
2,440,073
North Jakarta
1,645,659
1,778,981
1,784,753
Thousand Islands
2,774
Transportation
See also: Category:Roads of Jakarta
Various rail-based transports in Jakarta, from top left to right: Commuter rail, MRT, LRT, and Airport Railink
This section is an excerpt from Transport in Jakarta.
MH Thamrin Street area, Gondangdia, Menteng, Central Jakarta
As a metropolitan area of about 30 million people, Jakarta has a variety of transport systems.
Jakarta was awarded 2021 global Sustainable Transport Award (STA) for integrated public transportation system.
The city prioritized development of road networks, which were mostly designed to accommodate private vehicles.
A notable feature of Jakarta's present road system is the toll road network.
Composed of an inner and outer ring road and five toll roads radiating outwards, the network provides inner as well as outer city connections.
An 'odd-even' policy limits road use to cars with either odd or even-numbered registration plates on a particular day as a transitional measure to alleviate traffic congestion until the future introduction of electronic road pricing.
There are many bus terminals in the city, from where buses operate on numerous routes to connect neighborhoods within the city limit, to other areas of Greater Jakarta area and to cities across the island of Java.
The biggest of the bus terminal is Pulo Gebang Bus Terminal, which is arguably the largest of its kind in Southeast Asia.
Main terminus for long distance train services are Gambir and Pasar Senen.
High-speed railways being constructed connecting Jakarta to Bandung and another one is at planning stage from Jakarta to Surabaya.
Rapid transit in Greater Jakarta consists of TransJakarta bus rapid transit, Jakarta LRT, Jakarta MRT, Greater Jakarta Commuter Rail, and Soekarno-Hatta Airport Rail Link.
Another transit system Greater Jakarta LRT is expected to be operational by 2022. The city administration is building transit oriented development like Dukuh Atas TOD and CSW-ASEAN TOD in several area across Jakarta to facilitate commuters to transfer between different mode of public transportation.
Privately owned bus systems like Kopaja, MetroMini, Mayasari Bakti and PPD also provide important services for Jakarta commuters with numerous routes throughout the city.
Pedicabs are banned from the city for causing traffic congestion.
Bajaj auto rickshaw provide local transportation in the back streets of some parts of the city.
Angkot microbuses also play a major role in road transport of Jakarta.
Taxicabs and ojeks (motorcycle taxis) are available in the city.
The city administration has undertaken a project to build about 500 kilometers of bicycle lanes.
As of June 2021, Jakarta already has 63 kilometers of bicycle lanes, and another 101 kilometers will be added by the end of the year 2021.
Soekarno–Hatta International Airport (CGK) is the main airport serving the Greater Jakarta area, while Halim Perdanakusuma Airport (HLP) accommodates private and low-cost domestic flights.
Other airports in the Jakarta metropolitan area include Pondok Cabe Airport and an airfield on Pulau Panjang, part of the Thousand Island archipelago.
Indonesia's busiest and Jakarta's main seaport Tanjung Priok serves many ferry connections to different parts of Indonesia.
The old port Sunda Kelapa only accommodate pinisi, a traditional two-masted wooden sailing ship serving inter-island freight service in the archipelago.
Muara Angke is used as a public port to Thousand Islands (Indonesia), while Marina Ancol is used as a tourist port.
Jakarta is part of the Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean and there to the Upper Adriatic region.
Infrastructure
Batavia map of Meester Cornelis (now Jatinegara)
To transform the city into a more livable one, a ten-year urban regeneration project was undertaken, for Rp 571 trillion ($40.5 billion). The project aimed to develop infrastructure, including the creation of a better integrated public transit system and the improvement of the city's clean water and wastewater systems, housing and flood control systems.
Health
Jakarta has many of the country's best-equipped private and public healthcare facilities.
In 2012, Governor of Jakarta Joko Widodo introduced a universal health care program, the 'Healthy Jakarta Card' (Kartu Jakarta Sehat, KJS). In January 2014, the Indonesian government launched a universal health care system called the Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (JKN), which is run by BPJS Kesehatan.
KJS is being integrated into JKN, and KJS cards are still valid as of 2018. As of 2021, 85.55% of the people of Jakarta is covered by JKN.
Government-run hospitals are of a good standard but are often overcrowded.
Government-run specialised hospitals include Dr.
Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Gatot Soebroto Army Hospital, as well as community hospitals and puskesmas.
Other options for healthcare services include private hospitals and clinics.
The private healthcare sector has seen significant changes, as the government began allowing foreign investment in the private sector in 2010. While some private facilities are run by nonprofit or religious organisations, most are for-profit.
Hospital chains such as Siloam, Pondok Indah Hospital Group, Mayapada, Mitra Keluarga, Medika, Medistra, Ciputra, and Hermina operate in the city.
Water supply
Further information: Water privatisation in Jakarta
Two private companies, PALYJA and Aetra, provide piped water in the western and eastern half of Jakarta respectively under 25-year concession contracts signed in 1998. A public asset holding company called PAM Jaya owns the infrastructure.
Eighty per cent of the water distributed in Jakarta comes through the West Tarum Canal system from Jatiluhur reservoir on the Citarum River, 70 km (43 mi) southeast of the city.
The water supply was privatised by President Suharto in 1998 to the French company Suez Environnement and the British company Thames Water International.
Both companies subsequently sold their concessions to Indonesian companies.
Customer growth in the first seven years of the concessions had been lower than before, possibly because of substantial inflation-adjusted tariff increases during this period.
In 2005, tariffs were frozen, leading the private water companies to cut down on investments.
According to PALYJA, the service coverage ratio increased substantially from 34% (1998) to 65% (2010) in its western half of the concession.
According to data by the Jakarta Water Supply Regulatory Body, access in the eastern half of the city served by PTJ increased from about 57% in 1998 to about 67% in 2004 but stagnated afterwards.
However, other sources cite much lower access figures for piped water supply to houses, excluding access provided through public hydrants: one study estimated access as low as 25% in 2005, while another estimated it to be as low as 18.5% in 2011. Those without access to piped water get water mostly from wells that are often salty and unsanitary.
As of 2017, according to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, Jakarta had a crisis over clean water.
International relations
See also: List of embassies in Jakarta
The Secretariat of ASEAN at Jl.
Sisingamangaraja No.70A, South Jakarta, Indonesia
Jakarta hosts foreign embassies.
Jakarta also serves as the seat of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Secretariat and is ASEAN's diplomatic capital.
Jakarta is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21, C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group and ASEAN Smart Cities Network.
Twin towns – sister cities
Jakarta Street in Tripoli, Libya
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Indonesia
Jakarta signed sister city agreements with other cities, including Casablanca.
To promote friendship between the two cities, the main avenue famous for its shopping and business centres was named after Jakarta's Moroccan sister city.
No street in Casablanca is named after Jakarta.
However, the Moroccan capital city of Rabat has an avenue named after Sukarno, Indonesia's first president, to commemorate his visit in 1960 and as a token of friendship.
Jakarta's sister cities are:
Bangkok, Thailand
Beijing, China
Berlin, Germany
Casablanca, Morocco
East Jerusalem, Palestine
Hanoi, Vietnam
Islamabad, Pakistan
Istanbul, Turkey
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Kyiv, Ukraine
Los Angeles, United States
Maputo, Mozambique
Moscow, Russia
Pyongyang, North Korea
Seoul, South Korea
Tokyo, Japan
Vijayawada, India
Cooperation and friendship
Jakarta has established a partnership with Rotterdam, especially on integrated urban water management, including capacity-building and knowledge exchange.
This cooperation is mainly because both cities are dealing with similar problems; they lie in low-lying flat plains and are prone to flooding.
Additionally, they have both implemented drainage systems involving canals, dams, and pumps vital for both cities for below-sea-level areas.
In addition to its sister cities, Jakarta cooperates with:
Arkansas, United States
Budapest, Hungary
New South Wales, Australia
Paris, France
Rotterdam, Netherlands
See also
Indonesia portal
Cities portal
Asia portal
Geology of Indonesia
List of tallest buildings in Jakarta
List of Javanese people
Outline of Jakarta
References
a b c "Provinsi - Kementerian Dalam Negeri - Republik Indonesia" [Province - Ministry of Home Affairs - Republic of Indonesia] (in Indonesian). Ministry of Home Affairs.
Archived from the original on 19 February 2013. Retrieved 14 August 2019.
a b c Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2022.
"Demographia World Urban Areas" (PDF) (16th annual ed.). February 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2020.
"Basis Data Pusat Pengemangan Kawasan Perkotaan" [Urban Area Development Center database]. perkotaan.bpiw.pu.go.id.
Archived from the original on 6 February 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.
"Human Development Indices by Province, 2020-2021 (New Method)" (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2022.
"jaya". Sanskrit Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017.
"krta". Sanskrit Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017.
a b c "History of Jakarta". Jakarta News.
Archived from the original on 20 August 2011.
Cortesão 1990, pp. 27–32.
Kampen 1831, p. 291.
(in Dutch) "Batavia zoals het weent en lacht", (17 October 1939), Het Nieuws van den Dag voor Nederlandsch-Indië, p. 6
"The capital's 'childhood' names". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 28 January 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2019.
Zahorka 2007, p. ?.
Ayatrohaédi 2005, p. ?.
Hellman, Thynell & Voorst 2018, p. 182.
Bunge & Vreeland 1983, p. 3.
Ayatrohaédi 2005, p. 60.
a b Heuken 1999, p. ?.
Ricklefs 1981, p. ?.
a b c d Witton 2003, pp. 138–39.
Nas & Grijns 2000, p. 145.
"Menteng: Pelopor Kota Taman" (in Indonesian). Badan Perencanaan Kotamadya Jakarta Pusat. 3 November 2007. Archived from the original on 20 February 2009.
Henderson 1970, pp. 81–82.
Bakker et al. 2008, p. 1891.
Waworoentoe 2013.
Kusno 2000, p. 56; Schoppert & Damais 1997, p. 105?
"Why ethnic Chinese are afraid Archived 24 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine". BBC News. 12 February 1998.
a b c d e Statistik Potensi Desa Provinsi DKI Jakarta 2008 [Village Potential Statistics of Province of DKI Jakarta 2008] (in Indonesian). Vol. 10. Jakarta: Statistics Indonesia. 2008. ISBN 978-979-724-994-6. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
"Jakarta". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Archived from the original on 17 September 2007. Retrieved 17 September 2007.
Douglass 1989, pp. 211–38; Douglass 1992, pp. 9–32
Turner 1997, p. 315.
Sajor 2003, pp. 713–42.
Friend 2003, p. 329.
Shari, Michael (7 March 2016).  Written at Kuta Gandeg, West Java. "Wages of Hatred". Bloomberg Businessweek.
New York City: Bloomberg.
Archived from the original on 31 January 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2016.
Friend 2003, p. ?.
Minggu (19 July 2009). "Daftar Serangan Bom di Jakarta". Poskota.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"Jakarta holds historic election". BBC News. 8 August 2007. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2007.
"Jakarta sinks as Indonesian capital and Borneo takes on mantle". The Sydney Morning Herald.
Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019.
"Publikasi Provinsi dan Kabupaten Hasil Sementara SP2010". Bps.go.id.
Archived from the original on 13 October 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2011.
"The Tides: Efforts Never End to Repel an Invading Sea". Jakarta Globe.
Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 15 November 2015.
Based on Governor Decree 2007, No. 171. taken from Statistics DKI Jakarta Provincial Office, Jakarta in Figures, 2008, BPS, the province of DKI Jakarta
Murray et al. 2014, pp. 267–72.
Simanjuntak, T. P. Moan (16 July 2014). "Maja River in Pegadungan Strewn with Water Hyacinth and Mud". Berita Resmi Pemprov.
Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2017.
Elyda, Corry (27 December 2014). "BPK slams city's efforts to manage liquid waste". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 2 April 2015.
Hendrix, Esmeralda. "Dutch to study new dike for Jakarta Bay". Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2011.
"New Ciliwung River Dams Planned as Jakarta Struggles With Latest Floods". 20 January 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2018.
"Jatinegara residents complain about underground tunnel project". Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2015.
"Jakarta, the fastest-sinking city in the world". 16 August 2018. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021.
Knörr 2014, p. ?.
Nas & Grijns 2000, p. 324.
"Number of cultural heritage buildings in Jakarta increased". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 20 February 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2018.
Wilson, Willy (11 July 2012). "Building on the Past". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 5 March 2016.
Bishop, Phillips & Yeo 2003, p. 198.
"Where are the fastest evolving Central Business Districts in Asia Pacific?". Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2017.
"CTBUH Tall Building Database". The Skyscraper Center.
Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015.
Silver 2007, p. 101.
"Ruang Terbuka Hijau Terus Ditambah". Poskotanews.com (in Indonesian). 25 June 2011. Archived from the original on 26 June 2011.
"Jakarta to revive RPTRAs". Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019.
"30 lakes and reservoirs in Greater Jakarta disappear". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 26 February 2018. Retrieved 26 February 2018.
"Taman Medan Merdeka". deskominfomas (in Indonesian). Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 23 May 2010.
"Taman Lapangan Banteng". deskominfomas (in Indonesian). Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 24 May 2010.
"Taman Suropati". deskominfomas (in Indonesian). Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 23 May 2010.
Egi Adyatama (5 March 2017). "Kalijodo Park Expected to be New Tourism Icon in Indonesia". Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
Widodo, Wahyu Setyo. "Taman Wisata Alam Angke Kapuk, Permata di Utara Jakarta". detikTravel.
Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2020.
Ninis Chairunnisa (21 September 2014). "Ragunan Zoo Mulls Safari Night". Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
"Metro Madness: A Day of Betawi Culture at Setu Babakan". The Jakarta Globe.
Archived from the original on 1 October 2010. Retrieved 18 June 2017.
"Hidden parks in the concrete jungle". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019.
"Travel: Must-visit public parks in the capital". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2017.
"City allocates Rp 140 billion to revamp five parks". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019.
"Climatological Average of Kemayoran Meteorological Station for 1981-2010" (in Indonesian). Pondok Betung Climatological Station – Indonesian Bureau of Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysics.
Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021.
"Indonesia – Halim Perdanakus". Centro de Investigaciones Fitosociológicas.
Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2016.
"Stations Number 96745" (PDF). Ministry of Energy, Utilities and Climate.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2016.
"Jakarta, Indonesia – Monthly weather forecast and Climate data". Weather Atlas.
Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 8 February 2019.
Ginsburg, Koppel & McGee 1991, p. 71.
Harpham & Tanner 1995, p. 71.
"Hasil Sensus Penduduk 2020" (PDF) (in Indonesian). Statistics Indonesia. 21 January 2021. p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2021.
"Jakarta population". Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2017.
Cybriwsky & Ford 2001, pp. 202–13.
"Jabotabek, the Jakarta metropolitan area". UNU. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Setiawati, Indah. "After census city plans for 9.5 million". Archived from the original on 11 February 2020. Retrieved 3 May 2019.
"BPS Provinsi DKI Jakarta". Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
Hook, Walter. "BRT – Case Study 5 - Annex 5 Case Studies and Lessons - Module 2: Bus Rapid Transit (BRT): Toolkit for Feasibility Studies". sti-india-uttoolkit.adb.org.
Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2011.
Hermanto 1998, p. ?.
Firman, Tommy. "Population growth of Greater Jakarta and its impact". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 29 September 2015. Retrieved 6 December 2015.
"These are the megacities of the future". 9 October 2018. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
"Data collection, analysis, visualization and sharing". Knoema.
Archived from the original on 25 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018.
"Statistics of DKI Jakarta Province 2017". Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
Suryadinata, Arifin & Ananta 2003, p. ?.
These cement the pluralism in ethnic and national identities found in contemporary Jakarta;Knörr 2007, p. 263
Sáenz, Embrick & Rodriguez 2015, p. ?.
Iyer 2001, p. 23.
Johnston, Tim (3 March 2005). "Chinese diaspora: Indonesia". BBC News.
Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2019.
Reid 2010, p. 170.
Board of Editors, Contributions to Southeast Asian Ethnography, 1987
Naim 1971, p. ?.
"As English Spreads, Indonesians Fear for Their Language". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2019.
"Population by Region and Religion in Indonesia". BPS. 2017. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2019.
Pemerintah Provinsi Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta, Ensiklopedi Jakarta: Culture & Heritage, Vol. 1, Dinas Kebudayaan dan Permuseuman, 2005
Porter 2002, p. 39.
"Bahá'í International Community". 21 April 2015. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 2 October 2018.
"Statistik Indonesia 2016" (in Indonesian). Jakarta: Badan Pusat Statistik. 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2016.
"Most economically influential cities in the world, 2020". CEO World.
Archived from the original on 17 February 2020. Retrieved 6 March 2020.
"Shenzhen and Jakarta shine in city economy forecasts for 2030". Nikkei Asian Review.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 6 December 2018.
"Jakarta makes top 20 for resilient cities in global real estate index". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019.
"2028, Jakarta Diperkirakan Masuk Daftar Kota Tangguh Dunia". Kompas.
Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019.
"Six Indonesian Companies Make Forbes Global 2000 List". Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2019.
"Fortune 500". Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2019.
"Indonesia expects to have more than 5 unicorns by 2019: minister". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 22 June 2018.
"Google launches first Cloud region in Indonesia". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 24 June 2020.
"City administration launches Jakarta Investment Center". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 1 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018.
"Jakarta economy grows 6.22% in 2017". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018.
"Realisasi Investasi di DKI Jakarta 2017 Capai Rp108,6 Triliun". OKEZONE. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018.
"Jakarta Economy Slows Down in 2015". Tempo.
Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
Hilda B Alexander (19 March 2015). "18 Konglomerat Indonesia Tinggal di Jakarta". Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 1 January 2017.
"Mercer's annual Cost of Living Survey finds African, Asian, and European cities dominate the list of most expensive locations for working abroad". Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2017.
"Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018.
Gantan, Josua (1 November 2014). "Jakarta: The Luxury Property Capital of the World - The Jakarta Globe". Jakarta Globe.
Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
"Segitiga Emas Jakarta Tetap Primadona". Kompas.
Retrieved 10 August 2017.
"Jakarta, Kota dengan Lahan Mal Terluas di Dunia". 22 October 2015. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2015.
"Jakarta, a city with many shopping centers". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017.
"Jakarta Malls and Shopping Centers – luxury shopping in Jakarta, Indonesia". Expat.or.id.
Archived from the original on 28 July 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"International Franchise Stores". Debenhams plc. 2013. Archived from the original on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 4 June 2016.
"SOGO". Archived from the original on 23 July 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2015.
"Jalan Satrio Dijadikan "Shopping Belt" Jakarta". kompas.com. 20 June 2013. Archived from the original on 20 June 2013.
"Special Transjakarta buses to serve city shoppers". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 20 July 2018.
"Jakarta named the most popular location tag on Instagram Stories". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
"Jakarta among top 10 cities on Instagram". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
"Jakarta in big five world's fastest growing destinations". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 27 September 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2017.
"Jakarta among 10 fastest growing tourist cities in the world". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018.
"Jakarta likely to see tourist influx in 2027, study says". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019.
"Euromonitor International's Top 100 City Destinations Ranking" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
"Jakarta preps MICE tourism to lure more tourists". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2017.
"Ministry holds national convention to develop MICE tourism". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2017.
"Profile | Universitas Indonesia". Ui.ac.id.
Archived from the original on 19 April 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"State University of Jakarta". Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"University of Pembangunan Nasional "Veteran" Jakarta". Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Pertamina University". Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Bina Nusantara University". Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Jayabaya University". Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Pancasila University". Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Print Artikel". Majalah-farmacia.com.
Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"IPEKA International Christian School". Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
"Jakarta International Multicultural School". Jimsch.org.
Archived from the original on 22 February 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
"Welcome to Australian International School Indonesia". Ais-indonesia.com.
Archived from the original on 3 March 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
"Welcome to New Zealand International School". Nzis.net.
Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
"赤道直下の国 インドネシアで 仲間とともに 思いっきり学ぶ". jjs.or.id.
Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2022.
"Sekolah Pelita Harapan". Sph.edu.
Archived from the original on 20 October 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
"Lebaran Betawi: An event to maintain bonds and traditions". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019.
"Festival Condet 2019, Upaya untuk Lestarikan Budaya Betawi". Kompas.
Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019.
Knörr 2007
Tanjung, Intan. "Where to go for a drink and to dress up to impress". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 10 December 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
Parker, Simon. "36 Hours in... Jakarta". The Telegraph.
Archived from the original on 7 December 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
Wira, Simon Ni Nyoman. "Jakpost guide to Jl.
Sabang". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
Symington, Martin. "Jakarta Travel Tips: Where to go and what to do in 48 hours". The Independent.
Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2018.
"The legendary eateries you must visit in Blok M". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
"7 tantalizing eateries in Tebet". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
"JakPost guide to Jl.
Kemang Raya: Part 1". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
Jatmiko, Bambang Priyo. "Fenomena Bisnis Kuliner di Jalan Senopati Jakarta". Kompas.
Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
Valentina, Jessicha. "Jakpost guide to Pantai Indah Kapuk". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017.
Figge, Katrin. "A Trip to Melawai's Little Tokyo in Jakarta". Jakarta Globe.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
Prakoso, Johanes Randy (29 June 2015). "Lenggang Jakarta, Tempat Nongkrong Baru di Monas". detik.com.
Archived from the original on 24 July 2016.
"Lenggang Jakarta Kemayoran Resmi Dibuka, Kawasan Sentra Kuliner Baru di Pusat Ibu Kota". Tribnnews.
Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2017.
"Better space for cheap food". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2020.
"Superhot fried chicken eats into KFC's dominance in Indonesia". Nikkei Asian Review.
Archived from the original on 23 May 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018.
Hanna 1962, pp. 193–203.
"Olympic Council of Asia: Games". Ocasia.org.
Archived from the original on 5 October 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014.
"Stadion Utama Gelora Bung Karno". Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018.
"Asian Cup 2007 Host nations". 11 September 2007. Archived from the original on 23 July 2009.
"Football stadiums of the world – Stadiums in Indonesia". Fussballtempel.net.
Archived from the original on 13 May 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"Lintasan Sudah 90 Persen Rampung, Timnas Sepeda Jajal Venue Velodrome Awal Mei". NYSN Media.
Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018.
"Equestrian Park Pulomas Ditargetkan Rampung November 2017". Berita Satu.
Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2018.
"Car-Free Day reduces air pollution: Tests". 25 June 2008. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 26 May 2011.
"Thousands of runners to join Jakarta Marathon 2015 on Sunday". The Jakarta Post. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
"Here are the New Routes for Jakarta Marathon 2015 | GIVnews.com – Indonesian Perspective to Global Audience". Globalindonesianvoices.com. 26 September 2015. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
"Wonderful Indonesia – Jakarta Marathon 2014 : Indonesia's Biggest Running Event". Indonesia.travel.
Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
"AIMS – Calendar of Races". Aimsworldrunning.org.
Archived from the original on 10 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
"IAAF Approves Jakarta Marathon's Route | Metro | Tempo.Co :: Indonesian News Portal". En.tempo.co. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
"Sirkuit Formula E di Ancol Mulai Dibangun". Detik.com. 10 February 2022. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2022.
"TV Digital Indonesia – Siaran TV Digital". Archived from the original on 1 July 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2013.
"Ini 21 Caleg DPR yang Terpilih dari DKI Jakarta". detik.com (in Indonesian). 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2018.
"Four years on, Ahok's 'Smart City' legacy lives on". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 14 January 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2019.
'Taxpayer money for the city', The Jakarta Post, 16 July 2011.
Dewi, Sita W. (9 December 2013). "Jokowi spends less, provides more than Foke, say observers". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021.
"Editorial: Regional budgets underspent". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016.
Dewi, Sita W. (29 January 2013). "Council approves city budget for 2013, higher than proposed". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
"2019 draft city budget to be set at Rp 89 trillion". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 17 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
"Jakarta Proposes Rp95 Trillion Regional Budget Plan for 2020". Tempo.
Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
"Jakarta revised budget estimated at Rp 72 trillion". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 17 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019.
"Central Jakarta Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 11 September 2009. Retrieved 19 December 2009.
"West Jakarta Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 11 September 2009. Retrieved 24 February 2010.
"South Jakarta Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 19 December 2009.
"East Jakarta Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 14 October 2009. Retrieved 19 December 2009.
"North Jakarta Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 13 September 2009. Retrieved 19 December 2009.
""Thousand Island" Profile". The City Jakarta Administration.
Jakarta.go.id.
Archived from the original on 16 June 2009. Retrieved 19 December 2009.
Biro Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2011.
Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2021.
"Human Development Indices by Province, 2020-2021 (New Method)" (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2022.
Joe Cochrane (4 August 2013). "Hours to Go, Just to Get to Work: Indonesians Cope With Infuriating Traffic and Inefficient Public Transit". The New York Times.
Retrieved 5 August 2013.
"Jakarta wins global 2021 Sustainable Transport Award for integrated public transportation". The Jakarta Post.
Retrieved 31 October 2020.
"Transportation Issues and Future Condition in Tokyo, Jakarta, Manila and Hiroshima" (PDF). Retrieved 11 May 2010.
"Pulo Gebang, Terminal Terbesar se-ASEAN Diresmikan 28 Desember". Liputan6. Retrieved 12 June 2017.
"Get ready for a bike revolution". The Jakarta Post.
Retrieved 5 June 2021.
"Anies Baswedan Suggests Incentives for Workers Riding Bike to Work". Tempo.
Retrieved 5 June 2021.
"Pelabuhan Muara Angke Siap Digunakan". Retrieved 13 August 2020.
Shenntyara, Mirtha (22 September 2017). "Indonesia: Asia's maritime gateway to the west". Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 21 January 2021.
Hernig 2018, p. 112; Hartmann, Maennig & Wang 2017, p. 59
Yuniarni, Sarah. "Here's How Indonesia Can Benefit From China's Belt and Road Initiative". Jakarta Globe.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
"Capital or not, Jakarta looks toward urban regeneration". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 21 June 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2020.
McCawley, Tom (November 2013). "Overdue Antidote" (PDF). Asian Development Bank.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2013.
Britnell 2015, p. 47.
"Pemprov DKI Jakarta Masuki Tahun ke-4 Integrasikan KJS ke Program JKN-KIS" (in Indonesian). BPJS Kesehatan. 29 December 2016. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2022.
Martiyanti, Erna (17 January 2018). "Dinkes Pastikan KJS Masih Tetap Berlaku - Beritajakarta.id". Beritajakarta.id/ (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2022.
Dihni, Vika Azkiya (25 November 2021). "Bukan Jakarta, Penduduk yang Miliki BPJS di Provinsi Ini Terbanyak Se-Indonesia". databoks.katadata.co.id (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 26 November 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2022.
"Indonesia's health care industry is on the rise". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017.
"Mayapada Hospital Jakarta Selatan Diresmikan". Tribun News.
Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017.
"Key Figures". Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2011.
Iwan, Renalia (2008). Ten Years of Public Private Partnership in Jakarta Drinking Water Service (1998-2007): Eastern Jakarta Drinking Water Service by Thames PAM Jaya (Thesis). Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Bakker, Karen; Kooy, Michelle; Shofiani, Nur Endah; Martijn, Ernst-Jan (2006). Disconnected: Poverty, Water Supply and Development in Jakarta, Indonesia (Report). UNDP (published 17 October 2013). Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 16 November 2021. Personal Communication from Kris Tutuko, Technical Director PAM JAYA, Jakarta, Indonesia (was quoted - seems difficult to understand).
KRuHA People's coalition for the rights to water (7 June 2011). "Poor Water Service, Most of Jakarta People Threatened by E-Coli". Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2011.
Nababan, Christine Novita (11 June 2017). "Kementerian ESDM: Jakarta Krisis Air Bersih". CNN Indonesia.
Archived from the original on 11 June 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
"Jakarta is Affirmed to be a Diplomatic Capital City". Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Archived from the original on 31 May 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016.
Veeramalla Anjaiah (30 July 2009). "Morocco seeks to boost business ties with RI: Envoy". The Jakarta Post.
Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 June 2013.
a b "21 State Capitals Working with Sister City with Jakarta". Berita Jakarta. 13 February 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
"Indonesia for 'sister city' agreement with Vijayawada". The Hindu. 18 May 2019. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2021.
"Jakarta and Rotterdam strengthen ties on urban water management". Neso Indonesia. 16 September 2014. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016.
Bibliography
Ayatrohaédi (2005). Sundakala: cuplikan sejarah Sunda berdasarkan naskah-naskah "Panitia Wangsakerta" Cirebon [Sundakala: A snippet of Sundanese history based on the manuscripts of "Panitia Wangsakerta" Cirebon] (in Indonesian). Pustaka Jaya.
ISBN 978-979-419-330-3. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Bakker, K.; Kooy, M.; Shofiani, N.E.; Martijn, E. J. (2008). "Governance Failure: Rethinking the Institutional Dimensions of Urban Water Supply to Poor Households". World Development. 36 (10): 1891–1915. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2007.09.015.
Baskoro, Bra (2010). Wisata kota Jalan Jaksa : sebuah kajian sosiologi pariwisata [Street tourism, city tourism: A study of the sociology of tourism] (Cet. 1 ed.). Penerbit Koekoesan.
ISBN 978-979-1442-31-2. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2021.
Bishop, Ryan; Phillips, John; Yeo, Wei Wei (2003). Postcolonial Urbanism: Southeast Asian Cities and Global Processes.
Psychology Press.
ISBN 978-0-415-93250-9. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Britnell, Mark (2015). In Search of the Perfect Health System.
London: Palgrave.
ISBN 978-1-137-49661-4. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2021.
Bunge, Frederica M.; Vreeland, Nena (1983). Indonesia: A Country Study. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Corfield, Justin (2013). "Sister Cities". Historical Dictionary of Pyongyang.
London: Anthem Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-85728-234-7. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Douglass, M. (1992). "The Political Economy of Urban Poverty and Environmental Management in Asia: Access, Empowerment and Community-based Alternatives". Environment and Urbanization. 4 (2): 9–32. doi:10.1177/095624789200400203.
Cortesão, Armando (1990). The Suma oriental of Tome Pires, books 1-5. New Delhi: Asian Educational Services.
ISBN 81-206-0535-7. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Cybriwsky, Roman; Ford, Larry R. (2001). "City profile: Jakarta". Cities. 18 (3). doi:10.1016/S0264-2751(01)00004-X. ISSN 0264-2751.
Douglass, M. (1989). "The Environmental Sustainability of Development.
Coordination, Incentives and Political Will in Land Use Planning for the Jakarta Metropolis". Third World Planning Review. 11 (2): 211. doi:10.3828/twpr.11.2.44113540kqt27180.
Friend, Theodore (2003). Indonesian Destinies.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-01137-3. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Ginsburg, Norton Sydney; Koppel, Bruce; McGee, T. G. (1991). "The Extended Metropolis: Implications for Urban Management".  In Cheema, G. Shabbir (ed.). The Extended Metropolis: Settlement Transition in Asia.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
ISBN 0-585-30143-3. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Hanna, Willard A. (1962). "The Politics of Sport.
Indonesia as the Host to the "Fourth Asian Games"". American University.
Southeast Asia Series. 10 (19). Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Harpham, Trudy; Tanner, Marcel (1995). Urban health in developing countries : progress and prospects.
London: Earthscan.
ISBN 1-85383-285-5. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Hartmann, Wolf D.; Maennig, Wolfgang; Wang, Run (2017). Chinas neue Seidenstraße Kooperation statt Isolation [China's New Silk Road Cooperation instead of isolation] (in German) (1 ed.). Frankfurt am Main.
ISBN 978-3-95601-224-2. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Hellman, Jorgen; Thynell, Marie; Voorst, Roanne van (2018). Jakarta: Claiming spaces and rights in the city.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-351-62044-4. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2021.
Hermanto, Zarida (1998). Perubahan pemanfaatan tanah di Jabotabek : studi perbandingan dengan Gerbangkertosusila [Land use change in Jabotabek: A comparative study with Gerbangkertosusila]. Jakarta: Indonesian Institute of Sciences.
ISBN 979-9165-04-0. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Henderson, John William (1970). Area Handbook for Indonesia.
Vol. 550. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Hernig, Marcus (2018). Die Renaissance der Seidenstraße: Der Weg des chinesischen Drachens ins Herz Europas [The Renaissance of the Silk Road: The Chinese Dragon's Way to the Heart of Europe] (in German). FinanzBuch Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-96092-253-7. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Heuken, Adolf (1999). Sumber-sumber asli sejarah Jakarta, Jilid I: Dokumen-dokumen sejarah Jakarta sampai dengan akhir abad ke-16 [Original sources of Jakarta's history, Volume I: Historical documents of Jakarta up to the end of the 16th century]. Vol. 1. Cipta Loka Caraka.
Iyer, Alessandra (2001). Indonesian Performing Arts: Tradition and Transition.
Harwood Academic Pub.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Kampen, Nicolaas Godfried (1831). Geschiedenis der Nederlanders buiten Europa [History of the Dutch outside Europe] (in Dutch). Vol. 1. Haarlem: De Erven François Bohn.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Knörr, Jacqueline (2007). Kreolität und postkoloniale Gesellschaft: Integration und Differenzierung in Jakarta [Creole and Post-Colonial Society: Integration and Differentiation in Jakarta] (in German). Campus Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-593-38344-6. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Knörr, Jacqueline (2014). Creole Identity in Postcolonial Indonesia.
Berghahn Books.
ISBN 978-1-78238-268-3. JSTOR j.ctt9qcwb1. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Kusno, Abidin (2000). Behind the Postcolonial: Architecture, Urban Space and Political Cultures.
New York City: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-23615-7. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Merrillees, Scott (2015). Jakarta: Portraits of a Capital 1950–1980. Jakarta: Equinox Publishing.
ISBN 9786028397308. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2020.
Murray, N.J.; Clemens, R.S.; Phinn, S.R.; Possingham, H.P.; Fuller, R.A. (2014). "Tracking the rapid loss of tidal wetlands in the Yellow Sea" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 12 (5): 267–272. doi:10.1890/130260. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
Nas, Peter J.M.; Grijns, Kees (2000). Jakarta-Batavia: Socio-cultural Essays.
Leiden: KITLV Press.
ISBN 90-6718-139-0. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Naim, Mochtar (1971). "Merantau: Causes and Effects of Minangkabau Voluntary Migration". Merantau.
ISEAS Publishing. pp. 1–15. doi:10.1355/9789814380164-002. ISBN 978-981-4380-16-4. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Porter, Donald James (2002). Managing politics and Islam in Indonesia.
London.
ISBN 0-7007-1736-6. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Reid, Anthony (2010). Imperial Alchemy: Nationalism and Political Identity in Southeast Asia.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-87237-9. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
Ricklefs, M. C. (1981). A History of Modern Indonesia.
London: Macmillan Education UK. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-16645-9. ISBN 978-0-333-24380-0. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Sajor, Edsel E. (2003). "Globalization and the Urban Property Boom in Metro Cebu, Philippines". Development and Change. 34 (4): 713–742. doi:10.1111/1467-7660.00325.
Sáenz, Rogelio; Embrick, David G.; Rodriguez, Nestor P. (2015). The International Handbook of the Demography of Race and Ethnicity.
Dordrecht.
ISBN 978-90-481-8891-8.
Schoppert, P.; Damais, S. (1997). Java Style.
Paris: Didier Millet.
ISBN 978-962-593-232-3. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Silver, Christopher (2007). Planning the Megacity: Jakarta in the Twentieth Century.
Planning, History and Environment.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-135-99122-7. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2020.
Soekmono, R. (1973). Pengantar Sejarah Kebudayaan Indonesia 2, 2nd ed [Introduction to Indonesian Cultural History 2] (2 ed.). Yogyakarta: Penerbit Kanisius.
Suryadinata, Leo; Arifin, Evi Nurvidya; Ananta, Aris (2003). Indonesia's Population: Ethnicity and Religion in a Changing Political Landscape.
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
ISBN 978-981-230-212-0. Archived from the original on 25 August 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Teeuwen, Dirk (2010). "From horsepower to electrification: Tramways in Batavia-Jakarta 1869–1962" (PDF). Rendez-vous Batavia.
Indonesia-Dutch Colonial Heritage.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2017.
Torchia, Christopher; Djuhari, Lely (2007). Indonesian Idioms and Expressions: Colloquial Indonesian at Work.
Tuttle Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4629-1650-4. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Turner, Peter (1997). Java (1st ed.). Melbourne: Lonely Planet.
ISBN 978-0-86442-314-6. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Waworoentoe, Willem Johan (2013). "Jakarta". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Witton, Patrick (2003). Indonesia.
Melbourne: Lonely Planet Publications.
ISBN 978-1-74059-154-6. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021.
Zahorka, Herwig (2007). The Sunda Kingdoms of West Java.
Yayasan Cipta Loka Caraka.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
Further reading
Ring, Trudy (1994).  Schellinger, Paul E.; Salkin, Robert M. (eds.). International Dictionary of Historic Places: Asia and Oceania.
Vol. 5. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers.
ISBN 1-884964-05-2.
External links
Official website
Jakarta Official Travel Website
Geographic data related to Jakarta at OpenStreetMap
Jakarta topicsDivisions
Central Jakarta
North Jakarta
South Jakarta
East Jakarta
West Jakarta
Thousand Islands
History
Timeline
Sunda Kelapa
Batavia
List of colonial buildings and structures in Jakarta
Sunda Kingdom
Demographics
Betawi language
Betawi people
Geography
Ciliwung river
Flooding
Golden Triangle of Jakarta
Jakarta metropolitan area
Kota Tua
Merdeka Square
Semanggi Interchange
SCBD
Economics
Indonesia Stock Exchange
Bank Indonesia
Politics
Governor
Parliament
Istana Negara
Istana Merdeka
DPR/MPR Building
Transmigration program
ASEAN Headquarters
Education
University of Indonesia
Universitas Terbuka
Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic University
Jakarta State Polytechnic
Atma Jaya University
Trisakti University
Bina Nusantara University
Tarumanagara University
Universitas Kristen Indonesia
YARSI University
Landmarks
National Monument
National Museum of Indonesia
Jakarta History Museum
Gelora Bung Karno Stadium
Gelora Bung Karno Sports Complex
Hotel Indonesia
Selamat Datang Monument
Shri Sanathana Dharma Aalayam
Istiqlal Mosque
Jakarta Cathedral
Wayang Museum
Taman Mini Indonesia Indah
Transport
TransJakarta
Kopaja
MetroMini
Perum PPD
KRL Commuterline
Jakarta MRT
Jakarta LRT
Greater Jakarta LRT
Soekarno-Hatta Airport Rail Link
Soekarno–Hatta International Airport
Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport
Port of Tanjung Priok
Hospitals
Dr.
Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital
Gatot Soebroto Army Hospital
Others
Betawi cuisine
Water privatisation
Outline
Category
Commons
Portal
Links to related articles
Provinces of IndonesiaCapital: JakartaSumatra
Aceh
Bangka Belitung Islands
Bengkulu
Jambi
Lampung
North Sumatra
Riau
Riau Islands
South Sumatra
West Sumatra
Java
Banten
Central Java
East Java
Special Capital Region of Jakarta
West Java
Special Region of Yogyakarta
Kalimantan
Central Kalimantan
East Kalimantan
North Kalimantan
South Kalimantan
West Kalimantan
Lesser Sunda Islands
Bali
East Nusa Tenggara
West Nusa Tenggara
Sulawesi
Central Sulawesi
Gorontalo
North Sulawesi
Southeast Sulawesi
South Sulawesi
West Sulawesi
Maluku Islands
Maluku
North Maluku
Western New Guinea
Papua
Central Papua
Highland Papua
South Papua
West Papua
Former provinces
Central Sumatra
East Timor
Lists by
Current governors
GDP
GRP per capita
HDI
Highest point
ISO codes
Provincial capitals in IndonesiaSumatra
Banda Aceh
Bandar Lampung
Bengkulu
Jambi
Medan
Padang
Palembang
Pangkal Pinang
Pekanbaru
Tanjung Pinang
Java
Bandung
Jakarta
Semarang
Serang
Surabaya
Yogyakarta
Kalimantan
Banjarbaru
Palangka Raya
Pontianak
Samarinda
Tanjung Selor
Lesser Sunda
Denpasar
Kupang
Mataram
Sulawesi
Gorontalo
Kendari
Makassar
Mamuju
Manado
Palu
Maluku
Ambon
Sofifi
Papua
Jayapura
Manokwari
Merauke
Nabire
Wamena
Former provincial capitals
Banjarmasin
Bukittinggi
Dili
Singaraja
Ternate
Indonesian cities with a 200,000+ population2,000,000 and more
Jakarta
Surabaya
Bekasi
Bandung
Medan
Depok
1,000,000–1,999,999
Tangerang
Palembang
Semarang
Makassar
South Tangerang
Batam
Bandar Lampung
Bogor
Pekanbaru
Padang
Malang
Samarinda
Denpasar
Tasikmalaya
Serang
Balikpapan
Pontianak
Banjarmasin
Jambi
Cimahi
Surakarta
Manado
Kupang
Cilegon
Mataram
Jayapura
Bengkulu
Yogyakarta
Palu
Ambon
Sukabumi
Kendari
Cirebon
Dumai
Pekalongan
Palangka Raya
Binjai
Kediri
Sorong
Tegal
Pematang Siantar
Banjarbaru
Banda Aceh
Tarakan
Probolinggo
Singkawang
Lubuklinggau
Tanjungpinang
Bitung
Padangsidempuan
Pangkal Pinang
Batu
Madiun
Pasuruan
Ternate
Banjar
Capitals of AsiaDependent territories and states with limited recognition are in italicsCentral AsiaSouth AsiaSoutheast AsiaWestern Asia
Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
Astana, Kazakhstan
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
Dushanbe, Tajikistan
Tashkent, Uzbekistan
East Asia
Beijing, China
Pyongyang, North Korea
Seoul, South Korea
Taipei, Taiwan
Tokyo, Japan
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia
Camp Justice, BIOT (UK) *
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Islamabad, Pakistan
Kabul, Afghanistan
Kathmandu, Nepal
Malé, Maldives
New Delhi, India
Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Sri Lanka
Thimphu, Bhutan
Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
Bangkok, Thailand
Dili, East Timor
Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island (Australia)
Hanoi, Vietnam
Jakarta, Indonesia
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Manila, Philippines
Naypyidaw, Myanmar
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Singapore
Vientiane, Laos
West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia)
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Amman, Jordan
Ankara, Turkey
Baghdad, Iraq
Baku, Azerbaijan
Beirut, Lebanon
Damascus, Syria
Doha, Qatar
Episkopi Cantonment, Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK) *
Jerusalem, Israel (de facto) *
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Manama, Bahrain
Muscat, Oman
Nicosia, Cyprus
North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus *
Ramallah, Palestine (de facto) *
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Sanaa, Yemen
Stepanakert, Artsakh *
Sukhumi, Abkhazia *
Tbilisi, Georgia
Tehran, Iran
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia *
Yerevan, Armenia
* Disputed.
See: Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute, Cyprus dispute, Status of Jerusalem, Artsakh-Azerbaijani conflict, Abkhaz-Georgian conflict and Georgian-Ossetian conflict
Host cities of Asian GamesSummer
Winter
Largest cities in ASEANDemographia 2020
Rank
Name
Country
Pop.
Rank
Name
Country
Pop.
JakartaManila
Jakarta
Indonesia
Medan
Indonesia
3,632,000
BangkokHo Chi Minh City
Manila
Philippines
Cebu City
Philippines
2,275,000
Bangkok
Thailand
Phnom Penh
Cambodia
2,177,000
Ho Chi Minh City
Vietnam
Semarang
Indonesia
1,992,000
Kuala Lumpur
Malaysia
8,285,000
Johor Bahru
Malaysia
1,981,000
Bandung
Indonesia
7,065,000
Makassar
Indonesia
1,952,000
Hanoi
Vietnam
6,576,000
Palembang
Indonesia
1,889,000
Surabaya
Indonesia
6,499,000
Mandalay
Myanmar
1,633,000
Yangon
Myanmar
6,314,000
Hai Phong
Vietnam
1,623,000
Singapore
Singapore
5,745,000
Yogyakarta
Indonesia
1,568,000
MegacitiesAfrica (3)
Cairo
Kinshasa
Lagos
Asia (28)
Bangalore
Bangkok
Beijing
Chengdu
Chennai
Chongqing
Delhi
Dhaka
Guangzhou
Hangzhou
Ho Chi Minh City
Hyderabad
Istanbul
Jakarta
Karachi
Kolkata
Kyoto–Osaka–Kobe (Keihanshin)
Lahore
Metro Manila
Mumbai
Nagoya
Seoul
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Tehran
Tianjin
Tokyo
Xiamen
Europe (5)
Istanbul
London
Moscow
Paris
Rhine-Ruhr
North America (3)
Los Angeles
Mexico City
New York City
South America (5)
Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Lima
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Cities portal
Jakarta at Wikipedia's sister projects:Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel guides from WikivoyageResources from WikiversityData from WikidataPortals: Jakarta Geography Asia Indonesia
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz area
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 01:19 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
