Marketing - Wikipedia
Marketing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Study and process of exploring, creating, and delivering value to customers
For the Canadian magazine, see Marketing (magazine).  For the British magazine, see Marketing (British magazine).
Advertising boards behind a rugby union match, showing the logos of the companies Nike, Peugeot, and Pétrole Hahn
Marketing is the process of exploring, creating, and delivering value to meet the needs of a target market in terms of goods and services; potentially including selection of a target audience; selection of certain attributes or themes to emphasize in advertising; operation of advertising campaigns; attendance at trade shows and public events; design of products and packaging attractive to buyers; defining the terms of sale, such as price, discounts, warranty, and return policy; product placement in media or with people believed to influence the buying habits of others; agreements with retailers, wholesale distributors, or resellers; and attempts to create awareness of, loyalty to, and positive feelings about a brand.
Marketing is typically done by the seller, typically a retailer or manufacturer.
Sometimes tasks are contracted to a dedicated marketing firm or advertising agency.
More rarely, a trade association or government agency (such as the Agricultural Marketing Service) advertises on behalf of an entire industry or locality, often a specific type of food (e.g.
Got Milk?), food from a specific area, or a city or region as a tourism destination.
It is one of the primary components of business management and commerce.
Marketers can direct their product to other businesses (B2B marketing) or directly to consumers (B2C marketing). Regardless of who is being marketed to, several factors apply, including the perspective the marketers will use.
Known as market orientations, they determine how marketers approach the planning stage of marketing.
The marketing mix, which outlines the specifics of the product and how it will be sold, is affected by the environment surrounding the product, the results of marketing research and market research, and the characteristics of the product's target market.
Once these factors are determined, marketers must then decide what methods of promoting the product, including use of coupons and other price inducements.
The term marketing, what is commonly known as attracting customers, incorporates knowledge gained by studying the management of exchange relationships and is the business process of identifying, anticipating and satisfying customers' needs and wants.
Contents
Definition
Marketing
Marketing
Marketing management
Key concepts
Distribution
Pricing
Retail
Service
Activation
Brand licensing
Brand management
Co-creation
Dominance
Effectiveness
Ethics
Promotion
Segmentation
Strategy
Account-based marketing
Digital marketing
Product marketing
Social marketing
Influencer marketing
Attribution
Annoyance factor
Horizontal integration
Vertical integration
Promotional content
Advertising
Branding
Corporate anniversary
Direct marketing
Loyalty marketing
Mobile marketing
On-hold messaging
Personal selling
Premiums
Prizes
Product placement
Propaganda
Publicity
Sales promotion
Sex in advertising
Underwriting spot
Promotional media
Behavioral targeting
Brand ambassador
Display advertising
Drip marketing
In-game advertising
Mobile advertising
Native advertising
New media
Online advertising
Out-of-home advertising
Point of sale
Product demonstration
Promotional merchandise
Promotional representative
Visual merchandising
Web banner
Word-of-mouth
Research
Market research
Marketing research
Mystery shopping
Marketing is currently defined by the American Marketing Association (AMA) as "the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large". However, the definition of marketing has evolved over the years.
The AMA reviews this definition and its definition for "marketing research" every three years.
The interests of "society at large" were added into the definition in 2008. The development of the definition may be seen by comparing the 2008 definition with the AMA's 1935 version: "Marketing is the performance of business activities that direct the flow of goods, and services from producers to consumers". The newer definition highlights the increased prominence of other stakeholders in the new conception of marketing.
Recent definitions of marketing place more emphasis on the consumer relationship, as opposed to a pure exchange process.
For instance, prolific marketing author and educator, Philip Kotler has evolved his definition of marketing.
In 1980, he defined marketing as "satisfying needs and wants through an exchange process", and in 2018 defined it as "the process by which companies engage customers, build strong customer relationships, and create customer value in order to capture value from customers in return". A related definition, from the sales process engineering perspective, defines marketing as "a set of processes that are interconnected and interdependent with other functions of a business aimed at achieving customer interest and satisfaction".
Besides, customers some definitions of marketing highlight marketing's ability to produce value to shareholders of the firm as well.
In this context, marketing can be defined as "the management process that seeks to maximise returns to shareholders by developing relationships with valued customers and creating a competitive advantage". For instance, the Chartered Institute of Marketing defines marketing from a customer-centric perspective, focusing on "the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer requirements profitably".
In the past, marketing practice tended to be seen as a creative industry, which included advertising, distribution and selling, and even today many parts of the marketing process (e.g. product design, art director, brand management, advertising, inbound marketing, copywriting etc.) involve the use of the creative arts.
However, because marketing makes extensive use of social sciences, psychology, sociology, mathematics, economics, anthropology and neuroscience, the profession is now widely recognized as a science.
Marketing science has developed a concrete process that can be followed to create a marketing plan.
Concept
The "marketing concept" proposes that to complete its organizational objectives, an organization should anticipate the needs and wants of potential consumers and satisfy them more effectively than its competitors.
This concept originated from Adam Smith's book The Wealth of Nations but would not become widely used until nearly 200 years later.
Marketing and Marketing Concepts are directly related.
Given the centrality of customer needs, and wants in marketing, a rich understanding of these concepts is essential:
Needs: Something necessary for people to live a healthy, stable and safe life.
When needs remain unfulfilled, there is a clear adverse outcome: a dysfunction or death.
Needs can be objective and physical, such as the need for food, water, and shelter; or subjective and psychological, such as the need to belong to a family or social group and the need for self-esteem.
Wants: Something that is desired, wished for or aspired to.
Wants are not essential for basic survival and are often shaped by culture or peer-groups.
Demands: When needs and wants are backed by the ability to pay, they have the potential to become economic demands.
Marketing research, conducted for the purpose of new product development or product improvement, is often concerned with identifying the consumer's unmet needs.
Customer needs are central to market segmentation which is concerned with dividing markets into distinct groups of buyers on the basis of "distinct needs, characteristics, or behaviors who might require separate products or marketing mixes." Needs-based segmentation (also known as benefit segmentation) "places the customers' desires at the forefront of how a company designs and markets products or services." Although needs-based segmentation is difficult to do in practice, it has been proved to be one of the most effective ways to segment a market.
In addition, a great deal of advertising and promotion is designed to show how a given product's benefits meet the customer's needs, wants or expectations in a unique way.
B2B and B2C marketing
The two major segments of marketing are business-to-business (B2B) marketing and business-to-consumer (B2C) marketing.
B2B marketing
B2B (business-to-business) marketing refers to any marketing strategy or content that is geared towards a business or organization.
Any company that sells products or services to other businesses or organizations (vs. consumers) typically uses B2B marketing strategies.
Examples of products sold through B2B marketing include:
Major equipment
Accessory equipment
Raw materials
Component parts
Processed materials
Supplies
Venues
Business services
The four major categories of B2B product purchasers are:
Producers- use products sold by B2B marketing to make their own goods (e.g.: Mattel buying plastics to make toys)
Resellers- buy B2B products to sell through retail or wholesale establishments (e.g.: Walmart buying vacuums to sell in stores)
Governments- buy B2B products for use in government projects (e.g.: purchasing contractor services to repair infrastructure)
Institutions- use B2B products to continue operation (e.g.: schools buying printers for office use)
B2C marketing
Business-to-consumer marketing, or B2C marketing, refers to the tactics and strategies in which a company promotes its products and services to individual people.
Traditionally, this could refer to individuals shopping for personal products in a broad sense.
More recently the term B2C refers to the online selling of consumer products.
C2B marketing
Consumer-to-business marketing or C2B marketing is a business model where the end consumers create products and services which are consumed by businesses and organizations.
It is diametrically opposed to the popular concept of B2C or Business- to- Consumer where the companies make goods and services available to the end consumers.  In this type of business model, businesses profit from consumers' willingness to name their own price or contribute data or marketing to the company, while consumers benefit from flexibility, direct payment, or free or reduced-price products and services.
One of the major benefit of this type of business model is that it offers a company a competitive advantage in the market.
C2C marketing
Customer to customer marketing or C2C marketing represents a market environment where one customer purchases goods from another customer using a third-party business or platform to facilitate the transaction.
C2C companies are a new type of model that has emerged with e-commerce technology and the sharing economy.
Differences in B2B and B2C marketing
The different goals of B2B and B2C marketing lead to differences in the B2B and B2C markets.
The main differences in these markets are demand, purchasing volume, number of customers, customer concentration, distribution, buying nature, buying influences, negotiations, reciprocity, leasing and promotional methods.
Demand: B2B demand is derived because businesses buy products based on how much demand there is for the final consumer product.
Businesses buy products based on customer's wants and needs.
B2C demand is primarily because customers buy products based on their own wants and needs.
Purchasing volume: Businesses buy products in large volumes to distribute to consumers.
Consumers buy products in smaller volumes suitable for personal use.
Number of customers: There are relatively fewer businesses to market to than direct consumers.
Customer concentration: Businesses that specialize in a particular market tend to be geographically concentrated while customers that buy products from these businesses are not concentrated.
Distribution: B2B products pass directly from the producer of the product to the business while B2C products must additionally go through a wholesaler or retailer.
Buying nature: B2B purchasing is a formal process done by professional buyers and sellers, while B2C purchasing is informal.
Buying influences: B2B purchasing is influenced by multiple people in various departments such as quality control, accounting, and logistics while B2C marketing is only influenced by the person making the purchase and possibly a few others.
Negotiations: In B2B marketing, negotiating for lower prices or added benefits is commonly accepted while in B2C marketing (particularly in Western cultures) prices are fixed.
Reciprocity: Businesses tend to buy from businesses they sell to.
For example, a business that sells printer ink is more likely to buy office chairs from a supplier that buys the business's printer ink.
In B2C marketing, this does not occur because consumers are not also selling products.
Leasing: Businesses tend to lease expensive items while consumers tend to save up to buy expensive items.
Promotional methods: In B2B marketing, the most common promotional method is personal selling.
B2C marketing mostly uses sales promotion, public relations, advertising, and social media.
Marketing management orientations
Main article: History of marketing § Orientations or philosophies that inform marketing practice
A marketing orientation has been defined as a "philosophy of business management." or "a corporate state of mind" or as an "organisation[al] culture" Although scholars continue to debate the precise nature of specific concepts that inform marketing practice, the most commonly cited orientations are as follows:
Product concept: mainly concerned with the quality of its product.
It has largely been supplanted by the marketing orientation, except for haute couture and arts marketing.
Production concept: specializes in producing as much as possible of a given product or service in order to achieve economies of scale or economies of scope.
It dominated marketing practice from the 1860s to the 1930s, yet can still be found in some companies or industries.
Specifically, Kotler and Armstrong note that the production philosophy is "one of the oldest philosophies that guides sellers... [and] is still useful in some situations."
Selling concept: focuses on the selling/promotion of the firm's existing products, rather than developing new products to satisfy unmet needs or wants primarily through promotion and direct sales techniques, largely for "unsought goods" in industrial companies.
A 2011 meta analyses found that the factors with the greatest impact on sales performance are a salesperson's sales related knowledge (market segments, presentation skills, conflict resolution, and products), degree of adaptiveness, role clarity, cognitive aptitude, motivation and interest in a sales role).
Marketing concept: This is the most common concept used in contemporary marketing, and is a customer-centric approach based on products that suit new consumer tastes.
These firm engage in extensive market research, use R&D (Research & Development), and then utilize promotion techniques.
The marketing orientation includes:
Customer orientation: A firm in the market economy can survive by producing goods that people are willing and able to buy.
Consequently, ascertaining consumer demand is vital for a firm's future viability and even existence as a going concern.
Organizational orientation: The marketing department is of prime importance within the functional level of an organization.
Information from the marketing department is used to guide the actions of a company's other departments.
A marketing department could ascertain (via marketing research) that consumers desired a new type of product, or a new usage for an existing product.
With this in mind, the marketing department would inform the R&D department to create a prototype of a product/service based on consumers' new desires.
The production department would then start to manufacture the product.
The finance department may oppose required capital expenditures since it could undermine a healthy cash flow for the organization.
Societal marketing concept: Social responsibility that goes beyond satisfying customers and providing superior value embraces societal stakeholders such as employees, customers, and local communities.
Companies that adopt this perspective typically practice triple bottom line reporting and publish financial, social and environmental impact reports.
Sustainable marketing or green marketing is an extension of societal marketing.
The marketing mix
Main article: Marketing mix
A marketing mix is a foundational tool used to guide decision making in marketing.
The marketing mix represents the basic tools that marketers can use to bring their products or services to the market.
They are the foundation of managerial marketing and the marketing plan typically devotes a section to the marketing mix.
The 4Ps
The traditional marketing mix refers to four broad levels of marketing decision, namely: product, price, promotion, and place.
One version of the marketing mix is the 4Ps method.
Outline
Product
The product aspects of marketing deal with the specifications of the actual goods or services, and how it relates to the end-user's needs and wants.
The product element consists of product design, new product innovation, branding, packaging, labeling.
The scope of a product generally includes supporting elements such as warranties, guarantees, and support.
Branding, a key aspect of the product management, refers to the various methods of communicating a brand identity for the product, brand, or company.
Pricing
This refers to the process of setting a price for a product, including discounts.
The price need not be monetary; it can simply be what is exchanged for the product or services, e.g. time, energy, or attention or any sacrifices consumers make in order to acquire a product or service.
The price is the cost that a consumer pays for a product—monetary or not.
Methods of setting prices are in the domain of pricing science.
Place (or distribution)
This refers to how the product gets to the customer; the distribution channels and intermediaries such as wholesalers and retailers who enable customers to access products or services in a convenient manner.
This third P has also sometimes been called Place or Placement, referring to the channel by which a product or service is sold (e.g. online vs. retail), which geographic region or industry, to which segment (young adults, families, business people), etc. also referring to how the environment in which the product is sold in can affect sales.
Promotion
This includes all aspects of marketing communications: advertising, sales promotion, including promotional education, public relations, personal selling, product placement, branded entertainment, event marketing, trade shows, and exhibitions.
This fourth P is focused on providing a message to get a response from consumers.  The message is designed to persuade or tell a story to create awareness.
Criticisms
One of the limitations of the 4Ps approach is its emphasis on an inside-out view.
An inside-out approach is the traditional planning approach where the organisation identifies its desired goals and objectives, which are often based around what has always been done.
Marketing's task then becomes one of "selling" the organization's products and messages to the "outside" or external stakeholders.
In contrast, an outside-in approach first seeks to understand the needs and wants of the consumer.
From a model-building perspective, the 4 Ps has attracted a number of criticisms.
Well-designed models should exhibit clearly defined categories that are mutually exclusive, with no overlap.
Yet, the 4 Ps model has extensive overlapping problems.
Several authors stress the hybrid nature of the fourth P, mentioning the presence of two important dimensions, "communication" (general and informative communications such as public relations and corporate communications) and "promotion" (persuasive communications such as advertising and direct selling). Certain marketing activities, such as personal selling, may be classified as either promotion or as part of the place (i.e., distribution) element.
Some pricing tactics, such as promotional pricing, can be classified as price variables or promotional variables and, therefore, also exhibit some overlap.
Other important criticisms include that the marketing mix lacks a strategic framework and is, therefore, unfit to be a planning instrument, particularly when uncontrollable, external elements are an important aspect of the marketing environment.
Modifications and extensions
To overcome the deficiencies of the 4P model, some authors have suggested extensions or modifications to the original model.
Extensions of the four P's are often included in cases such as services marketing where unique characteristics (i.e. intangibility, perishability, heterogeneity and the inseparability of production and consumption) warrant additional consideration factors.
Other extensions have been found necessary for retail marketing, industrial marketing, and internet marketing
include "people", "process", and "physical evidence" and are often applied in the case of services marketing Other extensions have been found necessary in retail marketing, industrial marketing and internet marketing.
The 4Cs
In response to environmental and technological changes in marketing, as well as criticisms towards the 4Ps approach, the 4Cs has emerged as a modern marketing mix model.
Outline
Consumer (or client)
The consumer refers to the person or group that will acquire the product.
This aspect of the model focuses on fulfilling the wants or needs of the consumer.
Cost
Cost refers to what is exchanged in return for the product.
Cost mainly consists of the monetary value of the product.
Cost also refers to anything else the consumer must sacrifice to attain the product, such as time or money spent on transportation to acquire the product.
Convenience
Like "Place" in the 4Ps model, convenience refers to where the product will be sold.
This, however, not only refers to physical stores but also whether the product is available in person or online.
The convenience aspect emphasizes making it as easy as possible for the consumer to attain the product, thus making them more likely to do so.
Communication
Like "Promotion" in the 4Ps model, communication refers to how consumers find out about a product.
Unlike promotion, communication not only refers to the one-way communication of advertising, but also the two-way communication available through social media.
Environment
Main article: Market environment
The term "marketing environment" relates to all of the factors (whether internal, external, direct or indirect) that affect a firm's marketing decision-making/planning.
A firm's marketing environment consists of three main areas, which are:
The macro-environment (Macromarketing), over which a firm holds little control, consists of a variety of external factors that manifest on a large (or macro) scale.
These include: economic, social, political and technological factors.
A common method of assessing a firm's macro-environment is via a PESTLE (Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, Ecological) analysis.
Within a PESTLE analysis, a firm would analyze national political issues, culture and climate, key macroeconomic conditions, health and indicators (such as economic growth, inflation, unemployment, etc.), social trends/attitudes, and the nature of technology's impact on its society and the business processes within the society.
The micro-environment, over which a firm holds a greater amount (though not necessarily total) control, typically includes: Customers/consumers, Employees, Suppliers and the Media.
In contrast to the macro-environment, an organization holds a greater (though not complete) degree of control over these factors.
The internal environment, which includes the factors inside of the company itself A firm's internal environment consists
of: Labor, Inventory, Company Policy, Logistics, Budget, and Capital Assets.
Research
Main article: Marketing research
Marketing research is a systematic process of analyzing data that involves conducting research to support marketing activities and the statistical interpretation of data into information.
This information is then used by managers to plan marketing activities, gauge the nature of a firm's marketing environment and to attain information from suppliers.
A distinction should be made between marketing research and market research.
Market research involves gathering information about a particular target market.
As an example, a firm may conduct research in a target market, after selecting a suitable market segment.
In contrast, marketing research relates to all research conducted within marketing.
Market research is a subset of marketing research. (Avoiding the word consumer, which shows up in both, market research is about distribution, while marketing research encompasses distribution, advertising effectiveness, and salesforce effectiveness).
Marketing researchers use statistical methods (such as quantitative research, qualitative research, hypothesis tests, Chi-square tests, linear regression, correlation coefficients, frequency distributions, Poisson and binomial distributions, etc.) to interpret their findings and convert data into information.
The stages of research include:
Define the problem
Plan research
Research
Interpret data
Implement findings
Segmentation
Main article: Market segmentation
Market segmentation consists of taking the total heterogeneous market for a product and dividing it into several sub-markets or segments, each of which tends to be homogeneous in all significant aspects.
The process is conducted for two main purposes: better allocation of a firm's finite resources and to better serve the more diversified tastes of contemporary consumers.
A firm only possesses a certain amount of resources.
Thus, it must make choices (and appreciate the related costs) in servicing specific groups of consumers.
Moreover, with more diversity in the tastes of modern consumers, firms are noting the benefit of servicing a multiplicity of new markets.
Market segmentation can be defined in terms of the STP acronym, meaning Segment, Target, and Position.
Segmentation involves the initial splitting up of consumers into persons of like needs/wants/tastes.
Commonly used criteria include:
Geographic (such as a country, region, city, town)
Psychographic (e.g. personality traits or lifestyle traits which influence consumer behaviour)
Demographic (e.g. age, gender, socio-economic class, education)
Gender
Income
Life-Cycle (e.g.
Baby Boomer, Generation X, Millennial, Generation Z)
Lifestyle (e.g. tech savvy, active)
Behavioural (e.g. brand loyalty, usage rate)
Once a segment has been identified to target, a firm must ascertain whether the segment is beneficial for them to service.
The DAMP acronym is used as criteria to gauge the viability of a target market.
The elements of DAMP are:
Discernable – how a segment can be differentiated from other segments.
Accessible – how a segment can be accessed via Marketing Communications produced by a firm
Measurable – can the segment be quantified and its size determined?
Profitable – can a sufficient return on investment be attained from a segment's servicing?
The next step in the targeting process is the level of differentiation involved in a segment serving.
Three modes of differentiation exist, which are commonly applied by firms.
These are:
Undifferentiated – where a company produces a like product for all of a market segment
Differentiated – in which a firm produced slight modifications of a product within a segment
Niche – in which an organization forges a product to satisfy a specialized target market
Positioning concerns how to position a product in the minds of consumers and inform what attributes differentiate it from the competitor's products.
A firm often performs this by producing a perceptual map, which denotes similar products produced in the same industry according to how consumers perceive their price and quality.
From a product's placing on the map, a firm would tailor its marketing communications to meld with the product's perception among consumers and its position among competitors' offering.
Promotional mix
See also: Integrated marketing communications and Promotional mix
The promotional mix outlines how a company will market its product.
It consists of five tools: personal selling, sales promotion, public relations, advertising and social media
Personal selling involves a presentation given by a salesperson to an individual or a group of potential customers.
It enables two-way communication and relationship building, and is most commonly seen in business-to-business marketing but can also be found in business-to-consumer marketing (e.g.: selling cars at a dealership).
Personal selling: Young female beer sellers admonish the photographer that he also has to buy some, Tireli market, Mali 1989
Sales promotion involves short-term incentives to encourage the buying of products.
Examples of these incentives include free samples, contests, premiums, trade shows, giveaways, coupons, sweepstakes and games.
Depending on the incentive, one or more of the other elements of the promotional mix may be used in conjunction with sales promotion to inform customers of the incentives.
Public relations is the use of media tools to promote and monitor for a positive view of a company or product in the public's eye.
The goal is to either sustain a positive opinion or lessen or change a negative opinion.
It can include interviews, speeches/presentations, corporate literature, social media, news releases and special events.
Advertising occurs when a firm directly pays a media channel, directly via an in-house agency or via an advertising agency or media buying service, to publicize its product, service or message.
Common examples of advertising media include:
TV
Radio
Magazines
Online
Billboards
Event sponsorship
Direct mail
Transit ads
Social media is used to facilitate two-way communication between companies and their customers.
Outlets such as Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Snapchat and YouTube allow brands to start a conversation with regular and prospective customers.
Viral marketing can be greatly facilitated by social media and if successful, allows key marketing messages and content in reaching a large number of target audiences within a short time frame.
These platforms can also house advertising and public relations content.
The marketing plan
Main article: Marketing plan
The area of marketing planning involves forging a plan for a firm's marketing activities.
A marketing plan can also pertain to a specific product, as well as to an organization's overall marketing strategy.
An organization's marketing planning process is derived from its overall business strategy.
Thus, when top management is devising the firm's strategic direction/mission, the intended marketing activities are incorporated into this plan.
Outline of the marketing plan
Within the overall strategic marketing plan, the stages of the process are listed as thus:
Executive Summary
Current marketing situation
Threats and opportunities analysis
Objectives and issues
Marketing Strategy
Action programs
Budgets
Control
Levels of marketing objectives within an organization
As stated previously, the senior management of a firm would formulate a general business strategy for a firm.
However, this general business strategy would be interpreted and implemented in different contexts throughout the firm.
At the corporate level, marketing objectives are typically broad-based in nature, and pertain to the general vision of the firm in the short, medium or long-term.
As an example, if one pictures a group of companies (or a conglomerate), top management may state that sales for the group should increase by 25% over a ten-year period.
A strategic business unit (SBU) is a subsidiary within a firm, which participates within a given market/industry.
The SBU would embrace the corporate strategy, and attune it to its own particular industry.
For instance, an SBU may partake in the sports goods industry.
It thus would ascertain how it would attain additional sales of sports goods, in order to satisfy the overall business strategy.
The functional level relates to departments within the SBUs, such as marketing, finance, HR, production, etc.
The functional level would adopt the SBU's strategy and determine how to accomplish the SBU's own objectives in its market.
To use the example of the sports goods industry again, the marketing department would draw up marketing plans, strategies and communications to help the SBU achieve its marketing aims.
Product life cycle
Further information: Product life-cycle management (marketing)
Product lifecycle, with the assumption of four major phases: introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.
Curve of sales as a function of the time of the product on the market.
After a plateau in sales at product maturity, a steep decline can follow.
The product life cycle (PLC) is a tool used by marketing managers to gauge the progress of a product, especially relating to sales or revenue accrued over time.
The PLC is based on a few key assumptions, including:
A given product would possess introduction, growth, maturity, and decline stage
No product lasts perpetually on the market
A firm must employ differing strategies, according to where a product is on the PLC
In the introduction stage, a product is launched onto the market.
To stimulate the growth of sales/revenue, use of advertising may be high, in order to heighten awareness of the product in question.
During the growth stage, the product's sales/revenue is increasing, which may stimulate more marketing communications to sustain sales.
More entrants enter into the market, to reap the apparent high profits that the industry is producing.
When the product hits maturity, its starts to level off, and an increasing number of entrants to a market produce price falls for the product.
Firms may use sales promotions to raise sales.
During decline, demand for a good begins to taper off, and the firm may opt to discontinue the manufacture of the product.
This is so, if revenue for the product comes from efficiency savings in production, over actual sales of a good/service.
However, if a product services a niche market, or is complementary to another product, it may continue the manufacture of the product, despite a low level of sales/revenue being accrued.
See also
Main article: Outline of marketing
Account-based marketing
Advertising
History of advertising
Online Advertising
Sex in Advertising
Advertising management
Affinity marketing
American business history
B2B Marketing
Brand awareness
Consumer confusion
Consumer behaviour
Content marketing
Database marketing
Demand chain
Digital marketing
Email remarketing
Family in advertising
Guerrilla Marketing
History of marketing
Internet marketing
List of marketing terms
Loyalty marketing
Macromarketing
Marketing management
Marketing mix
Marketing science
Marketing strategy
Micromarketing
Media manipulation
Meta marketing
Mobile marketing
Multicultural marketing
Product management
Product marketing
Production orientation
Public Sector Marketing
Real-time marketing
Return on marketing investment (ROMI)
Relationship marketing
Search Engine Marketing
Services marketing
Smarketing
Societal marketing
Social Media Marketing
Sustainable market orientation
Visual marketing
Viral Marketing
Web marketing
Word-of-mouth marketing
Types of marketing
Agricultural marketing
Business marketing and industrial marketing
Destination marketing
Global marketing
Influencer marketing
Relationship marketing
Services marketing
Social marketing
Marketing orientations or philosophies
Marketing orientation
Production orientation
Selling orientation
Socially responsible marketing and corporate social responsibility
Relationship marketing and customer relationship management
References
Cerf, M.; Garcia-Garcia, M.; Kotler, P. (2017). Consumer Neuroscience.
The MIT Press (in French). MIT Press. p. 281. ISBN 978-0-262-03659-7. Retrieved 5 January 2022.
a b c American Marketing Association, Definitions of Marketing, approved 2017, accessed 24 January 2021
Drucker, Peter (1954). The Practice of Management.
New York: Harper & Row. p. 32.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Lamb, Charles; Hair, Joseph; McDaniel, Carl (2016). Principles of Marketing.
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
ISBN 978-1-285-86014-5.
a b Mc Namara (1972) cited in Deshpande, R., Developing a Market Orientation, Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage, 1999, p. 11
a b McCarthy, Jerome E. (1964). Basic Marketing.
A Managerial Approach.
Homewood, IL: Irwin.
a b c d e Hester, Brittany (9 April 2019). "Marketing Strategy: Forget the 4 P'S! What are the 4 C'S?". CATMEDIA Internal Communication.
Retrieved 8 November 2019.
a b c d e "What is Marketing Environment? definition and meaning – Business Jargons". Business Jargons. 25 August 2015. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
a b Market Research is a subset of Marketing Research"Difference Between Market & Marketing Research". 24 September 2019. Market Research is a subset of Marketing Research
a b "The Marketing Research Process | Principles of Marketing". courses.lumenlearning.com.
Retrieved 15 November 2019.
a b Stanton, William J (1984). Fundamentals of marketing.
McGraw-Hill.
Julie Bosman (10 March 2006). "For Tobacco, Stealth Marketing Is the Norm". The New York Times.
Hunt, Shelby D. (July 1976). "The Nature and Scope of Marketing". Journal of Marketing. 40 (3): 17–28. doi:10.2307/1249990. JSTOR 1249990.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (October 1975). "Marketing as Exchange". Journal of Marketing. 39 (4): 32–39. doi:10.2307/1250593. JSTOR 1250593.
Pomering, A., Noble, G. and Johnson, L., "A Sustainability Roadmap for Contemporary Marketing Education: Thinking Beyond the 4Ps", 2008, accessed 25 January 2021
Jenny Darroch, Morgan P. Miles, Andrew Jardine and Ernest F. Cooke, The 2004 AMA Definition of Marketing and Its Relationship to a Market Orientation: An Extension of Cooke, Rayburn, & Abercrombie, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, Fall, 2004, Vol. 12, No. 4 (Fall, 2004), pp. 29-38, accessed 25 January 2021
Kotler, Philip (1980). Principles of marketing.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
ISBN 0-13-701557-7. OCLC 5564799.
Kotler, Philip; Gary Armstrong (2018). Principles of marketing (Seventeenth ed.). Hoboken.
ISBN 978-0-13-449251-3. OCLC 954203453.
Paul H. Selden (1997). Sales Process Engineering: A Personal Workshop.
Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. p. 23.
Paliwoda, Stanley J.; Ryans, John K. (2008). "Back to first principles". International Marketing – Modern and Classic Papers (1st ed.). p. 25. ISBN 978-1-84376-649-0. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"Marketing library resources – content, knowledge databases". CIM. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Subin, Im (2004). Market Orientation, Creativity, and New Product Performance in High-Technology Firms.
Journal of Marketing. pp. 114–132.
Zhou, Julie. "The Science of Marketing". Forbes.
Retrieved 16 June 2017.
"10 Steps to Creating a Marketing Plan for Your Small Business". Dummies.
Retrieved 27 September 2017.
NetMBA.com. "Marketing Concept". 
Weeks, Richard; Marx, William (Autumn 1968). "The Market Concept: Problems and Promises". Business & Society. 9: 39–42. doi:10.1177/000765036800900106. S2CID 154456073.
a b Hague, Paul N.; Hague, Nicholas; Morgan, Carol-Ann (2013). Market Research in Practice: How to Get Greater Insight From Your Market.
London: Kogan-Page. pp. 19–20.
Smith, W.R. (July 1956). "Product Differentiation and Market Segmentation as Alternative Marketing Strategies" (PDF). Journal of Marketing. 21 (1): 3–8. doi:10.1177/002224295602100102. S2CID 49060196. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2019.
"What Comes Next? Survey Analysis and Segmentation", Discover the Future of Research, Wiley, 12 January 2017
Ahmad, Rizal (May 2003). "Benefit segmentation". International Journal of Market Research. 45 (3): 1–13. doi:10.1177/147078530304500302. ISSN 1470-7853. S2CID 220319720.
du Plessis, D.F. Introduction to Public Relations and Advertising. p. 134.
Business News Daily Editor, Exp. "What is B2C?". Business News Daily.
Retrieved 16 April 2020. {{cite web}}: |last1= has generic name (help)
Aspara, Jaakko; Grant, David B.; Holmlund, Maria (1 February 2021). "Consumer involvement in supply networks: A cubic typology of C2B2C and C2B2B business models". Industrial Marketing Management. 93: 356–369. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.09.004. ISSN 0019-8501. S2CID 226739953.
Tarver, Evan. "Customer to Customer – C2C". Investopedia.
Retrieved 16 April 2020.
Kohli, A.K. and Jaworski, B.J., "Market Orientation: The Construct, Research Propositions, and Managerial Implications," Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, April 1990, pp. 1–18
Narver, J.C.; Slater, S.F. (1990). "The Effect of a Market Orientation on Business Profitability". Journal of Marketing. 54 (4): 20–34. doi:10.2307/1251757. JSTOR 1251757.
Hollander, S.C.; Jones, D.G.B.; Dix, L. (2005). "Periodization in Marketing History". Journal of Macromarketing. 25 (1): 33–39. doi:10.1177/0276146705274982. S2CID 9997002.
Fillis, Ian (2006). "Art for Art's Sake or Art for Business Sake: An exploration of artistic product orientation". The Marketing Review. 6: 29–40. doi:10.1362/146934706776861573.
Sheth, J., Sisodia, R.S. and Sharma, A., "The Antecedents and Consequences of Customer-Centric Marketing," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2000, p. 55
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Principles of Marketing, 12th ed., Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, 2008, p. 28
Kotler, Philip (1980). Principles of Marketing.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Principles of Marketing, 12th ed., Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, 2008, p. 29
Avlonitis, G.J. and Gounaris, S.P., "Marketing Orientation and Company Performance: Industrial vs.
Consumer Goods Companies," Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 26, 1997, pp. 385–402
Verbeke, Willem; Dietz, Bart; Verwaal, Ernst (2010). "Drivers of sales performance: A contemporary meta-analysis.
Have salespeople become knowledge brokers?" (PDF). Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. 39 (3): 407–28. doi:10.1007/s11747-010-0211-8. S2CID 53687035.
McGee, L.W. and Spiro, R.L., "The Marketing Concept in Perspective," Business Horizons, May–June 1988, pp. 40–45
Hooley, G., Fahy, J., Beracs, J., Fonfara, K. and Snoj, B., "Market Orientation in the Transition Economies of Central Europe: Tests of the Narver and Slater Market Orientation Scales," Journal of Business Research, Vol. 50, 2000, pp. 273–85. Note that the most widely applied scale is that developed by Narver and Slater in Narver, J.C., and Slater, S.F., "The Effect of Marketing Orientation on Business Profitability," Journal of Marketing, Vo. 54, 1990, pp. 20–35
, Blackwell Reference, Kotler, P., "What consumerism means for marketers", Harvard Business Review, vol. 50, no. 3, 1972, pp. 48–57; Wilkie, W.L. and Moore, E.S., "Macromarketing as a Pillar of Marketing Thought," Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 26 No. 2, December 2006, pp. 224–32 doi:10.1177/0276146706291067; Wilkie, W.L. and Moore, E.S., "Scholarly Research in Marketing: Exploring the "4 Eras" of Thought Development," Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2003, pp. 116–46
Grönroos, Christian. "From Marketing Mix to Relationship Marketing: Towards a Paradigm Shift in Marketing," Management Decision, vol. 32, no. 2, 1994, pp. 4–20.
a b Kerr, F., Patti, C. and Ichul, K., "An Inside-out Approach to Integrated Marketing Communications: An International Perspective," International Journal of Advertising, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2008, pp. 531–40
a b c Borden, N., "The Concept of the Marketing Mix," Journal of Advertising Research, June 1964 pp. 2–7; van Waterschoot, W. and van den Bulte, C., "The 4P Classification of the Marketing Mix Revisited," Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, No. 4, 1992, pp. 83–93
Gareth, Morgan (1988). Riding the Waves of Change.
Jossey-Bass.
ISBN 978-1555420932.
Porcu, L., del Barrio-Garcia, S., and Kitchen, P.J., "How Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) works? A theoretical review and an analysis of its main drivers and effects/ ¿Cómo funciona la Comunicación Integrada de Marketing (CIM)? Una revisión teórica y un análisis de sus antecedents Efectos," Comunicación y Sociedad, Vol.
XXV, Núm. 1, 2012, pp. 313–48
van Waterschoot, W.; van den Bulte, C. (1992). "The 4P Classification of the Marketing Mix Revisited". Journal of Marketing. 56 (4): 83–93. doi:10.2307/1251988. JSTOR 1251988.
Constantinides, E., "The Marketing Mix Revisited: Towards the 21st Century Marketing," Journal of Marketing Management, Vo. 22, 2006, pp. 407–38
Fisk, R.P., Brown, W., and Bitner, M.J., "Tracking the Evolution of Services Marketing Literature", Journal of Retailing, vol. 41 (April), 1993; Booms, B. and Bitner, M.J. "Marketing Strategies and Organizational Structures for Service Firms" in James H. Donnelly and William R. George (eds), Marketing of Services, Chicago: American Marketing Association, 47–51; Rafiq, M. and Ahmed, P.K. "Using the 7Ps as a Generic Marketing mix: An Exploratory Survey of UK and European Marketing Academics", Marketing Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 4–15
US Census data is both for Market research and for Marketing research: "NAPCS Product List for NAICS 54191: Marketing Research" (PDF). data collection services for marketing research and public opinion surveys, by methods other than ... data collection services provided as part of a market research services package that includes
"Difference between Market Research and Marketing Research". 9 January 2018.
"4 Principles of Marketing As A Science". Search Engine Land. 18 April 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2017.
Moore, Karl; Pareek, Niketh (2010). Marketing: the Basics.
New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 38–65. ISBN 978-0-415-77899-2.
Moutinho, Luiz (2000). Strategic Management in Tourism.
New York, NY: CABI Publishing. pp. 121–166. ISBN 9780851992822.
Tiffany Hsu (28 October 2019). "The Advertising Industry Has a Problem: People Hate Ads". The New York Times.
Bibliography
Bartels, Robert, The History of Marketing Thought, Columbus, Ohio, Grid, (1976) 1988 online
Christensen, Clayton M. (1997). The innovator's dilemma: when new technologies cause great firms to fail.
Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Harvard Business School Press.
ISBN 978-0-87584-585-2.
Church, Roy and Godley, Andrew (eds), The Emergence of Modern Marketing, London, Frank Cass, 2003 online edition
Hollander, Stanley C., Rassuli, Kathleen M.; Jones, D.G. Brian; Dix and Farlow, L., "Periodization in Marketing History," Journal of Macromarketing, Vol 25, no.1, 2005, pp. 32–41. online
Tedlow, Richard S., and Jones, Geoffrey G. (eds), The Rise and Fall of Mass Marketing, Routledge, 2014
Weitz, Barton A. and Robin Wensley (eds). Handbook of Marketing, 2002
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marketing.
Library resources about  Marketing 
Resources in your library
The dictionary definition of marketing at Wiktionary
Quotations related to marketing at Wikiquote
Marketing at Wikibooks
Media manipulationContext
Bias
Crowd psychology
Deception
Dumbing down
False balance
Half-truths
Machiavellianism
Media
Obfuscation
Orwellian
Persuasion
Manipulation (psychology)
Activism
Alternative media
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstrations
Deplatforming
Guerrilla communication
Hacktivism
Internet
Media
Occupations
Petitions
Protests
Youth
Advertising
Billboards
False
Infomercials
Mobiles
Modeling
Radio
Sex
Slogans
Testimonials
TV
Criticism of advertising
Annoyance factor
CensorshipMedia regulation
Books
Broadcast law
Burying of scholars
Catch and kill
Corporate
Cover-ups
Euphemism
Films
Historical negationism
Internet
Political
Religious
Self
Hoaxing
Alternative facts
April Fools'
Deepfake
Fake news
websites
Fakelore
Fictitious entries
Forgery
Gaslighting
List
Literary
Lying press
Photograph manipulation
Racial
Urban legend
Virus
Marketing
Branding
Loyalty
Product
Product placement
Publicity
Research
Word of mouth
News media
Agenda-setting
Broadcasting
Circus
Cycle
False balance
Infotainment
Managing
Narcotizing dysfunction
Newspeak
Pseudo-event
Scrum
Sensationalism
Tabloid journalism
Political campaigning
Advertising
Astroturfing
Attack ad
Canvassing
Character assassination
Dog-whistle politics
Election promises
Lawn signs
Manifestos
Name recognition
Negative
Push polling
Smear campaign
Wedge issue
Propaganda
Bandwagon
Crowd manipulation
Disinformation
Fearmongering
Framing
Indoctrination
Loaded language
National mythology
Rally 'round the flag effect
Techniques
Psychological warfare
Airborne leaflets
False flag
Fifth column
Information (IT)
Lawfare
Political
Public diplomacy
Sedition
Subversion
Public relations
Cult of personality
Doublespeak
Non-apology apology
Reputation management
Slogans
Sound bites
Spin
Transfer
Understatement
Weasel words
Corporate propaganda
Sales
Cold calling
Door-to-door
Pricing
Product demonstrations
Promotion
Promotional merchandise
Telemarketing
Related
Influence-for-hire
Media bias
United States
Media concentration
Media democracy
Media ecology
Media ethics
Media franchise
Media influence
Media proprietor
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 07:52 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
