Mesoamerica - Wikipedia
Mesoamerica
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the cultural area.
For the economic region, see Mesoamerican region.
For the geographic area, see Central America.
For other uses, see Mesoamerica (disambiguation).
Pre-Columbian cultural area in the Americas
Mesoamerica and its cultural areas[according to whom?]
Mesoamerica is a historical region and cultural area in southern North America and most of Central America.
It extends from approximately central Mexico through Belize, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and northern Costa Rica.
Within this region pre-Columbian societies flourished for more than 3,000 years before the Spanish colonization of the Americas.
Mesoamerica was the site of two of the most profound historical transformations in world history: primary urban generation, and the formation of New World cultures out of the long encounters among indigenous, European, African and Asian cultures.
In the 16th century, Eurasian diseases such as smallpox and measles, which were endemic among the colonists but new to North America, caused the deaths of upwards of 90% of the indigenous people, resulting in great losses to their societies and cultures.
Mesoamerica is one of the five areas in the world where ancient civilization arose independently (see cradle of civilization), and the second in the Americas.
Norte Chico (Caral-Supe) in present-day Peru, arose as an independent civilization in the northern coastal region.
Ballgame court at Monte Albán
A pair of swinging Remojadas figurines, Classic Veracruz culture, 300 to 900 CE.
Page 9 of the Dresden Codex (from the 1880 Förstermann edition)
As a cultural area, Mesoamerica is defined by a mosaic of cultural traits developed and shared by its indigenous cultures.
Beginning as early as 7000 BCE, the domestication of cacao, maize, beans, tomato, avocado, vanilla, squash and chili, as well as the turkey and dog, resulted in a transition from paleo-Indian hunter-gatherer tribal groupings to the organization of sedentary agricultural villages.
In the subsequent Formative period, agriculture and cultural traits such as a complex mythological and religious tradition, a vigesimal numeric system, a complex calendric system, a tradition of ball playing, and a distinct architectural style, were diffused through the area.
Also in this period, villages began to become socially stratified and develop into chiefdoms.
Large ceremonial centers were built, interconnected by a network of trade routes for the exchange of luxury goods, such as obsidian, jade, cacao, cinnabar, Spondylus shells, hematite, and ceramics.
While Mesoamerican civilization knew of the wheel and basic metallurgy, neither of these became technologically relevant.
Among the earliest complex civilizations was the Olmec culture, which inhabited the Gulf Coast of Mexico and extended inland and southwards across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
Frequent contact and cultural interchange between the early Olmec and other cultures in Chiapas, Oaxaca and Guatemala laid the basis for the Mesoamerican cultural area.
All this was facilitated by considerable regional communications in ancient Mesoamerica, especially along the Pacific coast.
During this formative period distinct religious and symbolic traditions spread, as well as the development of artistic and architectural complexes.
In the subsequent Preclassic period, complex urban polities began to develop among the Maya, with the rise of centers such as Aguada fénix and Calakmul in Mexico; El Mirador, and Tikal in Guatemala, and the Zapotec at Monte Albán.
During this period, the first true Mesoamerican writing systems were developed in the Epi-Olmec and the Zapotec cultures.
The Mesoamerican writing tradition reached its height in the Classic Maya logosyllabic script.
Mesoamerica is one of only six regions of the world where writing is known to have independently developed (the others being ancient Egypt, Peru, India, Sumer, and China). In Central Mexico, the city of Teotihuacan ascended at the height of the Classic period; it formed a military and commercial empire whose political influence stretched south into the Maya area and northward.
Upon the collapse of Teotihuacán around 600 AD, competition between several important political centers in central Mexico, such as Xochicalco and Cholula, ensued.
At this time during the Epi-Classic period, the Nahua peoples began moving south into Mesoamerica from the North, and became politically and culturally dominant in central Mexico, as they displaced speakers of Oto-Manguean languages.
During the early post-Classic period, Central Mexico was dominated by the Toltec culture, and Oaxaca by the Mixtec.
The lowland Maya area had important centers at Chichén Itzá and Mayapán.
Towards the end of the post-Classic period, the Aztecs of Central Mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central Mesoamerica.
The distinct Mesoamerican cultural tradition ended with the Spanish conquest in the 16th century.
Over the next centuries, Mesoamerican indigenous cultures were gradually subjected to Spanish colonial rule.
Aspects of the Mesoamerican cultural heritage still survive among the indigenous peoples who inhabit Mesoamerica.
Many continue to speak their ancestral languages, and maintain many practices harking back to their Mesoamerican roots.
Contents
Etymology and definition
Ancient Mesoamerican sites in El Salvador
Holy Spirit Grotto
Joya de Cerén
Tazumal
Casa Blanca
San Andres
Cihuatán
The term Mesoamerica literally means "middle America" in Greek.
Middle America often refers to a larger area in the Americas, but it has also previously been used more narrowly to refer to Mesoamerica.
An example is the title of the 16 volumes of The Handbook of Middle American Indians.  "Mesoamerica" is broadly defined as the area that is home to the Mesoamerican civilization, which comprises a group of peoples with close cultural and historical ties.
The exact geographic extent of Mesoamerica has varied through time, as the civilization extended North and South from its heartland in southern Mexico.
Antropomorphic figure from the Proto-Lencan culture found at Los Naranjos, Honduras.
An example of mesomerican art during the preclassic Period.
The term was first used by the German ethnologist Paul Kirchhoff, who noted that similarities existed among the various pre-Columbian cultures within the region that included southern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, western Honduras, and the Pacific lowlands of Nicaragua and northwestern Costa Rica.
In the tradition of cultural history, the prevalent archaeological theory of the early to middle 20th century, Kirchhoff defined this zone as a cultural area based on a suite of interrelated cultural similarities brought about by millennia of inter- and intra-regional interaction (i.e., diffusion). Mesoamerica is recognized as a near-prototypical cultural area.
This term is now fully integrated in the standard terminology of pre-Columbian anthropological studies.
Conversely, the sister terms Aridoamerica and Oasisamerica, which refer to northern Mexico and the western United States, respectively, have not entered into widespread usage.
Some of the significant cultural traits defining the Mesoamerican cultural tradition are:
Horticulture and plant use: sedentism based on maize agriculture; floating gardens; use of bark paper and agave (see also maguey) for ritual purposes, as a medium for writing, and the use of agave for cooking and clothing; cultivation of cacao; grinding of corn softened with ashes or lime; harpoon-shaped digging stick
Clothing and personal articles: lip plugs, mirrors of polished stone, turbans, sandals with heels, textiles adorned with rabbit hair
Architecture: construction of stepped pyramids; stucco floors; ball courts with stone rings (see the use of natural rubber and the practice of the ritual Mesoamerican ballgame)
Record keeping: use of two different calendars (a 260-day ritual calendar and a 365-day calendar based on the solar year); use of locally developed pictographic and hieroglyphic (logo-syllabic) writing systems; numbers (see also vigesimal (base 20) number system); "century" of fifty-two years; eighteen-month calendar; screen-fold books
Commerce: specialized markets, "department store" markets subdivided according to specialty
Weapons and warfare: wooden swords with stone chips set into the edges (see macuahuitl), military orders (eagle knights and jaguar knights), clay pellets for blowguns, cotton-pad armor, traveling merchants who act as spies, wars for the purpose of securing sacrificial victims
Ritual and myth: practice of various forms of ritual sacrifice, including human sacrifice and quail sacrifice; paper and rubber as sacrificial offerings; pantheon of gods or spirits; acrobatic flier dance (see the Danza de los Voladores and the Totonac flier dance; 13 as a ritual number; ritual period of 20 x 13 = 260 days; mythic concept of one or more afterworlds and the difficult journey in reaching them; good and bad omen days; a religious complex based on a combination of shamanism and natural deities, and a shared system of symbols
Language: a linguistic area defined by a number of grammatical traits that have spread through the area by diffusion
Geography
Main article: Geography of Mesoamerica
El Mirador flourished from 600 BCE to 100 CE, and may have had a population of over 100,000.
Landscape of the Mesoamerican highlands
Located on the Middle American isthmus joining North and South America between ca. 10° and 22° northern latitude, Mesoamerica possesses a complex combination of ecological systems, topographic zones, and environmental contexts.
These different niches are classified into two broad categories: the lowlands (those areas between sea level and 1000 meters) and the altiplanos, or highlands (situated between 1,000 and 2,000 meters above sea level). In the low-lying regions, sub-tropical and tropical climates are most common, as is true for most of the coastline along the Pacific and Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea.
The highlands show much more climatic diversity, ranging from dry tropical to cold mountainous climates; the dominant climate is temperate with warm temperatures and moderate rainfall.
The rainfall varies from the dry Oaxaca and north Yucatán to the humid southern Pacific and Caribbean lowlands.
Cultural sub-areas
Several distinct sub-regions within Mesoamerica are defined by a convergence of geographic and cultural attributes.
These sub-regions are more conceptual than culturally meaningful, and the demarcation of their limits is not rigid.
The Maya area, for example, can be divided into two general groups: the lowlands and highlands.
The lowlands are further divided into the southern and northern Maya lowlands.
The southern Maya lowlands are generally regarded as encompassing northern Guatemala, southern Campeche and Quintana Roo in Mexico, and Belize.
The northern lowlands cover the remainder of the northern portion of the Yucatán Peninsula.
Other areas include Central Mexico, West Mexico, the Gulf Coast Lowlands, Oaxaca, the Southern Pacific Lowlands, and Southeast Mesoamerica (including northern Honduras).
Topography
There is extensive topographic variation in Mesoamerica, ranging from the high peaks circumscribing the Valley of Mexico and within the central Sierra Madre mountains to the low flatlands of the northern Yucatán Peninsula.
The tallest mountain in Mesoamerica is Pico de Orizaba, a dormant volcano located on the border of Puebla and Veracruz.
Its peak elevation is 5,636 m (18,490 ft).
The Sierra Madre mountains, which consist of several smaller ranges, run from northern Mesoamerica south through Costa Rica.
The chain is historically volcanic.
In central and southern Mexico, a portion of the Sierra Madre chain is known as the Eje Volcánico Transversal, or the Trans-Mexican volcanic belt.
There are 83 inactive and active volcanoes within the Sierra Madre range, including 11 in Mexico, 37 in Guatemala, 23 in El Salvador, 25 in Nicaragua, and 3 in northwestern Costa Rica.
According to the Michigan Technological University, 16 of these are still active.
The tallest active volcano is Popocatépetl at 5,452 m (17,887 ft). This volcano, which retains its Nahuatl name, is located 70 km (43 mi) southeast of Mexico City.
Other volcanoes of note include Tacana on the Mexico–Guatemala border, Tajumulco and Santamaría in Guatemala, Izalco in El Salvador, Arenal in Costa Rica, and Concepción and Maderas on Ometepe, which is an island formed by both volcanoes rising out of Lake Cocibolca in Nicaragua.
One important topographic feature is the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, a low plateau that breaks up the Sierra Madre chain between the Sierra Madre del Sur to the north and the Sierra Madre de Chiapas to the south.
At its highest point, the Isthmus is 224 m (735 ft) above mean sea level.
This area also represents the shortest distance between the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean in Mexico.
The distance between the two coasts is roughly 200 km (120 mi). The northern side of the Isthmus is swampy and covered in dense jungle—but the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, as the lowest and most level point within the Sierra Madre mountain chain, was nonetheless a main transportation, communication, and economic route within Mesoamerica.
Bodies of water
Yojoa Lake in Honduras.
Outside of the northern Maya lowlands, rivers are common throughout Mesoamerica.
Some of the more important ones served as loci of human occupation in the area.
The longest river in Mesoamerica is the Usumacinta, which forms in Guatemala at the convergence of the Salinas or Chixoy and La Pasion River and runs north for 970 km (600 mi)—480 km (300 mi) of which are navigable—eventually draining into the Gulf of Mexico.
Other rivers of note include the Rio Grande de Santiago, the Grijalva River, the Motagua River, the Ulúa River, and the Hondo River.
The northern Maya lowlands, especially the northern portion of the Yucatán peninsula, are notable for their nearly complete lack of rivers (largely due to the absolute lack of topographic variation). Additionally, no lakes exist in the northern peninsula.
The main source of water in this area is aquifers that are accessed through natural surface openings called cenotes.
With an area of 8,264 km2 (3,191 sq mi), Lake Nicaragua is the largest lake in Mesoamerica.
Lake Chapala is Mexico's largest freshwater lake, but Lake Texcoco is perhaps most well known as the location upon which Tenochtitlan, capital of the Aztec Empire, was founded.
Lake Petén Itzá, in northern Guatemala, is notable as where the last independent Maya city, Tayasal (or Noh Petén), held out against the Spanish until 1697. Other large lakes include Lake Atitlán, Lake Izabal, Lake Güija, Lemoa, and Lake Managua.
Biodiversity
Almost all ecosystems are present in Mesoamerica; the more well known are the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System, the second largest in the world, and La Mosquitia (consisting of the Rio Platano Biosphere Reserve, Tawahka Asangni, Patuca National Park, and Bosawas Biosphere Reserve) a rainforest second in size in the Americas only to the Amazonas.
The highlands present mixed and coniferous forest.
The biodiversity is among the richest in the world, though the number of species in the red list of the IUCN grows every year.
Chronology and culture
Main article: Mesoamerican chronology
Tikal is one of the largest archaeological sites, urban centers, and tourist attractions of the pre-Columbian Maya civilization.
It is located in the archaeological region of the Petén Basin in what is now northern Guatemala.
The history of human occupation in Mesoamerica is divided into stages or periods.
These are known, with slight variation depending on region, as the Paleo-Indian, the Archaic, the Preclassic (or Formative), the Classic, and the Postclassic.
The last three periods, representing the core of Mesoamerican cultural fluorescence, are further divided into two or three sub-phases.
Most of the time following the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century is classified as the Colonial period.
The differentiation of early periods (i.e., up through the end of the Late Preclassic) generally reflects different configurations of socio-cultural organization that are characterized by increasing socio-political complexity, the adoption of new and different subsistence strategies, and changes in economic organization (including increased interregional interaction). The Classic period through the Postclassic are differentiated by the cyclical crystallization and fragmentation of the various political entities throughout Mesoamerica.
Paleo-Indian
The Mesoamerican Paleo-Indian period precedes the advent of agriculture and is characterized by a nomadic hunting and gathering subsistence strategy.
Big-game hunting, similar to that seen in contemporaneous North America, was a large component of the subsistence strategy of the Mesoamerican Paleo-Indian.  These sites had obsidian blades and Clovis-style fluted projectile points.
Archaic
The Archaic period (8000–2000 BCE) is characterized by the rise of incipient agriculture in Mesoamerica.
The initial phases of the Archaic involved the cultivation of wild plants, transitioning into informal domestication and culminating with sedentism and agricultural production by the close of the period.
Transformations of natural environments have been a common feature at least since the mid Holocene.
Archaic sites include Sipacate in Escuintla, Guatemala, where maize pollen samples date to c. 3500 BCE.
Preclassic/Formative
See also: Olmec influences on Mesoamerican cultures
Olmec Colossal Head No. 3 1200–900 BCE
The first complex civilization to develop in Mesoamerica was that of the Olmec, who inhabited the gulf coast region of Veracruz throughout the Preclassic period.
The main sites of the Olmec include San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán, La Venta, and Tres Zapotes.
Specific dates vary, but these sites were occupied from roughly 1200 to 400 BCE. Remains of other early cultures interacting with the Olmec have been found at Takalik Abaj, Izapa, and Teopantecuanitlan, and as far south as in Honduras.
Research in the Pacific Lowlands of Chiapas and Guatemala suggest that Izapa and the Monte Alto Culture may have preceded the Olmec.
Radiocarbon samples associated with various sculptures found at the Late Preclassic site of Izapa suggest a date of between 1800 and 1500 BCE.
During the Middle and Late Preclassic period, the Maya civilization developed in the southern Maya highlands and lowlands, and at a few sites in the northern Maya lowlands.
The earliest Maya sites coalesced after 1000 BCE, and include Nakbe, El Mirador, and Cerros.
Middle to Late Preclassic Maya sites include Kaminaljuyú, Cival, Edzná, Cobá, Lamanai, Komchen, Dzibilchaltun, and San Bartolo, among others.
The Preclassic in the central Mexican highlands is represented by such sites as Tlapacoya, Tlatilco, and Cuicuilco.
These sites were eventually superseded by Teotihuacán, an important Classic-era site that eventually dominated economic and interaction spheres throughout Mesoamerica.
The settlement of Teotihuacan is dated to the later portion of the Late Preclassic, or roughly 50 CE.
In the Valley of Oaxaca, San José Mogote represents one of the oldest permanent agricultural villages in the area, and one of the first to use pottery.
During the Early and Middle Preclassic, the site developed some of the earliest examples of defensive palisades, ceremonial structures, the use of adobe, and hieroglyphic writing.
Also of importance, the site was one of the first to demonstrate inherited status, signifying a radical shift in socio-cultural and political structure.
San José Mogote was eventual overtaken by Monte Albán, the subsequent capital of the Zapotec empire, during the Late Preclassic.
The Preclassic in western Mexico, in the states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, and Michoacán also known as the Occidente, is poorly understood.
This period is best represented by the thousands of figurines recovered by looters and ascribed to the "shaft tomb tradition".
Preclassic gallery
Sculpture of "The Acrobat" from Tlatilco
Pyramid of the archaeological site of La Venta 1000-400 BCE
Cuicuilco 800–600 BCE
The partly excavated main structure of San José Mogote 1500–500 BCE
Monte Albán, Building J in the foreground. 200 BCE – 200 CE
Classic
Early Classic
Pyramid of the Moon viewed from atop of the Pyramid of the Sun.
The Classic period is marked by the rise and dominance of several polities.
The traditional distinction between the Early and Late Classic are marked by their changing fortune and their ability to maintain regional primacy.
Of paramount importance are Teotihuacán in central Mexico and Tikal in Guatemala; the Early Classic's temporal limits generally correlate to the main periods of these sites.
Monte Albán in Oaxaca is another Classic-period polity that expanded and flourished during this period, but the Zapotec capital exerted less interregional influence than the other two sites.
During the Early Classic, Teotihuacan participated in and perhaps dominated a far-reaching macro-regional interaction network.
Architectural and artifact styles (talud-tablero, tripod slab-footed ceramic vessels) epitomized at Teotihuacan were mimicked and adopted at many distant settlements.
Pachuca obsidian, whose trade and distribution is argued to have been economically controlled by Teotihuacan, is found throughout Mesoamerica.
Tikal came to dominate much of the southern Maya lowlands politically, economically, and militarily during the Early Classic.
An exchange network centered at Tikal distributed a variety of goods and commodities throughout southeast Mesoamerica, such as obsidian imported from central Mexico (e.g., Pachuca) and highland Guatemala (e.g., El Chayal, which was predominantly used by the Maya during the Early Classic), and jade from the Motagua valley in Guatemala.
Tikal was often in conflict with other polities in the Petén Basin, as well as with others outside of it, including Uaxactun, Caracol, Dos Pilas, Naranjo, and Calakmul.
Towards the end of the Early Classic, this conflict lead to Tikal's military defeat at the hands of Caracol in 562, and a period commonly known as the Tikal Hiatus.
Early Classic gallery
Great Goddess of Teotihuacan 200–500 CE
A reconstruction of Guachimontones, flourished from 200 to 400 CE
Temple of the Owl, Dzibanche 200–600 CE
Acanceh, 200–300 CE
Mask located on the "Temple of the Masks" Kohunlich c. 500 CE
Late Classic
Xochicalco, Temple of the Feathered Serpent, 650–900 CE
The Late Classic period (beginning c. 600 CE until 909 CE) is characterized as a period of interregional competition and factionalization among the numerous regional polities in the Maya area.
This largely resulted from the decrease in Tikal's socio-political and economic power at the beginning of the period.
It was therefore during this time that other sites rose to regional prominence and were able to exert greater interregional influence, including Caracol, Copán, Palenque, and Calakmul (which was allied with Caracol and may have assisted in the defeat of Tikal), and Dos Pilas Aguateca and Cancuén in the Petexbatún region of Guatemala.
Around 710, Tikal arose again and started to build strong alliances and defeat its worst enemies.
In the Maya area, the Late Classic ended with the so-called "Maya collapse", a transitional period coupling the general depopulation of the southern lowlands and development and florescence of centers in the northern lowlands.
Late Classic gallery
Main palace of Palenque, 7th century AD
K'inich Janaab Pakal I of Palenque 603–683 AD
Copan Stela H commissioned by Uaxaclajuun Ubʼaah Kʼawiil 695–738 AD
Jaina Island type figure (Maya) 650–800 AD
Cacaxtla, Mural depicting the Bird Man 650–900 AD
Terminal Classic
Detail of the Nunnery Quadrangle at Uxmal, 10th century
Generally applied to the Maya area, the Terminal Classic roughly spans the time between c. 800/850 and c. 1000 AD. Overall, it generally correlates with the rise to prominence of Puuc settlements in the northern Maya lowlands, so named after the hills where they are mainly found.
Puuc settlements are specifically associated with a unique architectural style (the "Puuc architectural style") that represents a technological departure from previous construction techniques.
Major Puuc sites include Uxmal, Sayil, Labna, Kabah, and Oxkintok.
While generally concentrated within the area in and around the Puuc hills, the style has been documented as far away as at Chichen Itza to the east and Edzna to the south.
Chichén Itzá was originally thought to have been a Postclassic site in the northern Maya lowlands.
Research over the past few decades has established that it was first settled during the Early/Late Classic transition but rose to prominence during the Terminal Classic and Early Postclassic.
During its apogee, this widely known site economically and politically dominated the northern lowlands.
Its participation in the circum-peninsular exchange route, possible through its port site of Isla Cerritos, allowed Chichén Itzá to remain highly connected to areas such as central Mexico and Central America.
The apparent "Mexicanization" of architecture at Chichén Itzá led past researchers to believe that Chichén Itzá existed under the control of a Toltec empire.
Chronological data refutes this early interpretation, and it is now known that Chichén Itzá predated the Toltec; Mexican architectural styles are now used as an indicator of strong economic and ideological ties between the two regions.
Terminal Classic gallery
Chichen Itza, Temple of the Jaguars 900–1000 AD
Governor's Palace rear view and details,  10th century CE, Uxmal
Codz Poop,  7th–10th centuries CE Kabah
Sayil, three-story palace, 600–900 CE
Chichen Itza, "Temple of Three Dintels" 600–1000 CE
Postclassic
The Postclassic (beginning 900–1000 CE, depending on area) is, like the Late Classic, characterized by the cyclical crystallization and fragmentation of various polities.
The main Maya centers were located in the northern lowlands.
Following Chichén Itzá, whose political structure collapsed during the Early Postclassic, Mayapán rose to prominence during the Middle Postclassic and dominated the north for c. 200 years.
After Mayapán's fragmentation, political structure in the northern lowlands revolved around large towns or city-states, such as Oxkutzcab and Ti’ho (Mérida, Yucatán), that competed with one another.
Mesoamerica and Central America in the 16th century before Spanish arrival[according to whom?]
Toniná, in the Chiapas highlands, and Kaminaljuyú in the central Guatemala highlands, were important southern highland Maya centers.
The latter site, Kaminaljuyú, is one of the longest occupied sites in Mesoamerica and was continuously inhabited from c. 800 BCE to around 1200 CE. Other important highland Maya groups include the K'iche' of Utatlán, the Mam in Zaculeu, the Poqomam in Mixco Viejo, and the Kaqchikel at Iximche in the Guatemalan highlands.
The Pipil resided in El Salvador, while the Ch'orti' were in eastern Guatemala and northwestern Honduras.
In central Mexico, the early portion of the Postclassic correlates with the rise of the Toltec and an empire based at their capital, Tula (also known as Tollan). Cholula, initially an important Early Classic center contemporaneous with Teotihuacan, maintained its political structure (it did not collapse) and continued to function as a regionally important center during the Postclassic.
The latter portion of the Postclassic is generally associated with the rise of the Mexica and the Aztec Empire.
One of the more commonly known cultural groups in Mesoamerica, the Aztec politically dominated nearly all of central Mexico, the Gulf Coast, Mexico's southern Pacific Coast (Chiapas and into Guatemala), Oaxaca, and Guerrero.
The Tarascans (also known as the P'urhépecha) were located in Michoacán and Guerrero.
With their capital at Tzintzuntzan, the Tarascan state was one of the few to actively and continuously resist Aztec domination during the Late Postclassic.
Other important Postclassic cultures in Mesoamerica include the Totonac along the eastern coast (in the modern-day states of Veracruz, Puebla, and Hidalgo). The Huastec resided north of the Totonac, mainly in the modern-day states of Tamaulipas and northern Veracruz.
The Mixtec and Zapotec cultures, centered at Mitla and Zaachila respectively, inhabited Oaxaca.
The Postclassic ends with the arrival of the Spanish and their subsequent conquest of the Aztec between 1519 and 1521. Many other cultural groups did not acquiesce until later.
For example, Maya groups in the Petén area, including the Itza at Tayasal and the Kowoj at Zacpeten, remained independent until 1697.
Some Mesoamerican cultures never achieved dominant status or left impressive archaeological remains but are nevertheless noteworthy.
These include the Otomi, Mixe–Zoque groups (which may or may not have been related to the Olmecs), the northern Uto-Aztecan groups, often referred to as the Chichimeca, that include the Cora and Huichol, the Chontales, the Huaves, and the Pipil, Xincan and Lencan peoples of Central America.
Postclassic gallery
Palace of Mitla, Oaxaca 12th century
The Calendar temple of Tlatelolco, 1200 CE
Detail of page 20 from the Codex Zouche-Nuttall, 14–15th century
Pectoral mixtec, Shield of Yanhuitlan.
Aztec sun stone, early 16th century
Chronology in chart form
Main article: Mesoamerican chronology
Summary of the chronology and cultures of Mesoamerica
Period
Timespan
Important cultures, cities
Paleo-Indian
Honduras, Guatemala, Belize, obsidian and pyrite points, Iztapan
Archaic
Agricultural settlements, Tehuacán
Preclassic (Formative)
Unknown culture in La Blanca and Ujuxte, Monte Alto culture
Early Preclassic
Olmec area: San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan; Central Mexico: Chalcatzingo; Valley of Oaxaca: San José Mogote.
The Maya area: Nakbe, Cerros
Central american Area: Los Naranjos
Middle Preclassic
Olmec area: La Venta, Tres Zapotes; Maya area: El Mirador, Izapa, Lamanai, Xunantunich, Naj Tunich, Takalik Abaj, Kaminaljuyú, Uaxactun; Valley of Oaxaca: Monte Albán; Central american area: Yarumela
Late Preclassic
Maya area: Uaxactun, Tikal, Edzná, Cival, San Bartolo, Altar de Sacrificios, Piedras Negras, Ceibal, Rio Amarillo, Rio Azul; Central Mexico: Teotihuacan; Gulf Coast: Epi-Olmec culture; Western Mexico: Shaft Tomb Tradition
Classic
Classic Maya Centers, Teotihuacan, Zapotec
Early Classic
Maya area: Calakmul, Caracol, Chunchucmil, Copán, Naranjo, Palenque, El puente, Quiriguá, Tikal, Uaxactun, Yaxha; Central Mexico: Teotihuacan apogee; Zapotec apogee; Western Mexico: Teuchitlan tradition; Central american area: Tenampua
Late Classic
Maya area: Uxmal, Toniná, Cobá, Waka', Pusilhá, Xultún, Dos Pilas, Cancuen, Aguateca, Yaxchilan; Central Mexico: Xochicalco, Cacaxtla; Gulf Coast: El Tajín and Classic Veracruz culture; Western Mexico: Teuchitlan tradition
Terminal Classic
Maya area: Puuc sites: Uxmal, Labna, Sayil, Kabah
Postclassic
Aztec, Tarascans, Mixtec, Totonac, Pipil, Itzá, Kowoj, K'iche', Kaqchikel, Poqomam, Mam
Early Postclassic
Cholula, Tula, Mitla, El Tajín, Tulum, Topoxte, Kaminaljuyú, Joya de Cerén
Late Postclassic
Tenochtitlan, Cempoala, Tzintzuntzan, Mayapán, Ti'ho, Utatlán, Iximche, Mixco Viejo, Zaculeu, Peñol de Cerquin
Colonial
Nahuas, Maya, Mixtec, Zapotec, Purépecha, Chinantec, Otomi, Tepehua, Totonac, Mazatec, Tlapanec, Amuzgo
Postcolonial
Nahuas, Maya, Mixtec, Lenca, Zapotec, Purépecha, Chinantec, Otomi, Tepehua, Totonac, Mazatec, Tlapanec, Amuzgo
Other characteristics
Subsistence
Further information: Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Maya diet and subsistence
Examples of the diversity of maize
The Aztec Empire in 1512
By roughly 6000 BCE, hunter-gatherers living in the highlands and lowlands of Mesoamerica began to develop agricultural practices with early cultivation of squash and chilli.
The earliest example of maize dates to c. 4000 BCE and comes from Guilá Naquitz, a cave in Oaxaca.
Earlier maize samples have been documented at the Los Ladrones cave site in Panama, c. 5500 BCE. Slightly thereafter, semi-agrarian communities began to cultivate other crops throughout Mesoamerica.
Maize was the most common domesticate, but the common bean, tepary bean, scarlet runner bean, jicama, tomato and squash all became common cultivates by 3500 BCE. At the same time, these communities exploited cotton, yucca, and agave for fibers and textile materials.
By 2000 BCE, corn was the staple crop in the region, and remained so through modern times.
The Ramón or Breadnut tree (Brosimum alicastrum) was an occasional substitute for maize in producing flour.
Fruit was also important in the daily diet of Mesoamerican cultures.
Some of the main ones consumed include avocado, papaya, guava, mamey, zapote, and annona.
Mesoamerica lacked animals suitable for domestication, most notably domesticated large ungulates.
The lack of draft animals for transportation is one notable difference between Mesoamerica and the cultures of the South American Andes.
Other animals, including the duck, dogs, and turkey, were domesticated.
Turkey was the first to be domesticated locally, around 3500 BCE. Dogs were the primary source of animal protein in ancient Mesoamerica, and dog bones are common in midden deposits throughout the region.
Societies of this region did hunt certain wild species for food.
These animals included deer, rabbit, birds, and various types of insects.
They also hunted for luxury items, such as feline fur and bird plumage.
Mesoamerican cultures that lived in the lowlands and coastal plains settled down in agrarian communities somewhat later than did highland cultures due to the fact that there was a greater abundance of fruits and animals in these areas, which made a hunter-gatherer lifestyle more attractive.
Fishing also was a major provider of food to lowland and coastal Mesoamericans creating a further disincentive to settle down in permanent communities.
Political organization
K'inich Kan B'alam II, the Classic period ruler of Palenque, as depicted on a stele
Ceremonial centers were the nuclei of Mesoamerican settlements.
The temples provided spatial orientation, which was imparted to the surrounding town.
The cities with their commercial and religious centers were always political entities, somewhat similar to the European city-state, and each person could identify with the city where they lived.[citation needed]
Ceremonial centers were always built to be visible.
Pyramids were meant to stand out from the rest of the city, to represent the gods and their powers.
Another characteristic feature of the ceremonial centers is historic layers.
All the ceremonial edifices were built in various phases, one on top of the other, to the point that what we now see is usually the last stage of construction.
Ultimately, the ceremonial centers were the architectural translation of the identity of each city, as represented by the veneration of their gods and masters.[citation needed] Stelae were common public monuments throughout Mesoamerica, and served to commemorate notable successes, events and dates associated with the rulers and nobility of the various sites.
Economy
See also: Trade in Maya civilization
Given that Mesoamerica was broken into numerous and diverse ecological niches, none of the societies that inhabited the area were self-sufficient, although very long-distance trade was common only for very rare goods, or luxury materials.
For this reason, from the last centuries of the Archaic period (8000 BC– 1000 BC) onward, regions compensated for the environmental inadequacies by specializing in the extraction of certain abundant natural resources and then trading them for necessary unavailable resources through established commercial trade networks.
The following is a list of some of the specialized resources traded from the various Mesoamerican sub-regions and environmental contexts:
Pacific lowlands: cotton and cochineal
Maya lowlands and the Gulf Coast: cacao, vanilla, jaguar skins, birds and bird feathers (especially quetzal and macaw)
Central Mexico: Obsidian (Pachuca)
Guatemalan highlands: Obsidian (San Martin Jilotepeque, El Chayal, and Ixtepeque), pyrite, and jade from the Motagua River valley
Coastal areas: salt, dry fish, shell, and dyes
Architecture
Main article: Mesoamerican architecture
Illustration that recreates the structures of the archaeological site of Yarumela or El Chircal in Honduras, this place reflects the Olmec influence that existed in Central America in the pre-classic period.
Mesoamerican architecture is the collective name given to urban, ceremonial and public structures built by pre-Columbian civilizations in Mesoamerica.
Although very different in styles, all kinds of mesoamerican architecture show some kind of interrelation, due to very significant cultural exchanges occurred during thousands of years.
Among the most well-known structures in Mesoamerica, the flat-top pyramids are a landmark feature of the most developed urban centers.
Two characteristics are most notable in Mesoamerican architecture.
Firstly, the intimate connection between geography, astronomy and architecture: very often, urban centers or even single buildings are aligned to cardinal directions and/or along particular constellations.
Secondly, iconography was considered integral part of architecture, with buildings often being adorned with images of religious and cultural significance.
Calendrical systems
Main article: Mesoamerican calendars
"Head Variant" or "Patron Gods" glyphs for Maya days
The emblem glyph of Tikal (Mutal)
Agriculturally based people historically divide the year into four seasons.
These included the two solstices and the two equinoxes, which could be thought of as the four "directional pillars" that support the year.
These four times of the year were, and still are, important as they indicate seasonal changes that directly impact the lives of Mesoamerican agriculturalists.
The Maya closely observed and duly recorded the seasonal markers.
They prepared almanacs recording past and recent solar and lunar eclipses, the phases of the moon, the periods of Venus and Mars, the movements of various other planets, and conjunctions of celestial bodies.
These almanacs also made future predictions concerning celestial events.
These tables are remarkably accurate, given the technology available, and indicate a significant level of knowledge among Maya astronomers.
Among the many types of calendars the Maya maintained, the most important include a 260-day cycle, a 360-day cycle or 'year', a 365-day cycle or year, a lunar cycle, and a Venus cycle, which tracked the synodic period of Venus.
Maya of the European contact period said that knowing the past aided in both understanding the present and predicting the future (Diego de Landa). The 260-day cycle was a calendar to govern agriculture, observe religious holidays, mark the movements of celestial bodies and memorialize public officials.
The 260-day cycle was also used for divination, and (like the Catholic calendar of saints) to name newborns.
The names given to the days, months, and years in the Mesoamerican calendar came, for the most part, from animals, flowers, heavenly bodies, and cultural concepts that held symbolic significance in Mesoamerican culture.
This calendar was used throughout the history of Mesoamerican by nearly every culture.
Even today, several Maya groups in Guatemala, including the K'iche', Q'eqchi', Kaqchikel, and the Mixe people of Oaxaca continue using modernized forms of the Mesoamerican calendar.
Writing systems
Main article: Mesoamerican writing systems
One of the earliest examples of the Mesoamerican writing systems, the Epi-Olmec script on the La Mojarra Stela 1 dated to around 150 CE. Mesoamerica is one of the five places in the world where writing has developed independently.
The Mesoamerican scripts deciphered to date are logosyllabic combining the use of logograms with a syllabary, and they are often called hieroglyphic scripts.
Five or six different scripts have been documented in Mesoamerica, but archaeological dating methods, and a certain degree of self-interest, create difficulties in establishing priority and thus the forebear from which the others developed.
The best documented and deciphered Mesoamerican writing system, and therefore the most widely known, is the classic Maya script.
Others include the Olmec, Zapotec, and Epi-Olmec/Isthmian writing systems.
An extensive Mesoamerican literature has been conserved partly in indigenous scripts and partly in the postinvasion transcriptions into Latin script.
The other glyphic writing systems of Mesoamerica, and their interpretation, have been subject to much debate.
One important ongoing discussion regards whether non-Maya Mesoamerican texts can be considered examples of true writing or whether non-Maya Mesoamerican texts are best understood as pictographic conventions that express ideas, specifically religious ones, but don't represent the phonetics of spoken language.
Mesoamerican writing is found in several mediums, including large stone monuments such as stelae, carved directly onto architecture, carved or painted over stucco (e.g., murals), and on pottery.
No Precolumbian Mesoamerican society is known to have had widespread literacy, and literacy was probably restricted to particular social classes, including scribes, painters, merchants, and the nobility.
The Mesoamerican book was typically written with brush and colored inks on a paper prepared from the inner bark of the ficus amacus.
The book consisted of a long strip of the prepared bark, which was folded like a screenfold to define individual pages.
The pages were often covered and protected by elaborately carved book boards.
Some books were composed of square pages while others were composed of rectangular pages.
Following the Spanish conquests in the sixteenth century, Spanish friars taught indigenous scribes to write their languages in alphabetic texts.
Many oral histories of the prehispanic period were subsequently recorded in alphabetic texts.  The indigenous in central and southern Mexico continued to produce written texts in the colonial period, many with pictorial elements.  An important scholarly reference work is the Handbook of Middle American Indians, Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources.
Mesoamerican codices survive from the Aztec, Maya, Mixtec, and Zapotec regions.
Arithmetic
See also: Maya numerals
Mesoamerican arithmetic treated numbers as having both literal and symbolic value, the result of the dualistic nature that characterized Mesoamerican ideology.
As mentioned, the Mesoamerican numbering system was vigesimal (i.e., based on the number 20).
In representing numbers, a series of bars and dots were employed.
Dots had a value of one, and bars had a value of five.
This type of arithmetic was combined with a symbolic numerology: '2' was related to origins, as all origins can be thought of as doubling; '3' was related to household fire; '4' was linked to the four corners of the universe; '5' expressed instability; '9' pertained to the underworld and the night; '13' was the number for light, '20' for abundance, and '400' for infinity.
The concept of zero was also used, and its representation at the Late Preclassic occupation of Tres Zapotes is one of the earliest uses of zero in human history.
Food, medicine, and science
Mesoamerica would deserve its place in the human pantheon if its inhabitants had only created maize, in terms of harvest weight the world's most important crop.
But the inhabitants of Mexico and northern Central America also developed tomatoes, now basic to Italian cuisine; peppers, essential to Thai and Indian food; all the world's squashes (except for a few domesticated in the United States); and many of the beans on dinner plates around the world.
One writer estimated these indigenous tribes developed three-fifths of the crops now grown in cultivation, most of them in Mesoamerica.
Having secured their food supply, the Mesoamerican societies turned to intellectual pursuits.
In a millennium or less, a comparatively short time, they invented their own writing, astronomy and mathematics, including the zero.
Maize played an important role in Mesoamerican feasts due to its symbolic meaning and abundance.
Gods were praised and named after.
Companion planting was practiced in various forms by the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
They domesticated squash 8,000 to 10,000 years ago, then maize, then common beans, forming the Three Sisters agricultural technique.
The cornstalk served as a trellis for the beans to climb, and the beans fixed nitrogen, benefitting the maize.
Fray Bernardino de Sahagún collected extensive information on plants, animals, soil types, among other matters from native informants in Book 11, The Earthly Things, of the twelve-volume General History of the Things of New Spain, known as the Florentine Codex, compiled in the third quarter of the sixteenth century.
Bernardino de Sahagún reported the ritualistic use of Psilocybe mushrooms known to the Aztecs as teōnanācatl (agglutinative form of teōtl (god, sacred) and nanācatl (mushroom) in Náhuatl). An earlier work, the Badianus Manuscript or Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum Herbis is another Aztec codex with written text and illustrations collected from the indigenous viewpoint.
The ancient Aztecs used a variety of entheogens within their society.
Evidence shows that wild animals were captured and traded for symbolic and ritual purposes.
Mythology and worldview
Further information: Mesoamerican religion, Mesoamerican creation myths, and Mesoamerican world tree
See also: Aztec religion, Olmec mythology, Maya religion, and Maya mythology Shared traits in Mesoamerican mythology are characterized by their common basis as a religion that—though in many Mesoamerican groups developed into complex polytheistic religious systems—retained some shamanistic elements.
The xoloitzcuintle is one of the naguales of the god Quetzalcoatl.
In this form, it helps the dead cross the Chicnahuapan, a river that separates the world of the living from the dead.
Zapotec mask of the Bat God.
The great breadth of the Mesoamerican pantheon of deities is due to the incorporation of ideological and religious elements from the first primitive religion of Fire, Earth, Water and Nature.
Astral divinities (the sun, stars, constellations, and Venus) were adopted and represented in anthropomorphic, zoomorphic, and anthropozoomorphic sculptures, and in day-to-day objects.
The qualities of these gods and their attributes changed with the passage of time and with cultural influences from other Mesoamerican groups.
The gods are at once three: creator, preserver, and destroyer, and at the same time just one.
An important characteristic of Mesoamerican religion was the dualism among the divine entities.
The gods represented the confrontation between opposite poles: the positive, exemplified by light, the masculine, force, war, the sun, etc.; and the negative, exemplified by darkness, the feminine, repose, peace, the moon, etc.
The typical Mesoamerican cosmology sees the world as separated into a day world watched by the sun and a night world watched by the moon.
More importantly, the three superposed levels of the world are united by a Ceiba tree (Yaxche' in Mayan). The geographic vision is also tied to the cardinal points.
Certain geographical features are linked to different parts of this cosmovision.
Thus mountains and tall trees connect the middle and upper worlds; caves connect the middle and nether worlds.
Sacrifice
Generally, sacrifice can be divided into two types: autosacrifice and human sacrifice.
The different forms of sacrifice are reflected in the imagery used to evoke ideological structure and sociocultural organization in Mesoamerica.
In the Maya area, for example, stele depict bloodletting rituals performed by ruling elites, eagles and jaguars devouring human hearts, jade circles or necklaces that represented hearts, and plants and flowers that symbolized both nature and the blood that provided life.
Imagery also showed pleas for rain or pleas for blood, with the same intention to replenish the divine energy.
Ritual sacrifice was done in efforts to appease the gods, and was done with the purpose of protection of the population.
Autosacrifice
Main article: Bloodletting in Mesoamerica
See also: Sacrifice in Maya culture Ritual human sacrifice portrayed in Codex Laud
Autosacrifice, also called bloodletting, is the ritualized practice of drawing blood from oneself.
It is commonly seen or represented through iconography as performed by ruling elites in highly ritualized ceremonies, but it was easily practiced in mundane sociocultural contexts (i.e., non-elites could perform autosacrifice). The act was typically performed with obsidian prismatic blades or stingray spines, and blood was drawn from piercing or cutting the tongue, earlobes, and/or genitals (among other locations). Another form of autosacrifice was conducted by pulling a rope with attached thorns through the tongue or earlobes.
The blood produced was then collected on amate held in a bowl.
Autosacrifice was not limited to male rulers, as their female counterparts often performed these ritualized activities.
They are typically shown performing the rope and thorns technique.
A recently discovered queen's tomb in the Classic Maya site of Waka (also known as El Perú) had a ceremonial stingray spine placed in her genital area, suggesting that women also performed bloodletting in their genitalia.
Human sacrifice
See also: Human sacrifice in Aztec culture and Human sacrifice in Maya culture
Sacrifice had great importance in the social and religious aspects of Mesoamerican culture.
First, it showed death transformed into the divine.
Death is the consequence of a human sacrifice, but it is not the end; it is but the continuation of the cosmic cycle.
Death creates life—divine energy is liberated through death and returns to the gods, who are then able to create more life.
Secondly, it justifies war, since the most valuable sacrifices are obtained through conflict.
The death of the warrior is the greatest sacrifice and gives the gods the energy to go about their daily activities, such as the bringing of rain.
Warfare and capturing prisoners became a method of social advancement and a religious cause.
Finally, it justifies the control of power by the two ruling classes, the priests and the warriors.
The priests controlled the religious ideology, and the warriors supplied the sacrifices.
Historically it was also in discussion that those sacrificed were chosen by the gods, this idea of being "chosen" was decided by the gods.
This was then displayed by acts, such as being struck by lightning.
If someone was struck by lightning and a sacrifice was needed they would often be chosen by their population, as they believed they were chosen by the gods.
Ballgame
Main article: Mesoamerican ballgame
A small ceremonial ballcourt at Tikal.
Ballgame marker from the classic Lowland Maya site of Chinkultic, Mexico depicting a ballplayer in full gear
The Mesoamerican ballgame was a sport with ritual associations played for over 3000 years by nearly all pre-Columbian peoples of Mesoamerica.
The sport had different versions in different places during the millennia, and a modern version of the game, ulama, is still played in a few places.
Over 1300 ballcourts have been found throughout Mesoamerica.
They vary considerably in size, but they all feature long narrow alleys with side-walls to bounce the balls against.
The rules of the ballgame are not known, but it was probably similar to volleyball, where the object is to keep the ball in play.
In the most well-known version of the game, the players struck the ball with their hips, though some versions used forearms or employed rackets, bats, or handstones.
The ball was made of solid rubber, and weighed up to 4 kg or more, with sizes that differed greatly over time or according to the version played.
While the game was played casually for simple recreation, including by children and perhaps even women, the game also had important ritual aspects, and major formal ballgames were held as ritual events, often featuring human sacrifice.
Astronomy
Mesoamerican astronomy included a broad understanding of the cycles of planets and other celestial bodies.
Special importance was given to the sun, moon, and Venus as the morning and evening star.
Observatories were built at some sites, including the round observatory at Ceibal and the "Observatorio" at Xochicalco.
Often, the architectural organization of Mesoamerican sites was based on precise calculations derived from astronomical observations.
Well-known examples of these include the El Castillo pyramid at Chichen Itza and the Observatorio at Xochicalco.
A unique and common architectural complex found among many Mesoamerican sites are E-Groups, which are aligned so as to serve as astronomical observatories.
The name of this complex is based on Uaxactun's "Group E", the first known observatory in the Maya area.
Perhaps the earliest observatory documented in Mesoamerica is that of the Monte Alto culture.
This complex consisted of three plain stelae and a temple oriented with respect to the Pleiades.
Symbolism of space and time
The Avenue of the Dead in Teotihuacan, an example of a Mesoamerican settlement planned according to concepts of directionality
It has been argued that among Mesoamerican societies the concepts of space and time are associated with the four cardinal compass points and linked together by the calendar.
Dates or events were always tied to a compass direction, and the calendar specified the symbolic geographical characteristic peculiar to that period.
Resulting from the significance held by the cardinal directions, many Mesoamerican architectural features, if not entire settlements, were planned and oriented with respect to directionality.
In Maya cosmology, each cardinal point was assigned a specific color and a specific jaguar deity (Bacab). They are as follows:
Hobnil, Bacab of the East, associated with the color red and the Kan years
Can Tzicnal, Bacab of the North, assigned the color white and the Muluc years
Zac Cimi, Bacab of the West, associated with the color black and the Ix years
Hozanek, Bacab of the South, associated with the color yellow and the Cauac years.
Later cultures such as the Kaqchikel and K'iche' maintain the association of cardinal directions with each color, but utilized different names.
Among the Aztec, the name of each day was associated with a cardinal point (thus conferring symbolic significance), and each cardinal direction was associated with a group of symbols.
Below are the symbols and concepts associated with each direction:
East: croco dile, the serpent, water, cane, and movement.
The East was linked to the world priests and associated with vegetative fertility, or, in other words, tropical exuberance.
North: wind, death, the dog, the jaguar, and flint (or chert). The north contrasts with the east in that it is conceptualized as dry, cold, and oppressive.
It is considered the nocturnal part of the universe and includes the dwellings of the dead.
The dog (xoloitzcuintle) has a very specific meaning, as it accompanies the deceased during the trip to the lands of the dead and helps them cross the river of death that leads into nothingness. (See also Dogs in Mesoamerican folklore and myth).
West: the house, the deer, the monkey, the eagle, and rain.
The west was associated with the cycles of vegetation, specifically the temperate high plains that experience light rains and the change of seasons.
South: rabbit, the lizard, dried herbs, the buzzard, and flowers.
It is related on the one hand to the luminous Sun and the noon heat, and on the other with rain filled with alcoholic drink.
The rabbit, the principal symbol of the west, was associated with farmers and with pulque.
Political and religious art
See also: Category:Mesoamerican art
Art with ideological and political meaning: depiction of an Aztec tzompantli (skull-rack) from the Ramirez Codex
Mesoamerican artistic expression was conditioned by ideology and generally focused on themes of religion and/or sociopolitical power.
This is largely based on the fact that most works that survived the Spanish conquest were public monuments.
These monuments were typically erected by rulers who sought to visually legitimize their sociocultural and political position; by doing so, they intertwined their lineage, personal attributes and achievements, and legacy with religious concepts.
As such, these monuments were specifically designed for public display and took many forms, including stele, sculpture, architectural reliefs, and other types of architectural elements (e.g., roofcombs). Other themes expressed include tracking time, glorifying the city, and veneration of the gods—all of which were tied to explicitly aggrandizing the abilities and the reign of the ruler who commissioned the artwork.
The majority of artwork created during this historical time was in relation to these topics, religion and politics.
Rulers were drawn and sculpted.
Historical tales and events were then translated into pieces of art, and art was used to relay religious and political messages.
Music
Main article: Maya musicArchaeological studies have never discovered any written music from the pre-Columbian era, but musical instruments were found, as well as carvings and depictions, that clearly show how music played a central role in the Mayan religious and societal structures, for example, as accompaniment to celebrations and funerals.
Some Mesoamerican civilizations, such as the Maya, commonly played various instruments such as drums, flutes and whistles.
Although most of the original Mayan music disappeared following the Spanish colonization, some of it mixed with the incoming Spanish music and exists to date.
See also
Mesoamerica portal
Geography portal
Latin America portal
Americas (terminology)
Americas
Central America
Hispanic America
Hispanic and Latino Americans
Indigenous peoples of Mexico
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Latin America
Mesoamerican region
Middle America (Americas)
Painting in the Americas before European colonization
References
Davíd Carrasco. "Mesoamerica: An Overview". In Davíd Carrasco (ed). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures.
Vol 2. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Pp 212 - 216 ISBN 9780195108156
"Meso-America," Oxford English Reference Dictionary, 2nd ed. (rev.) 2002. (ISBN 0-19-860652-4) Oxford: Oxford University Press; p. 906.
(2000): Atlas del México Prehispánico.
Revista Arqueología mexicana.
Número especial 5. Julio de 2000. Raíces/ Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia.
México.
Carmack, Gasco & Gossen 1996, p. 55.
Brian M. Fagan, ed. (1996). The Oxford Companion to Archaeology.
Charlotte Beck.
Oxford University Press. p. 762. ISBN 978-0-19-507618-9.
Carmack, Gasco & Gossen 1996, pp. 40–80.
Carmack, Gasco & Gossen 1996.
Kirchhoff 1943.
Carmack, Gasco & Gossen 1996, pp. 5–8.
Bierhorst, John (1990). The Mythology of Mexico and Central America.
New York: William Morrow and Company, Inc. p. 12. ISBN 0688067212.
Campbell, Kaufman & Smith-Stark 1986.
Coe 1994.
Carmack, Gasco & Gossen 1996, pp. 9–11.
"MTU Volcanoes Page – World Reference Map". Geo.mtu.edu.
Retrieved 2014-04-21.
"Science Show – Bosawas Bioreserve Nicaragua". Abc.net.au. 2006-08-19. Retrieved 2014-04-21.
Franco-Gaviria, Felipe (2018). "The human impact imprint on modern pollen spectra of the Mayan lands" (PDF). Boletín de la Sociedad Geológica Mexicana. 70, 1: 61–78. doi:10.18268/BSGM2018v70n1a4.
Roush, Wade (9 May 1997). "Archaeobiology: Squash Seeds Yield New View of Early American Farming". Science. 276 (5314): 894–95. doi:10.1126/science.276.5314.894. S2CID 158673509.
Diehl, p. 248.
Paul A. Dunn; Vincent H. Malmström. "Pre-Columbian Magnetic Sculptures in Western Guatemala" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2006-12-31. (10.1 KB)
"Mesoweb Articles". mesoweb.com.
"Los Ladrones cave site" (PDF). UAC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-02-15. Retrieved 2007-01-06.
O'Brien (2005), p. 25.
Diamond (1999), pp. 126–27.
Diamond (1999) p. 100.
Coe (1994), p. 45 ("The only domestic animals were dogs—the principal source of meat for much of Preclassic Mesoamerica—and turkeys—understandably rare because that familiar bird consumes very large quantities of corn and is thus expensive to raise".)
Diamond (1999).
O'Brien (2005), p. 25
"Science, civilization and society". 
Šprajc, Ivan. "El Sol en Chichén Itzá y Dzibilchaltún: la supuesta importancia de los equinoccios en Mesoamérica". Arqueología Mexicana.
Miller, Mary (1993). The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya. p. 30.
Roxanne V. Pacheco, Myths of Mesoamerican Cultures Reflect a Knowledge and Practice of Astronomy, University of New Mexico, archived July 18, 2003 (accessed January 25, 2016).
Bernardino de Sahagun, Historia de las cosas de Nueva Espana; Diego Duran, The Book of The Gods and Rites, Oklahoma; The Books of Chilam Balam of Mani, Kaua, and Chumayel.
Mann, Charles C. 1491: Revelations of the Americas before Columbus.
Vinton Press. 2005. pp. 196–97.
Lecount, Lisa J. "Like Water for Chocolate: Feasting and Political Ritual among the Late Classic Maya at Xunantunich, Belize." American Anthropologist 103.4 (2001): 935–53. Web.
Landon, Amanda J. (2008). "The "How" of the Three Sisters: The Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and the Human Niche".
Hofmann, Albert (1980). LSD, my problem child.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 0-07-029325-2. OCLC 6251390.
de Sahagún, Bernardino. "General History of the Things of New Spain by Fray Bernardino de Sahagún: The Florentine Codex". 
Hofmann, Albert (1971). "Teonanácatl and Ololiuqui, two ancient magic drugs of Mexico". Bulletin on Narcotics.
Carod-Artal, F.J. (2015-01-01). "Hallucinogenic drugs in pre-Columbian Mesoamerican cultures". Neurología (English Edition). 30 (1): 42–49. doi:10.1016/j.nrleng.2011.07.010. ISSN 2173-5808. PMID 21893367.
Nawa Sugiyama; William L. Fash; Christine A. M. France (2018). "Jaguar and puma captivity and trade among the Maya: Stable isotope data from Copan, Honduras". PLOS ONE. 13 (9): e0202958. Bibcode:2018PLoSO..1302958S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0202958. PMC 6135383. PMID 30208053.
Bernard R. Ortiz de Montellano Aztec Medicine, Health, and Nutrition New Brunswick; Rutgers University Press. 1990, pp. 67–71 ISBN 0-8135-1563-7
"Transcript of "The Maya myth of the morning star"". 
"Creation Story of the Maya | Living Maya Time". maya.nmai.si.edu.
Retrieved 2021-02-04.
"Feeding the gods: Hundreds of skulls reveal massive scale of human sacrifice in Aztec capital". Science | AAAS. 2018-06-21. Retrieved 2021-01-29.
Roos, Dave. "Human Sacrifice: Why the Aztecs Practiced This Gory Ritual". HISTORY. Retrieved 2021-01-29.
"Archaeologists Announce Discoveries At The Ancient Maya Site Of Waka' In Northern Guatemala". May 6, 2004. Retrieved 2 April 2010.
Fitzsimmons, James L. (2009). Death And The Classic Maya Kings, Chapter Three Royal Funerals.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
ISBN 978-0-292-79370-5.
Taladoire (2001:98) Note that slightly over 200 ballcourts have also been identified in the American Southwest.
This total does not include those, since they are outside Mesoamerica, and there is discussion whether these areas were actually used for ballplaying.
Filloy Nadal 2001, p. 30.
Leyenaar 2001, pp. 125–26.
Grofe, Michael J. (2016), "Astronomy in Mesoamerica",  in Selin, Helaine (ed.), Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 1–12, doi:10.1007/978-94-007-3934-5_10270-2, ISBN 978-94-007-3934-5
Šprajc, Ivan (June 2011). "Astronomy and its role in ancient Mesoamerica". The Role of Astronomy in Society and Culture. 260: 87–95. Bibcode:2011IAUS..260...87S. doi:10.1017/S1743921311002171. ISSN 1743-9221.
Duverger 1999
Houston, Stephen (2006). The Memory of Bones: Body, Being and Experience Among the Classic Maya.
Houston: University of Texas Press.
ISBN 978-0-292-71319-2.
Bourg, Cameron (2005). Ancient Maya music now with sound (MA thesis). Louisiana State University. doi:10.31390/gradschool_theses.3498. S2CID 51916845.
Bibliography
Adams, Richard E. W.; MacLeod, Murdo J., eds. (2000). Cambridge History of the Native peoples of The Americas.
Vol. 2: Mesoamerica.
Cambridge University Press.
Braswell, Geoffrey E. (2003). "Introduction: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction".  In Geoffrey E. Braswell (ed.). The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction.
Austin: University of Texas Press. pp. 1–44. ISBN 978-0-292-70587-6. OCLC 49936017.
Campbell, Lyle (1997).  William Bright (ed.). American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America.
Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics, 4. New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-509427-5. OCLC 32923907.
Campbell, Lyle; Kaufman, Terrence; Smith-Stark, Thomas (September 1986). "Meso-America as a linguistic area". Language. 62 (3): 530–58. doi:10.2307/415477. ISSN 0097-8507. JSTOR 415477. OCLC 1361911.
Carmack, Robert M.; Gasco, Janine L.; Gossen, Gary H. (1996). Legacy of Mesoamerica, The: History and Culture of a Native American Civilization.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
ISBN 978-0-13-337445-2.
Carrasco, Davíd (2001). ""Mesoamerica: An Overview"".  In Davíd Carrasco (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures.
Vol. 2. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 212–216. ISBN 9780195108156. OCLC 1169898498.
Carrasco, Davíd; Jones, Lindsay; Sessions, Scott (2002). Mesoamerica's Classic Heritage: From Teotihuacan to the Aztecs.
Boulder, CO: University Press of Colorado.
Coe, Michael D. (1994) . Mexico: from the Olmecs to the Aztecs (4th edition, Revised and Enlarged ed.). New York: Thames & Hudson.
ISBN 978-0-500-27722-5.
Diehl, Richard A. (2004). The Olmecs: America's First Civilization.
London: Thames & Hudson.
ISBN 978-0-500-28503-9.
Diamond, Jared (1999). Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
ISBN 978-0-393-31755-8.
Filloy Nadal, Laura (2001). "Rubber and Rubber Balls in Mesoamerica".  In E. Michael Whittington (ed.). The Sport of Life and Death: The Mesoamerican Ballgame.
New York: Thames & Hudson. pp. 20–31. ISBN 978-0-500-05108-5.
Gamio, Manuel (1922). La Población del Valle de Teotihuacán: Representativa de las que Habitan las Regiones Rurales del Distrito Federal y de los Estados de Hidalgo, Puebla, México y Tlaxcala (in Spanish) (2 vols. in 3 ed.). Mexico City: Talleres Gráficos de la Secretaría de Educación Pública.
Gibson, Charles.
The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule.
Stanford: Stanford University Press 1964.
Kirchhoff, Paul (1943). "Mesoamérica.
Sus Límites Geográficos, Composición Étnica y Caracteres Culturales". Acta Americana (in Spanish). 1 (1): 92–107.
Leyenaar, Ted (2001). "The Modern Ballgames of Sinaloa: a Survival of the Aztec Ullamaliztli".  In E. Michael Whittington (ed.). The Sport of Life and Death: The Mesoamerican Ballgame.
New York: Thames & Hudson. pp. 97–115. ISBN 978-0-500-05108-5.
Lockhart, James (1992). The Nahuas After the Conquest: A Social and Cultural History of the Indians of Central Mexico, Sixteenth Through Eighteenth Centuries.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8047-1927-8. OCLC 24283718.
López Austin, Alfredo; López Luján, Leonardo (1996). El pasado indígena (in Spanish). Mexico City: El Colegio de México.
ISBN 978-968-16-4890-9.
O'Brien, Patrick, ed. (2005). Oxford Atlas of World History.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Markman, Roberta H.; Markman, Peter T. (1992). The Flayed God: the Mesoamerican Mythological Tradition; Sacred Texts and Images from pre-Columbian Mexico and Central America.
San Francisco: Harper.
ISBN 978-0-06-250528-6. OCLC 25507756.
Mendoza, Ruben G. (2001). Mesoamerican Chronology: Periodization.
The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Culture.
Vol. 2. pp. 222–226. ISBN 978-0-19-510815-6.
Palerm, Ángel (1972). Agricultura y civilización en Mesoamérica (in Spanish). Mexico: Secretaría de Educación Pública.
ISBN 978-968-13-0994-7.
Restall, Matthew (2004). Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest (1st pbk ed.). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-517611-7. OCLC 56695639.
Sahagún, Bernardino de (1950–82) [ca. 1540–85].  Charles E. Dibble; Arthur J. O. Anderson (eds.). Florentine Codex: General History of the Things of New Spain.
Vol. I–XII (translation of Historia General de las Cosas de la Nueva España ed.). Santa Fe, NM and Salt Lake City: School of American Research and the University of Utah Press.
ISBN 978-0-87480-082-1. OCLC 276351.
Sharer, Robert J.; Traxler, Loa P. (2006). The Ancient Maya (6th ed.). Stanford University Press.
Smith, Michael E. (1997). The Aztecs (first ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-631-23015-1. OCLC 48579073.
Smith, Michael E. (May 2005). "City Size in Late Post-Classic Mesoamerica" (PDF). Journal of Urban History. 31 (4): 403–34. doi:10.1177/0096144204274396. ISSN 0096-1442. OCLC 1798556. S2CID 145452272.
Smith, Michael E.; Masson, Marilyn (2000). The Ancient Civilizations of Mesoamerica: A Reader.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Suaréz, Jorge A. (1983). The Mesoamerican Indian Languages.
Cambridge Language Surveys.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-22834-3. OCLC 8034800.
Miller, Mary; Taube, Karl (1993). The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya: An Illustrated Dictionary of Mesoamerican Religion.
London: Thames & Hudson.
ISBN 978-0-500-05068-2. OCLC 27667317.
Taladoire, Eric (2001). "The Architectural Background of the Pre-Hispanic Ballgame".  In E. Michael Whittington (ed.). The Sport of Life and Death: The Mesoamerican Ballgame.
New York: Thames & Hudson. pp. 97–115. ISBN 978-0-500-05108-5.
Wauchope, Robert, general editor.
Handbook of Middle American Indians.
Austin: University of Texas Press 1964–1976.
Ward, Thomas (2018). The Formation of Latin American Nations: From Late Antiquity to Early Modernity.
Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
ISBN 9780806161501. OCLC 1035463634.
Weaver, Muriel Porter (1993). The Aztecs, Maya, and Their Predecessors: Archaeology of Mesoamerica (3rd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press.
ISBN 978-0-01-263999-3.
Zeitlin, Robert N.; Zeitlin, Judith (2000). The Paleoindian and Archaic Cultures of Mesoamerica.
The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas.
Vol. 2. pp. 45–122. ISBN 978-0-521-35165-2.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mesoamerica.
Maya Culture
Mesoweb.com: a comprehensive site for Mesoamerican civilizations
Museum of the Templo Mayor (Mexico) (in Spanish)
National Museum of Anthropology and History (Mexico) (in Spanish)
Selected bibliography concerning war in Mesoamerica (in Spanish)
WAYEB: European Association of Mayanists
Arqueologia Iberoamericana: Open access international scientific journal devoted to the archaeological study of the American and Iberian peoples.
It contains research articles on Mesoamerica.
Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America, 1520–1820
"Google Scholar Citations: Mesoamerica".
Cultural areas of Indigenous North Americans
Arctic
Subarctic
Northwest Coast
Plateau
Interior Plains
Eastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Southeastern Woodlands
California
Great Basin
Southwest
Mexico
Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Caribbean
Earth's primary regions and subregionsRegions of AfricaCentral
Guinea region
Gulf of Guinea
Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland
Mbaise
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Cameroonian Highlands forests
East Sudanian savanna
Congolian rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau
East
African Great Lakes
Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Virunga Mountains
Kavirondo
Zanj
East African montane forests
Eastern Arc Mountains
Serengeti
Horn of Africa
Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbaria
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Dahlak Archipelago
Hanish Islands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura
Red Sea
Indian Ocean islands
Comoro Islands
Lamu Archipelago
Madagascar
Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands
Zanzibar Archipelago
Swahili coast
North
Eastern Desert
Maghreb
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains
Barbary Coast
Gibraltar Arc
Ifriqiya
Nile Valley
Nile Delta
Bashmur
Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt
Tibesti Mountains
Western Sahara
South
Rhodesia
North
South
Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Maputaland
Highveld
Fynbos
Indian Ocean coastal belt
Albany thickets
Cape Floristic Region
Skeleton Coast
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
Cape Peninsula
False Bay
West
Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Upper Guinean forests
Lower Guinean forests
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic
Guinea Highlands
Gulf of Guinea
Dahomey Gap
Niger Basin
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta
West Sudanian savanna
Yorubaland
Macro-regions
Aethiopia
Afromontane
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Greater Middle East
Guineo-Congolian region
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Miombo woodlands
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Southeast Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian savanna
Tropical Africa
Zambezian region
Regions of AsiaCentral(The 'stans)
Roof of the World
Greater  Middle  East
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee
Tartary
Transoxiana
Turan
Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Arachosia
Khwarazm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Kazakh Steppe
Betpak-Dala
Eurasian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Siachen Glacier
Tibetan Plateau
East(Northeast)
Orient
Japanese Archipelago
Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc
Korea
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria
Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
North China Plain
Yan Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
High-mountain Asia
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau
Karakoram
Kunlun Mountains
Qilian Mountains
Hengduan Mountains
Tarim Basin
Qinling Mountains
Sichuan Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop
Loess Plateau
Shaanbei
Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze
Yangtze Delta
Yellow River
Pearl River Delta
Yenisey Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
North(Siberia)
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Inner Asia
Northeast
Ural
Ural Mountains
Far East
Russian Far East
Okhotsk–Manchurian taiga
Beringia
Chukchi Peninsula
Kamchatka Peninsula
Extreme North
Tartary
Siberia
Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Baraba steppe
Khatanga Gulf
Transbaikal
West
Amur Basin
Yenisey Gulf
Yenisey Basin
Sikhote-Alin
Kolyma
Bering Strait
Ring of Fire
Outer Manchuria
Asia-Pacific
Southeast(East Indies)
Orient
Sundaland
Mainland/Indochina
Northern Triangle temperate forests
Maritime/Malay Archipelago
Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands
Indonesian Archipelago/Nusantara
Wallacea
Timor
Philippine Archipelago
Luzon
Mindanao
Visayas
Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
South(IndianSubcontinent)
Orient
Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Kangchenjunga
Nanda Devi
Hindu Kush
Bactria
Carnatic region
Tamilakam
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Guzgan
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Gedrosia
Makran
Marathwada
Kashmir
Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range
Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern Coastal Plains
Kalinga
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
Lower Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan
Baltistan
Shigar Valley
High-mountain Asia
Karakoram
Saltoro Mountains
Siachen Glacier
Bengal
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Halar
Gulf of Mannar
Palk Strait
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Laccadive Islands
Aminidivi
Paropamisadae
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands
Maldives
Alpide belt
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Tibetan Plateau
West(Middle East)
Greater Middle East
MENA
Middle East
Red Sea
Hanish Islands
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Elam
Persian Gulf
Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs
Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula
Najd
Al-Yamama
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia
Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert
Al-Sharat
Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia
Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh Plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Eber-Nari
Kurdistan
Levant (Syria region)
Palestine region
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley
Philistia
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Galilee
Canaan
Gilead
Syrian Desert
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Aram
Aram-Naharaim
Negev
Phoenicia
Retjenu
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Bekaa valley
Levantine Sea
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Hauran
Iranian Plateau
Dasht-e Kavir
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus
Caucasus Mountains
Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus
North Caucasus
South Caucasus
Shirvan
Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula
Kartli
Anatolia
Taurus Mountains
Aeolis
Paphlagonia
Phasiane
Isauria
Ionia
Bithynia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Caria
Corduene
Chaldia
Doris
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Galatia
Pisidia
Pontus
Mysia
Arzawa
Speri 
Sophene
Biga Peninsula
Troad
Tuwana
Alpide belt
Regions of EuropeNorth
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Jutland
Gotland
Sápmi
Ingria
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Livonia
Curonian Spit
Nemunas Delta
Cap of the North
East
Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Wallachia
Transylvania
Moldavia
Bukovina
Bessarabia
Livonia
Ruthenia
Carpathian Ruthenia
Donbas
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula
Amber Coast
Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia
East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus
Lokhaniemi
Southeastern
Balkans
Crimea
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Taman Peninsula
Southern Russia
Kola Peninsula
East European Plain
Ryn Desert
Cap of the North
Central
North European Plain
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Rhineland
Eastphalia
Westphalia
Prussia
Lusatia
Bohemia
Moravia
Silesia
Czech Silesia
Pomerania
Pomerelia
Kashubia
Bukovina
Istria
Transdanubia
Polesia
Germania
Germania Slavica
West
Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Doggerland
Upper Rhine Plain
Upper Rhine
Gaul
Gascony
Normandy
Brittany
Septimania
Batavia
Gulf of Lion
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Pyrenees
Alpide belt
South
Italy
Po Valley (Padania)
Italian Peninsula
Tuscan Archipelago
Insular Italy
Aegadian Islands
Occitania
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Epirus
Rumelia
Balkans
Aegean Sea
Aegean Islands
Attica
Boeotia
Opuntian Locris
Phocis
Megaris
Peloponnese
Chalkidiki
Aetolia
Gulf of Chania
Istria
Mediterranean
Alpide belt
Germanic
Romance
Celtic
Slavic countries
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin
Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland
Regions of North AmericaUpper Northern(i.e.
Canada and Alaska (US))Eastern
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
Central Canada
Great Lakes
Northern (Canada and Alaska)
North American Arctic
Arctic Circle
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Alaska
Aleutian Arc
Aleutian Islands
Aleutian Range
Alaska Peninsula
Bering Strait
Gulf of Alaska
Greenland
Western
Pacific Northwest
Cascadia
Prairie Pothole Region
Acadia
Acadian Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula
Bay de Verde Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Brodeur Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Canadian Prairies
Canadian Shield
Cook Peninsula
Cypress Hills
English Canada
French Canada
Gaspé Peninsula
Georgian Bay
Gulf Islands
Gulf of Boothia
Hudson Bay
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
James Bay
Kodiak Island
Labrador Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Newfoundland Island
Palliser's Triangle
Peace River Country
Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Strait of Georgia
The Maritimes
Vancouver Island
Lower Northern(i.e.
United States)Central
Midwest
Upper Midwest
Old Southwest
Tallgrass prairie
Eastern
Appalachia
East Coast
Northeast
Atlantic Northeast
Mid-Atlantic
New England
Southeast
Thirteen Colonies
Northern
East North Central states
Great Lakes
Southern
Deep South
Old South
South Central
Gulf Coast
Upland South
Southwestern
Four Corners
Great Basin
Llano Estacado
West Texas
Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Southern Rocky Mountains
Western
Basin and Range Province
Northwest
Cascadia
Inland Northwest
Pacific Northwest
West Coast
Pacific Coast Ranges
Oregon Trail
Mormon corridor
Calumet Region
Llano Estacado
Third Coast
Backcountry
Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Basin
Great Basin Desert
Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mountain states
Intermountain West
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area
San Francisco Bay
North Bay
East Bay
Silicon Valley
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
"Belt" regions
Bible Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt
MexicoCentral
Bajío
Huasteca
Islas Marías
La Mixteca
Mezquital Valley
Revillagigedo Islands
Sierra Gorda
Tierra Caliente
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine–oak forests
Valley of Mexico
Northern
Baja California peninsula
Basin and Range Province
Comarca Lagunera
Gulf of California
Colorado River Delta
Isla Llave
Lerdo Landing
Pimería Alta
Salton Trough
Sierra de San Francisco
Southern
Chiapas Highlands
Isthmus of Tehuantepec
Ku-Maloob-Zaap
Petén Basin
Puuc
Sierra Madre de Chiapas
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Sierra Madre del Sur
Soconusco
Triangle of the Sun
Yucatán Peninsula
Gulf of Mexico
Sierra Madre Occidental
Sierra Madre Oriental
Central
Darién Gap
Isthmus of Panama
Lake Nicaragua
Panama Canal
Western Caribbean zone
West Indies
Caribbean
Antilles
Greater Antilles
Hispaniola
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Saint Martin Island
Virgin Islands
Southern Caribbean
Leeward Antilles
ABC islands
Windward Islands
Bajo Nuevo Bank
San Andrés and Providencia
Serranilla Bank
Lucayan Archipelago
American Cordillera
Anglo
Aridoamerica
Latin America
French
Hispanic
Latin America and the Caribbean
Mesoamerica
Middle America
Oasisamerica
Ring of Fire
North America portal
Regions of Oceania
Australia-New Guinea
Near Oceania
Pacific Islands
Pacific Plate
Remote Oceania
Zealandia
AustralasiaAustraliaAustralian Capital Territory
Canberra
Jervis Bay Territory
Jervis Bay Village
Wreck Bay Village
New South Wales
Central Coast
Central Tablelands
Central West
Far West
Greater Blue Mountains Area
Hunter
Illawarra
Mid North Coast
Monaro
New England
North West Slopes
Northern Rivers
Northern Tablelands
Orana
Riverina
South Coast
South West Slopes
Southern Highlands
Southern Tablelands
Northern Territory
Arnhem Land
Barkly Tableland
Central Australia
Darwin
Katherine
Top End
Queensland
Central West
Central
Darling Downs
Far North
Gulf Country
North
South East
South West
Wide Bay–Burnett
South Australia
Adelaide Hills
Barossa Light and Lower North
Eastern Adelaide
Eyre Western
Far North
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island
Limestone Coast
Murray and Mallee
Northern Adelaide
Southern Adelaide
Western Adelaide
Yorke and Mid North
Tasmania
Central Highlands
East Coast
Midlands
North East
North West
Northern
South West
Southern
West Coast
Victoria
Barwon South West
Gippsland
Grampians
Greater Melbourne
Hume
Loddon Mallee
Western Australia
Gascoyne
Goldfields–Esperance
Great Southern
Greater Perth
Perth Metropolitan Area
Kimberley
Mid West
Peel
Pilbara
South West
Wheatbelt
Australian External Territories
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Norfolk Island
Australian Indian Ocean Territories
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
New ZealandNorth Island
Northland
Auckland
Waikato
Bay of Plenty
Gisborne
Hawke's Bay
Taranaki
Manawatū-Whanganui
Wellington
South Island
Tasman
Nelson
Marlborough
West Coast
Canterbury
Otago
Southland
Stewart Island
NZ Outlying Islands
Chatham Islands
Kermadec Islands
Solander Islands
Three Kings Islands
NZ Subantarctic Islands
Antipodes Islands
Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Campbell Islands
Snares Islands
MelanesiaIsland Melanesia
Fiji
New Caledonia
East Melanesian Islands
Bismarck Archipelago
Gazelle Peninsula
Santa Cruz Islands
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands Archipelago
Bougainville
Bonis Peninsula
Solomon Islands
New Guinea
Aru Islands
Papua New Guinea
Highlands Region
Momase Region
Huon Gulf
Huon Peninsula
Southern Region
Western New Guinea
Papua
West Papua
Bird's Head Peninsula
Micronesia
Caroline Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Palau
Kiribati
Banaba
Gilbert Islands
Mariana Islands
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Wake Island
PolynesiaPolynesian Triangle
Easter Island
Salas and Gómez Island
Cook Islands
French Polynesia
Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Mangareva Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu Islands
Johnston Atoll
Line Islands
Jarvis Island
Kingman Reef
Kiritimati
Palmyra Atoll
Tabuaeran
Teraina
Niue
Pitcairn Islands
Pitcairn Island
Henderson Island
Ducie Island
Oeno Island
Samoan Islands
American Samoa
Independent State of Samoa
Southeastern Hawaiian Islands
Tokelau Islands
Atafu
Fakaofo
Nukunonu
Swains Island
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna
Hoorn Islands
Wallis Islands
Phoenix Islands
Canton Island
Howland and Baker Islands
Baker Island
Howland Island
Polynesian Outliers
Clipperton Island
Desventuradas Islands
Galápagos Islands
Juan Fernández Islands
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
Midway Atoll
Asia-Pacific
Indo-Australian Plate
Indo-Pacific
Islands Region
Papuan Peninsula
Ring of Fire
Regions of South AmericaEast
Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado
North
Caribbean South America
West Indies
Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin
Amazon rainforest
Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta
South
Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula
Triple Frontier
Río de la Plata
Río de la Plata Basin
West
Andes
Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range
Altiplano
Atacama Desert
Middle
Latin
Hispanic
Bolivarian
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC
Earth's polar regionsAntarctic
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands
Arctic
Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic
Earth's oceans and seasArctic Ocean
Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean
Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean
Arafura Sea
Bali Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Java Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seram Sea
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea
Southern Ocean
Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea
Endorheic basins
Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea
Others
Ocean
Sea
Superocean
Oceans portal
Category
Hemispheres of Earth
Northern
Southern
Eastern
Western
Land
Water
Portal:Geography
Commons:Maps of Earth's hemispheres
World portal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat (via VIAF)
National libraries
Germany
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 25 September 2022, at 10:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
