Paul the Apostle - Wikipedia
Paul the Apostle
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Early Christian apostle and missionary
"Saint Paul" redirects here.
For other uses, see Saint Paul (disambiguation).
SaintPaul the ApostleThe Apostle Paul, c. 1657, RembrandtApostle to the Gentiles, MartyrBornSaul of Tarsusc. 5 ADTarsus, Cilicia, Roman Empire (in 21st-century
Turkey)Diedc. 64/65 ADRome, Italia, Roman EmpireVenerated inAll Christian denominations that venerate saintsCanonizedPre-CongregationMajor shrineBasilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls, Rome, ItalyFeast
Saturday before the sixth Sunday after Pentecost – Feast of the Twelve Apostles and Paul the thirteenth Apostle (Armenian Apostolic Church)
AttributesChristian martyrdom, sword, bookPatronageMissionaries, theologians, evangelists, and Gentile ChristiansTheology careerEducationSchool of GamalielOccupationChristian missionaryNotable workCertain:Epistle to the RomansEpistle to the GalatiansFirst Epistle to the CorinthiansSecond Epistle to the CorinthiansFirst Epistle to the ThessaloniansEpistle to PhilemonEpistle to the PhilippiansDisputed:Second Epistle to the ThessaloniansEpistle to the ColossiansEpistle to the EphesiansFirst Epistle to TimothySecond Epistle to TimothyEpistle to TitusTheological workEraApostolic AgeLanguageKoine GreekTradition or movementPauline ChristianityMain interestsTorah, Christology, eschatology, soteriology, ecclesiologyNotable ideasPauline privilege, Law of Christ, Holy Spirit, unknown God, divinity of Jesus, thorn in the flesh, Pauline mysticism, biblical inspiration, supersessionism, non-circumcision, salvation
Paul[a] (previously called Saul of Tarsus;[b] c. 5 – c. 64/65 AD), commonly known as Paul the Apostle and Saint Paul, was a Christian apostle who spread the teachings of Jesus in the first-century world.
Generally regarded as one of the most important figures of the Apostolic Age, he founded several Christian communities in Asia Minor and Europe from the mid-40s to the mid-50s AD.
According to the New Testament book Acts of the Apostles, Paul was a Pharisee.
He participated in the persecution of early disciples of Jesus, possibly Hellenised diaspora Jews converted to Christianity, in the area of Jerusalem, prior to his conversion.[note 1] Some time after having approved of the execution of Stephen, Paul was traveling on the road to Damascus so that he might find any Christians there and bring them "bound to Jerusalem" (ESV). At midday, a light brighter than the sun shone around both him and those with him, causing all to fall to the ground, with the risen Christ verbally addressing Paul regarding his persecution.
Having been made blind, along with being commanded to enter the city, his sight was restored three days later by Ananias of Damascus.
After these events, Paul was baptized, beginning immediately to proclaim that Jesus of Nazareth was the Jewish messiah and the Son of God.
Approximately half of the content in the book of Acts details the life and works of Paul.
Fourteen of the 27 books in the New Testament have traditionally been attributed to Paul.
Seven of the Pauline epistles are undisputed by scholars as being authentic, with varying degrees of argument about the remainder.
Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is not asserted in the Epistle itself and was already doubted in the 2nd and 3rd centuries.[note 2] It was almost unquestioningly accepted from the 5th to the 16th centuries that Paul was the author of Hebrews, but that view is now almost universally rejected by scholars.
The other six are believed by some scholars to have come from followers writing in his name, using material from Paul's surviving letters and letters written by him that no longer survive.[note 3] Other scholars argue that the idea of a pseudonymous author for the disputed epistles raises many problems.
Today, Paul's epistles continue to be vital roots of the theology, worship and pastoral life in the Latin and Protestant traditions of the West, as well as the Eastern Catholic and Orthodox traditions of the East.
Paul's influence on Christian thought and practice has been characterized as being as "profound as it is pervasive", among that of many other apostles and missionaries involved in the spread of the Christian faith.
Contents
Names
Paul's Jewish name was "Saul" (Hebrew: שָׁאוּל‎, Modern: Sha'ûl, Tiberian: Šā'ûl), perhaps after the biblical King Saul, the first king of Israel and like Paul a member of the Tribe of Benjamin; the Latin name Paul, meaning small, was not a result of his conversion as it is commonly believed but a second name for use in communicating with a Greco-Roman audience.
According to the Acts of the Apostles, he was a Roman citizen.
As such, he bore the Latin name "Paul" – in Latin Paulus and in biblical Greek Παῦλος (Paulos). It was typical for the Jews of that time to have two names: one Hebrew, the other Latin or Greek.
Jesus called him "Saul, Saul" in "the Hebrew tongue" in the Acts of the Apostles, when he had the vision which led to his conversion on the road to Damascus.
Later, in a vision to Ananias of Damascus, "the Lord" referred to him as "Saul, of Tarsus". When Ananias came to restore his sight, he called him "Brother Saul".
In Acts 13:9, Saul is called "Paul" for the first time on the island of Cyprus – much later than the time of his conversion.
The author of Luke–Acts indicates that the names were interchangeable: "Saul, who also is called Paul." He refers to him as Paul through the remainder of Acts.
This was apparently Paul's preference since he is called Paul in all other Bible books where he is mentioned, including those that he authored.
Adopting his Roman name was typical of Paul's missionary style.
His method was to put people at their ease and to approach them with his message in a language and style to which they could relate, as in 1 Corinthians 9:19–23.
Available sources
Further information: Historical reliability of the Acts of the Apostles
The Conversion of Saul, fresco by Michelangelo, 1542–1545
The main source for information about Paul's life is the material found in his epistles and in the Acts of the Apostles.
However, the epistles contain little information about Paul's pre-conversion past.
The Acts of the Apostles recounts more information but leaves several parts of Paul's life out of its narrative, such as his probable but undocumented execution in Rome.
The Acts of the Apostles also contradict Paul's epistles on multiple accounts, in particular concerning the frequency of Paul's visits to the church in Jerusalem.
Sources outside the New Testament that mention Paul include:
Clement of Rome's epistle to the Corinthians (late 1st/early 2nd century);
Ignatius of Antioch's epistles to the Romans and to the Ephesians (early 2nd century);
Polycarp's epistle to the Philippians (early 2nd century);
Eusebius's Historia Ecclesiae (early 4th century);
The apocryphal Acts narrating the life of Paul (Acts of Paul, Acts of Paul and Thecla, Acts of Peter and Paul), the apocryphal epistles attributed to him (the Latin Epistle to the Laodiceans, the Third Epistle to the Corinthians, and the Correspondence of Paul and Seneca) and some apocalyptic texts attributed to him (Apocalypse of Paul and Coptic Apocalypse of Paul). These writings are all late (they are usually dated from the 2nd to the 4th century).
Biography
Early life
Geography relevant to Paul's life, stretching from Jerusalem to Rome
The two main sources of information that give access to the earliest segments of Paul's career are the Acts of the Apostles and the autobiographical elements of Paul's letters to the early Christian communities.
Paul was likely born between the years of 5 BC and 5 AD. The Acts of the Apostles indicates that Paul was a Roman citizen by birth, but Helmut Koester takes issue with the evidence presented by the text.
He was from a devout Jewish family based in the city of Tarsus.
One of the larger centers of trade on the Mediterranean coast and renowned for its university, Tarsus had been among the most influential cities in Asia Minor since the time of Alexander the Great, who died in 323 BC.
Paul referred to himself as being "of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee". The Bible reveals very little about Paul's family.
Acts quotes Paul referring to his family by saying he was "a Pharisee, born of Pharisees". Paul's nephew, his sister's son, is mentioned in Acts 23:16. In Romans 16:7, he states that his relatives, Andronicus and Junia, were Christians before he was and were prominent among the Apostles.
The family had a history of religious piety.[note 4] Apparently, the family lineage had been very attached to Pharisaic traditions and observances for generations.
Acts says that he was an artisan involved in the leather crafting or tent-making profession.
This was to become an initial connection with Priscilla and Aquila, with whom he would partner in tentmaking and later become very important teammates as fellow missionaries.
While he was still fairly young, he was sent to Jerusalem to receive his education at the school of Gamaliel, one of the most noted teachers of Jewish law in history.
Although modern scholarship agrees that Paul was educated under the supervision of Gamaliel in Jerusalem, he was not preparing to become a scholar of Jewish law, and probably never had any contact with the Hillelite school.
Some of his family may have resided in Jerusalem since later the son of one of his sisters saved his life there.
Nothing more is known of his biography until he takes an active part in the martyrdom of Stephen, a Hellenised diaspora Jew.
Although it is known (from his biography and from Acts) that Paul could and did speak Aramaic (then known as "Hebrew"), modern scholarship suggests that Koine Greek was his first language.
In his letters, Paul drew heavily on his knowledge of Stoic philosophy, using Stoic terms and metaphors to assist his new Gentile converts in their understanding of the Gospel and to explain his Christology.
Persecutor of early Christians
Conversion on the Way to Damascus (1601), by Caravaggio
Paul says that prior to his conversion, he persecuted early Christians "beyond measure", more specifically Hellenised diaspora Jewish members who had returned to the area of Jerusalem.[note 1] According to James Dunn, the Jerusalem community consisted of "Hebrews," Jews speaking both Aramaic and Greek, and "Hellenists," Jews speaking only Greek, possibly diaspora Jews who had resettled in Jerusalem.
Paul's initial persecution of Christians probably was directed against these Greek-speaking "Hellenists" due to their anti-Temple attitude.
Within the early Jewish Christian community, this also set them apart from the "Hebrews" and their continuing participation in the Temple cult.
Conversion
Main article: Conversion of Paul the Apostle
The Conversion of Saint Paul on the Way to Damascus (c. 1889), by José Ferraz de Almeida Júnior
Paul's conversion can be dated to 31–36 AD by his reference to it in one of his letters.
In Galatians 1:16, Paul writes that God "was pleased to reveal his son to me." In 1 Corinthians 15:8, as he lists the order in which Jesus appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, Paul writes, "last of all, as to one untimely born, He appeared to me also."
According to the account in the Acts of the Apostles, it took place on the road to Damascus, where he reported having experienced a vision of the ascended Jesus.
The account says that "He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?' He asked, 'Who are you, Lord?' The reply came, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting'."
According to the account in Acts 9:1–22, he was blinded for three days and had to be led into Damascus by the hand.
During these three days, Saul took no food or water and spent his time in prayer to God.
When Ananias of Damascus arrived, he laid his hands on him and said: "Brother Saul, the Lord, [even] Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." His sight was restored, he got up and was baptized.
This story occurs only in Acts, not in the Pauline epistles.
The author of the Acts of the Apostles may have learned of Paul's conversion from the church in Jerusalem, or from the church in Antioch, or possibly from Paul himself.
According to Timo Eskola, early Christian theology and discourse was influenced by the Jewish Merkabah tradition.
Similarly, Alan Segal and Daniel Boyarin regard Paul's accounts of his conversion experience and his ascent to the heavens (in 2 Corinthians 12) as the earliest first-person accounts that are extant of a Merkabah mystic in Jewish or Christian literature.
Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that Paul's Damascus road encounter does not fit the pattern of Merkabah.
Post-conversion
St Paul (c. 1611) by Peter Paul Rubens
According to Acts:
And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, saying, "He is the Son of God." And all who heard him were amazed and said, "Is not this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem of those who called upon this name? And has he not come here for this purpose, to bring them bound before the chief priests?" But Saul increased all the more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ.— Acts 9:20–22
Early ministry
The house believed to be of Ananias of Damascus in Damascus
Bab Kisan, believed to be where Paul escaped from persecution in Damascus
After his conversion, Paul went to Damascus, where Acts 9 states he was healed of his blindness and baptized by Ananias of Damascus.
Paul says that it was in Damascus that he barely escaped death.
Paul also says that he then went first to Arabia, and then came back to Damascus.
Paul's trip to Arabia is not mentioned anywhere else in the Bible, and some suppose he actually traveled to Mount Sinai for meditations in the desert.
He describes in Galatians how three years after his conversion he went to Jerusalem.
There he met James and stayed with Simon Peter for 15 days.
Paul located Mount Sinai in Arabia in Galatians 4:24–25.
Paul asserted that he received the Gospel not from man, but directly by "the revelation of Jesus Christ". He claimed almost total independence from the Jerusalem community (possibly in the Cenacle), but agreed with it on the nature and content of the gospel.
He appeared eager to bring material support to Jerusalem from the various growing Gentile churches that he started.
In his writings, Paul used the persecutions he endured to avow proximity and union with Jesus and as a validation of his teaching.
Paul's narrative in Galatians states that 14 years after his conversion he went again to Jerusalem.
It is not known what happened during this time, but both Acts and Galatians provide some details.
Though a view is held that Paul spent 14 years studying the scriptures and growing in the faith.
At the end of this time, Barnabas went to find Paul and brought him to Antioch.
The Christian community at Antioch had been established by Hellenised diaspora Jews living in Jerusalem, who played an important role in reaching a Gentile, Greek audience, notably at Antioch, which had a large Jewish community and significant numbers of Gentile "God-fearers." From Antioch the mission to the Gentiles started, which would fundamentally change the character of the early Christian movement, eventually turning it into a new, Gentile religion.
When a famine occurred in Judea, around 45–46, Paul and Barnabas journeyed to Jerusalem to deliver financial support from the Antioch community.
According to Acts, Antioch had become an alternative center for Christians following the dispersion of the believers after the death of Stephen.
It was in Antioch that the followers of Jesus were first called "Christians".
First missionary journey
The author of Acts arranges Paul's travels into three separate journeys.
The first journey, for which Paul and Barnabas were commissioned by the Antioch community, and led initially by Barnabas,[note 5] took Barnabas and Paul from Antioch to Cyprus then into southern Asia Minor, and finally returning to Antioch.
In Cyprus, Paul rebukes and blinds Elymas the magician who was criticizing their teachings.
They sailed to Perga in Pamphylia.
John Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem.
Paul and Barnabas went on to Pisidian Antioch.
On Sabbath they went to the synagogue.
The leaders invited them to speak.
Paul reviewed Israelite history from life in Egypt to King David.
He introduced Jesus as a descendant of David brought to Israel by God.
He said that his team came to town to bring the message of salvation.
He recounted the story of Jesus' death and resurrection.
He quoted from the Septuagint to assert that Jesus was the promised Christos who brought them forgiveness for their sins.
Both the Jews and the "God-fearing" Gentiles invited them to talk more next Sabbath.
At that time almost the whole city gathered.
This upset some influential Jews who spoke against them.
Paul used the occasion to announce a change in his mission which from then on would be to the Gentiles.
Map of the missionary journeys of St.
Paul
Antioch served as a major Christian home base for Paul's early missionary activities, and he remained there for "a long time with the disciples" at the conclusion of his first journey.
The exact duration of Paul's stay in Antioch is unknown, with estimates ranging from nine months to as long as eight years.
In Raymond Brown's An Introduction to the New Testament (1997), a chronology of events in Paul's life is presented, illustrated from later 20th-century writings of biblical scholars.
The first missionary journey of Paul is assigned a "traditional" (and majority) dating of 46–49 AD, compared to a "revisionist" (and minority) dating of after 37 AD.
Council of Jerusalem
Main article: Council of Jerusalem
See also: Circumcision controversy in early Christianity
A vital meeting between Paul and the Jerusalem church took place in the year 49 AD by "traditional" (and majority) dating, compared to a "revisionist" (and minority) dating of 47/51 AD. The meeting is described in Acts 15:2 and usually seen as the same event mentioned by Paul in Galatians 2:1. The key question raised was whether Gentile converts needed to be circumcised.
At this meeting, Paul states in his letter to the Galatians, Peter, James, and John accepted Paul's mission to the Gentiles.
The Jerusalem meetings are mentioned in Acts, and also in Paul's letters.
For example, the Jerusalem visit for famine relief apparently corresponds to the "first visit" (to Peter and James only). F. F. Bruce suggested that the "fourteen years" could be from Paul's conversion rather than from his first visit to Jerusalem.
Incident at Antioch
Main article: Incident at Antioch
Despite the agreement achieved at the Council of Jerusalem, Paul recounts how he later publicly confronted Peter in a dispute sometimes called the "Incident at Antioch", over Peter's reluctance to share a meal with Gentile Christians in Antioch because they did not strictly adhere to Jewish customs.
Writing later of the incident, Paul recounts, "I opposed [Peter] to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong", and says he told Peter, "You are a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew.
How is it, then, that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?" Paul also mentions that even Barnabas, his traveling companion and fellow apostle until that time, sided with Peter.
The final outcome of the incident remains uncertain.
The Catholic Encyclopedia suggests that Paul won the argument, because "Paul's account of the incident leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke". However Paul himself never mentions a victory and L. Michael White's From Jesus to Christianity draws the opposite conclusion: "The blowup with Peter was a total failure of political bravado, and Paul soon left Antioch as persona non grata, never again to return".
The primary source account of the Incident at Antioch is Paul's letter to the Galatians.
Second missionary journey
Saint Paul delivering the Areopagus sermon in Athens, by Raphael, 1515. This sermon addressed early issues in Christology.
Paul left for his second missionary journey from Jerusalem, in late Autumn 49 AD, after the meeting of the Council of Jerusalem where the circumcision question was debated.
On their trip around the Mediterranean Sea, Paul and his companion Barnabas stopped in Antioch where they had a sharp argument about taking John Mark with them on their trips.
The Acts of the Apostles said that John Mark had left them in a previous trip and gone home.
Unable to resolve the dispute, Paul and Barnabas decided to separate; Barnabas took John Mark with him, while Silas joined Paul.
Paul and Silas initially visited Tarsus (Paul's birthplace), Derbe and Lystra.
In Lystra, they met Timothy, a disciple who was spoken well of, and decided to take him with them.
Paul and his companions, Silas and Timothy, had plans to journey to the southwest portion of Asia Minor to preach the gospel but during the night, Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him to go to Macedonia to help them.
After seeing the vision, Paul and his companions left for Macedonia to preach the gospel to them.
The Church kept growing, adding believers, and strengthening in faith daily.
In Philippi, Paul cast a spirit of divination out of a servant girl, whose masters were then unhappy about the loss of income her soothsaying provided.
They seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the authorities and Paul and Silas were put in jail.
After a miraculous earthquake, the gates of the prison fell apart and Paul and Silas could have escaped but remained; this event led to the conversion of the jailor.
They continued traveling, going by Berea and then to Athens, where Paul preached to the Jews and God-fearing Greeks in the synagogue and to the Greek intellectuals in the Areopagus.
Paul continued from Athens to Corinth.
Interval in Corinth
Around 50–52 AD, Paul spent 18 months in Corinth.
The reference in Acts to Proconsul Gallio helps ascertain this date (cf.
Gallio Inscription). In Corinth, Paul met Priscilla and Aquila, who became faithful believers and helped Paul through his other missionary journeys.
The couple followed Paul and his companions to Ephesus, and stayed there to start one of the strongest and most faithful churches at that time.
In 52, departing from Corinth, Paul stopped at the nearby village of Cenchreae to have his hair cut off, because of a vow he had earlier taken.
It is possible this was to be a final haircut prior to fulfilling his vow to become a Nazirite for a defined period of time.
With Priscilla and Aquila, the missionaries then sailed to Ephesus and then Paul alone went on to Caesarea to greet the Church there.
He then traveled north to Antioch, where he stayed for some time (Ancient Greek: ποιησας χρονον, "perhaps about a year"), before leaving again on a third missionary journey.[citation needed] Some New Testament texts[note 6] suggest that he also visited Jerusalem during this period for one of the Jewish feasts, possibly Pentecost.
Textual critic Henry Alford and others consider the reference to a Jerusalem visit to be genuine and it accords with Acts 21:29, according to which Paul and Trophimus the Ephesian had previously been seen in Jerusalem.
Third missionary journey
The Preaching of Saint Paul at Ephesus by Eustache Le Sueur (1649)
According to Acts, Paul began his third missionary journey by traveling all around the region of Galatia and Phrygia to strengthen, teach and rebuke the believers.
Paul then traveled to Ephesus, an important center of early Christianity, and stayed there for almost three years, probably working there as a tentmaker, as he had done when he stayed in Corinth.
He is claimed to have performed numerous miracles, healing people and casting out demons, and he apparently organized missionary activity in other regions.
Paul left Ephesus after an attack from a local silversmith resulted in a pro-Artemis riot involving most of the city.
During his stay in Ephesus, Paul wrote four letters to the church in Corinth.
The Jerusalem Bible suggests that the letter to the church in Philippi was also written from Ephesus.
Paul went through Macedonia into Achaea and stayed in Greece, probably Corinth, for three months during 56–57 AD. Commentators generally agree that Paul dictated his Epistle to the Romans during this period.
He then made ready to continue on to Syria, but he changed his plans and traveled back through Macedonia because of some Jews who had made a plot against him.
In Romans 15:19, Paul wrote that he visited Illyricum, but he may have meant what would now be called Illyria Graeca, which was at that time a division of the Roman province of Macedonia.
On their way back to Jerusalem, Paul and his companions visited other cities such as Philippi, Troas, Miletus, Rhodes, and Tyre.
Paul finished his trip with a stop in Caesarea, where he and his companions stayed with Philip the Evangelist before finally arriving at Jerusalem.
Journey from Rome to Spain
Among the writings of the early Christians, Pope Clement I said that Paul was "Herald (of the Gospel of Christ) in the West", and that "he had gone to the extremity of the west". John Chrysostom indicated that Paul preached in Spain: "For after he had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these parts, we know not". Cyril of Jerusalem said that Paul, "fully preached the Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of his preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing Signs and wonders". The Muratorian fragment mentions "the departure of Paul from the city [of Rome] [5a] (39) when he journeyed to Spain".
Visits to Jerusalem in Acts and the epistles
This table is adapted from White, From Jesus to Christianity.
Note that the matching of Paul's travels in the Acts and the travels in his Epistles is done for the reader's convenience and is not approved of by all scholars.
Acts
Epistles
First visit to Jerusalem
"after many days" of Damascus conversion
preaches openly in Jerusalem with Barnabas
meets apostles
First visit to Jerusalem
three years after Damascus conversion
sees only Cephas (Simon Peter) and James
Second visit to Jerusalem
for famine relief
There is debate over whether Paul's visit in Galatians 2 refers to the visit for famine relief or the Jerusalem Council.
If it refers to the former, then this was the trip made "after an interval of fourteen years".
Third visit to Jerusalem
with Barnabas
"Council of Jerusalem"
followed by confrontation with Barnabas in Antioch
Another[note 7] visit to Jerusalem
with Barnabas and Titus
possibly the "Council of Jerusalem"
Paul agrees to "remember the poor"
followed by confrontation with Peter and Barnabas in Antioch
Fourth visit to Jerusalem
to "greet the church"
Apparently unmentioned.
Fifth visit to Jerusalem
after an absence of several years
to bring gifts for the poor and to present offerings
Paul arrested
Another[note 8] visit to Jerusalem.
to deliver the collection for the poor
Last visit to Jerusalem and arrest
Saint Paul arrested, early 1900s Bible illustration
In 57 AD, upon completion of his third missionary journey, Paul arrived in Jerusalem for his fifth and final visit with a collection of money for the local community.
The Acts of the Apostles reports that he initially was warmly received.
However, Acts goes on to recount how Paul was warned by James and the elders that he was gaining a reputation for being against the Law, saying "they have been told about you that you teach all the Jews living among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and that you tell them not to circumcise their children or observe the customs." Paul underwent a purification ritual so that "all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself observe and guard the law."
When the seven days of the purification ritual were almost completed, some "Jews from Asia" (most likely from Roman Asia) accused Paul of defiling the temple by bringing gentiles into it.
He was seized and dragged out of the temple by an angry mob.
When the tribune heard of the uproar, he and some centurions and soldiers rushed to the area.
Unable to determine his identity and the cause of the uproar, they placed him in chains.
He was about to be taken into the barracks when he asked to speak to the people.
He was given permission by the Romans and proceeded to tell his story.
After a while, the crowd responded. "Up to this point they listened to him, but then they shouted, 'Away with such a fellow from the earth! For he should not be allowed to live.'" The tribune ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks and questioned by flogging.
Paul asserted his Roman citizenship, which would prevent his flogging.
The tribune "wanted to find out what Paul was being accused of by the Jews, the next day he released him and ordered the chief priests and the entire council to meet". Paul spoke before the council and caused a disagreement between the Pharisees and the Sadducees.
When this threatened to turn violent, the tribune ordered his soldiers to take Paul by force and return him to the barracks.
The next morning, forty Jews "bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink until they had killed Paul", but the son of Paul's sister heard of the plot and notified Paul, who notified the tribune that the conspiracists were going to ambush him.
The tribune ordered two centurions to "Get ready to leave by nine o'clock tonight for Caesarea with two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen.
Also provide mounts for Paul to ride, and take him safely to Felix the governor."
Paul was taken to Caesarea, where the governor ordered that he be kept under guard in Herod's headquarters. "Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and an attorney, a certain Tertullus, and they reported their case against Paul to the governor." Both Paul and the Jewish authorities gave a statement "But Felix, who was rather well informed about the Way, adjourned the hearing with the comment, "When Lysias the tribune comes down, I will decide your case."
Marcus Antonius Felix then ordered the centurion to keep Paul in custody, but to "let him have some liberty and not to prevent any of his friends from taking care of his needs." He was held there for two years by Felix, until a new governor, Porcius Festus, was appointed.
The "chief priests and the leaders of the Jews" requested that Festus return Paul to Jerusalem.
After Festus had stayed in Jerusalem "not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; the next day he took his seat on the tribunal and ordered Paul to be brought." When Festus suggested that he be sent back to Jerusalem for further trial, Paul exercised his right as a Roman citizen to "appeal unto Caesar". Finally, Paul and his companions sailed for Rome where Paul was to stand trial for his alleged crimes.
St.
Paul's Grotto in Rabat, Malta
Acts recounts that on the way to Rome for his appeal as a Roman citizen to Caesar, Paul was shipwrecked on "Melita" (Malta), where the islanders showed him "unusual kindness" and where he was met by Publius.
From Malta, he travelled to Rome via Syracuse, Rhegium and Puteoli.
Two years in Rome
Paul Arrives in Rome, from Die Bibel in Bildern
Paul finally arrived in Rome around 60 AD, where he spent another two years under house arrest.
The narrative of Acts ends with Paul preaching in Rome for two years from his rented home while awaiting trial.
Irenaeus wrote in the 2nd century that Peter and Paul had been the founders of the church in Rome and had appointed Linus as succeeding bishop.
However, Paul was not a bishop of Rome, nor did he bring Christianity to Rome since there were already Christians in Rome when he arrived there; Paul also wrote his letter to the church at Rome before he had visited Rome.
Paul only played a supporting part in the life of the church in Rome.
Death
The Beheading of Saint Paul by Enrique Simonet, 1887
The date of Paul's death is believed to have occurred after the Great Fire of Rome in July 64 AD, but before the last year of Nero's reign, in 68 AD.
The Second Epistle to Timothy states that Paul was arrested in Troad and brought back to Rome, where he was imprisoned and put on trial; the Epistle was traditionally ascribed to Paul, but today many scholars considered it to be pseudepigrapha, perhaps written by one of Paul's disciples.
Pope Clement I writes in his Epistle to the Corinthians that after Paul "had borne his testimony before the rulers", he "departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance." Ignatius of Antioch writes in his Epistle to the Ephesians that Paul was martyred, without giving any further information.
Eusebius states that Paul was killed during the Neronian Persecution and, quoting from Dionysius of Corinth, argues that Peter and Paul were martyred "at the same time". Tertullian writes that Paul was beheaded like John the Baptist, a detail also contained in Lactantius, Jerome, John Chrysostom and Sulpicius Severus.[full citation needed]
A legend later developed that his martyrdom occurred at the Aquae Salviae, on the Via Laurentina.
According to this legend, after Paul was decapitated, his severed head rebounded three times, giving rise to a source of water each time that it touched the ground, which is how the place earned the name "San Paolo alle Tre Fontane" ("St Paul at the Three Fountains"). The apocryphal Acts of Paul also describe the martyrdom and the burial of Paul, but their narrative is highly fanciful and largely unhistorical.
Remains
According to the Liber Pontificalis, Paul's body was buried outside the walls of Rome, at the second mile on the Via Ostiensis, on the estate owned by a Christian woman named Lucina.
It was here, in the fourth century, that the Emperor Constantine the Great built a first church.
Then, between the fourth and fifth centuries, it was considerably enlarged by the Emperors Valentinian I, Valentinian II, Theodosius I, and Arcadius.
The present-day Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls was built there in the early 19th century.
Caius in his Disputation Against Proclus (198 AD) mentions this of the places in which the remains of the apostles Peter and Paul were deposited: "I can point out the trophies of the apostles.
For if you are willing to go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Way, you will find the trophies of those who founded this Church".
Jerome in his De Viris Illustribus (392 AD) writing on Paul's biography, mentions that "Paul was buried in the Ostian Way at Rome".
In 2002, an 8-foot (2.4 m)-long marble sarcophagus, inscribed with the words "PAULO APOSTOLO MART" ("Paul apostle martyr") was discovered during excavations around the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls on the Via Ostiensis.
Vatican archaeologists declared this to be the tomb of Paul the Apostle in 2005. In June 2009, Pope Benedict XVI announced excavation results concerning the tomb.
The sarcophagus was not opened but was examined by means of a probe, which revealed pieces of incense, purple and blue linen, and small bone fragments.
The bone was radiocarbon-dated to the 1st or 2nd century.
According to the Vatican, these findings support the conclusion that the tomb is Paul's.
Church tradition
Greek Orthodox mural painting of Saint Paul
Various Christian writers have suggested more details about Paul's life.
By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed out the prize of patient endurance.
After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance.— Lightfoot 1890, p. 274, The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians, 5:5–6
Commenting on this passage, Raymond Brown writes that while it "does not explicitly say" that Paul was martyred in Rome, "such a martyrdom is the most reasonable interpretation". Eusebius of Caesarea, who wrote in the 4th century, states that Paul was beheaded in the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero.
This event has been dated either to the year 64 AD, when Rome was devastated by a fire, or a few years later, to 67 AD. According to one tradition, the church of San Paolo alle Tre Fontane marks the place of Paul's execution.
A Roman Catholic liturgical solemnity of Peter and Paul, celebrated on 29 June, commemorates his martyrdom, and reflects a tradition (preserved by Eusebius) that Peter and Paul were martyred at the same time.
The Roman liturgical calendar for the following day now remembers all Christians martyred in these early persecutions; formerly, 30 June was the feast day for St.
Paul.
Persons or religious orders with a special affinity for St.
Paul can still celebrate their patron on 30 June.
The apocryphal Acts of Paul and the apocryphal Acts of Peter suggest that Paul survived Rome and traveled further west.
Some think that Paul could have revisited Greece and Asia Minor after his trip to Spain, and might then have been arrested in Troas, and taken to Rome and executed.[note 4] A tradition holds that Paul was interred with Saint Peter ad Catacumbas by the via Appia until moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome.
Bede, in his Ecclesiastical History, writes that Pope Vitalian in 665 gave Paul's relics (including a cross made from his prison chains) from the crypts of Lucina to King Oswy of Northumbria, northern Britain.
The skull of Saint Paul is claimed to reside in the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran since at least the ninth century, alongside the skull of Saint Peter.
The Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul is celebrated on 25 January.
Paul is remembered (with Peter) in the Church of England with a Festival on 29 June.
Paul is considered the patron saint of London.
Physical appearance
Facial composite of Saint Paul, created by experts of the Landeskriminalamt of North Rhine-Westphalia using historical sources
The New Testament offers little if any information about the physical appearance of Paul, but several descriptions can be found in apocryphal texts.
In the Acts of Paul he is described as "A man of small stature, with a bald head and crooked legs, in a good state of body, with eyebrows meeting and nose somewhat hooked". In the Latin version of the Acts of Paul and Thecla it is added that he had a red, florid face.
In The History of the Contending of Saint Paul, his countenance is described as "ruddy with the ruddiness of the skin of the pomegranate". The Acts of Saint Peter confirms that Paul had a bald and shining head, with red hair.
As summarised by Barnes, Chrysostom records that Paul's stature was low, his body crooked and his head bald.
Lucian, in his Philopatris, describes Paul as "corpore erat parvo, contracto, incurvo, tricubitali" ("he was small, contracted, crooked, of three cubits, or four feet six").
Nicephorus claims that Paul was a little man, crooked, and almost bent like a bow, with a pale countenance, long and wrinkled, and a bald head.
Pseudo-Chrysostom echoes Lucian's height of Paul, referring to him as "the man of three cubits".
Writings
Part of a series of articles onPaul in the Bible
Pauline literature (Authorship)Romans1 Corinthians · 2 CorinthiansGalatians · EphesiansPhilippians · Colossians1 Thessalonians · 2 Thessalonians1 Timothy · 2 TimothyTitus · Philemon
Related literature
Lost epistles
Apocalypse of Paul
Coptic Apocalypse of Paul
Acts of Paul
Paul and Thecla
Peter and Paul
Prayer of Paul
See alsoPaul the Apostle · Apostles in the New Testament · Pauline Christianity
Main article: Pauline epistles
Statue of St.
Paul in the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran by Pierre-Étienne Monnot
Part of a series onCatholic philosophy  Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham
Ethics
Cardinal virtues
Just price
Just war
Principle of Double Effect
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Social teaching
Virtue ethics
Metaphysics
Conceptualism
Realism
Moderate realism
Nominalism
Quiddity (essence / nature)
Haecceity
Quinque Viae
Predestination
Free Will
Divine Attributes
Schools
Augustinianism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Nouvelle théologie
Occamism
Scholasticism
Neo
Scotism
Thomism
Analytic
Salamanca
Philosophers
Ancient
Ambrose
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Benedict of Nursia
Boethius
Clement of Alexandria
Cyprian
Cyril of Alexandria
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Irenaeus
Jerome
John Cassian
John Chrysostom
John Climacus
John of Damascus
Justin Martyr
Maximus the Confessor
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Origen
Paul the Apostle
Tertullian
Postclassical
Peter Abelard
Albertus Magnus
Anselm of Canterbury
Roger Bacon
Bede
Bernard of Clairvaux
Berengar of Tours
Bonaventure
Catherine of Siena
Duns Scotus
John Scotus Eriugena
Pope Gregory I
Gregory of Rimini
Giles of Rome
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Isidore of Seville
James of Viterbo
Jean Buridan
Meister Eckhart
Nicholas of Cusa
Nicole Oresme
Paul of Venice
Paschasius Radbertus
Peter Lombard
Roscellinus
Symeon the New Theologian
Thierry of Chartres
Thomas Aquinas
William of Ockham
Modern
Arnauld
Azpilcueta
Bellarmine
Bossuet
Brentano
Vico
Botero
Cajetan
Cortés
Sales
Soto
Descartes
Erasmus
Fénelon
Gracián
Kołłątaj
Krasicki
La Mennais
Liguori
Malebranche
Maistre
Meinong
Mercado
Molina
More
Newman
Pascal
Chateaubriand
Rosmini
Ávila
Suárez
Vitoria
Contemporary
Mortimer J. Adler
Peter Geach
G. E. M. Anscombe
Robert Barron
Pope Benedict XVI
Maurice Blondel
G. K. Chesterton
Yves Congar
Frederick Copleston
Henri de Lubac
John Finnis
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Étienne Gilson
René Girard
Gustavo Gutiérrez
Nicolás Gómez Dávila
Romano Guardini
John Haldane
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Pope John Paul II
Bernard Lonergan
Alasdair MacIntyre
Gabriel Marcel
Jean-Luc Marion
Jacques Maritain
Marshall McLuhan
Emmanuel Mounier
Josef Pieper
Karl Rahner
Edith Stein
Charles Taylor
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Catholicism portal Philosophy portal
Of the 27 books in the New Testament, 14 have been attributed to Paul; seven of these are widely considered authentic and Paul's own, while the authorship of the other seven is disputed.
The undisputed letters are considered the most important sources since they contain what is widely agreed to be Paul's own statements about his life and thoughts.
Theologian Mark Powell writes that Paul directed these seven letters to specific occasions at particular churches.
As an example, if the Corinthian church had not experienced problems concerning its celebration of the Lord's Supper, today it would not be known that Paul even believed in that observance or had any opinions about it one way or the other.
Powell comments that there may be other matters in the early church that have since gone unnoticed simply because no crises arose that prompted Paul to comment on them.
In Paul's writings, he provides the first written account of what it is to be a Christian and thus a description of Christian spirituality.
His letters have been characterized as being the most influential books of the New Testament after the Gospels of Matthew and John.[note 9]
Date
Paul's authentic letters are roughly dated to the years surrounding the mid-1st century.
Placing Paul in this time period is done on the basis of his reported conflicts with other early contemporary figures in the Jesus movement including James and Peter, the references to Paul and his letters by Clement of Rome writing in the late 1st century, his reported issues in Damascus from 2 Corinthians 11:32 which he says took place while King Aretas IV was in power, a possible reference to Erastus of Corinth in Romans 16:23, his reference to preaching in the province of Illyricum (which dissolved in 80 AD), the lack of any references to the Gospels indicating a pre-war time period, the chronology in the Acts of the Apostles placing Paul in this time, and the dependence on Paul's letters by other 1st-century pseudo-Pauline epistles.
Authorship
Main article: Authorship of the Pauline epistles
Paul Writing His Epistles, painting attributed to Valentin de Boulogne, 17th century
Seven of the 13 letters that bear Paul's name – Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon – are almost universally accepted as being entirely authentic (dictated by Paul himself). They are considered the best source of information on Paul's life and especially his thought.
Four of the letters (Ephesians, 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus) are widely considered pseudepigraphical, while the authorship of the other two is subject to debate.
Colossians and 2 Thessalonians are possibly "Deutero-Pauline" meaning they may have been written by Paul's followers after his death.
Similarly, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus may be "Trito-Pauline" meaning they may have been written by members of the Pauline school a generation after his death.
According to their theories, these disputed letters may have come from followers writing in Paul's name, often using material from his surviving letters.
These scribes also may have had access to letters written by Paul that no longer survive.
The authenticity of Colossians has been questioned on the grounds that it contains an otherwise unparalleled description (among his writings) of Jesus as "the image of the invisible God", a Christology found elsewhere only in the Gospel of John.
However, the personal notes in the letter connect it to Philemon, unquestionably the work of Paul.
Internal evidence shows close connection with Philippians.
Ephesians is a letter that is very similar to Colossians, but is almost entirely lacking in personal reminiscences.
Its style is unique.
It lacks the emphasis on the cross to be found in other Pauline writings, reference to the Second Coming is missing, and Christian marriage is exalted in a way that contrasts with the reference in 1 Corinthians.
Finally, according to R. E. Brown, it exalts the Church in a way suggestive of the second generation of Christians, "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets" now past.
The defenders of its Pauline authorship argue that it was intended to be read by a number of different churches and that it marks the final stage of the development of Paul's thinking.
It has been said, too, that the moral portion of the Epistle, consisting of the last two chapters, has the closest affinity with similar portions of other Epistles, while the whole admirably fits in with the known details of Paul's life, and throws considerable light upon them.
Russian Orthodox icon of the Apostle Paul, 18th century (Iconostasis of Transfiguration Church, Kizhi Monastery, Karelia, Russia)
Three main reasons have been advanced by those who question Paul's authorship of 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus, also known as the Pastoral Epistles:
They have found a difference in these letters' vocabulary, style, and theology from Paul's acknowledged writings.
Defenders of the authenticity say that they were probably written in the name and with the authority of the Apostle by one of his companions, to whom he distinctly explained what had to be written, or to whom he gave a written summary of the points to be developed, and that when the letters were finished, Paul read them through, approved them, and signed them.
There is a difficulty in fitting them into Paul's biography as it is known.
They, like Colossians and Ephesians, were written from prison but suppose Paul's release and travel thereafter.
This, again, is explainable by the possibility that Paul requested one of his companions to write the letter for him under his dictation.
Acts
Although approximately half of the Acts of the Apostles deals with Paul's life and works, Acts does not refer to Paul writing letters.
Historians believe that the author of Acts did not have access to any of Paul's letters.
One piece of evidence suggesting this is that Acts never directly quotes from the Pauline epistles.
Discrepancies between the Pauline epistles and Acts would further support the conclusion that the author of Acts did not have access to those epistles when composing Acts.
British Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby contended that Paul, as described in the Acts of the Apostles, is quite different from the view of Paul gleaned from his own writings.
Some difficulties have been noted in the account of his life.
Paul as described in the Acts of the Apostles is much more interested in factual history, less in theology; ideas such as justification by faith are absent as are references to the Spirit, according to Maccoby.
He also pointed out that there are no references to John the Baptist in the Pauline Epistles, although Paul mentions him several times in the Acts of the Apostles.
Others have objected that the language of the speeches is too Lukan in style to reflect anyone else's words.
Moreover, George Shillington writes that the author of Acts most likely created the speeches accordingly and they bear his literary and theological marks.
Conversely, Howard Marshall writes that the speeches were not entirely the inventions of the author and while they may not be accurate word-for-word, the author nevertheless records the general idea of them.
F. C. Baur (1792–1860), professor of theology at Tübingen in Germany, the first scholar to critique Acts and the Pauline Epistles, and founder of the Tübingen School of theology, argued that Paul, as the "Apostle to the Gentiles", was in violent opposition to the original 12 Apostles.
Baur considers the Acts of the Apostles were late and unreliable.
This debate has continued ever since, with Adolf Deissmann (1866–1937) and Richard Reitzenstein (1861–1931) emphasising Paul's Greek inheritance and Albert Schweitzer stressing his dependence on Judaism.
Views
Byzantine ivory relief, 6th – early 7th century (Musée de Cluny)
Self-view
In the opening verses of Romans 1, Paul provides a litany of his own apostolic appointment to preach among the Gentiles and his post-conversion convictions about the risen Christ.
Paul described himself as set apart for the gospel of God and called to be an apostle and a servant of Jesus Christ.
Jesus had revealed himself to Paul, just as he had appeared to Peter, to James, and to the twelve disciples after his resurrection.
Paul experienced this as an unforeseen, sudden, startling change, due to all-powerful grace, not as the fruit of his reasoning or thoughts.
Paul also describes himself as afflicted with "a thorn in the flesh"; the nature of this "thorn" is unknown.
There are debates as to whether Paul understood himself as commissioned to take the gospel to the gentiles at the moment of his conversion.
Before his conversion he believed his persecution of the church to be an indication of his zeal for his religion; after his conversion he believed Jewish hostility toward the church was sinful opposition, that would incur God's wrath.
Paul believed he was halted by Christ, when his fury was at its height.
It was "through zeal" that he persecuted the Church, and he obtained mercy because he had "acted ignorantly in unbelief".[note 4]
Understanding of Jesus Christ
Paul's writings emphasized the crucifixion, Christ's resurrection and the Parousia or second coming of Christ.
Paul saw Jesus as Lord (kyrios), the true messiah and the Son of God, who was promised by God beforehand, through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures.
While being a biological descendant from David ("according to the flesh"), he was declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.
According to E. P. Sanders, Paul "preached the death, resurrection, and lordship of Jesus Christ, and he proclaimed that faith in Jesus guarantees a share in his life."
In Paul's view, "Jesus' death was not a defeat but was for the believers' benefit," a sacrifice which substitutes for the lives of others, and frees them from the bondage of sin.
Believers participate in Christ's death and resurrection by their baptism.
The resurrection of Jesus was of primary importance to Paul, bringing the promise of salvation to believers.
Paul taught that, when Christ returned, those who had died believing in Christ as the saviour of mankind would be brought back to life, while those still alive would be "caught up in the clouds together with them to meet the Lord in the air".
Sanders concludes that Paul's writings reveal what he calls the essence of the Christian message: "(1) God sent his Son; (2) the Son was crucified and resurrected for the benefit of humanity; (3) the Son would soon return; and (4) those who belonged to the Son would live with him forever.
Paul's gospel, like those of others, also included (5) the admonition to live by the highest moral standard: "May your spirit and soul and body be kept sound and blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ"."
In Paul's writings, the public, corporate devotional patterns towards Jesus in the early Christian community are reflective of Paul's perspective on the divine status of Jesus in what scholars have termed a "binitarian" pattern of devotion.
For Paul, Jesus receives prayer, the presence of Jesus is confessionally invoked by believers, people are baptized in Jesus' name, Jesus is the reference in Christian fellowship for a religious ritual meal (the Lord's Supper; in pagan cults, the reference for ritual meals is always to a deity), and Jesus is the source of continuing prophetic oracles to believers.
Atonement
Main article: Atonement in Christianity
Paul taught that Christians are redeemed from sin by Jesus' death and resurrection.
His death was an expiation as well as a propitiation, and by Christ's blood peace is made between God and man.
By grace, through faith, a Christian shares in Jesus' death and in his victory over death, gaining as a free gift a new, justified status of sonship.
According to Krister Stendahl, the main concern of Paul's writings on Jesus' role, and salvation by faith, is not the individual conscience of human sinners, and their doubts about being chosen by God or not, but the problem of the inclusion of gentile (Greek) Torah observers into God's covenant.[note 10] "Dying for our sins" refers to the problem of gentile Torah-observers, who, despite their faithfulness, cannot fully observe commandments, including circumcision, and are therefore 'sinners', excluded from God's covenant.
Jesus' death and resurrection solved this problem of the exclusion of the gentiles from God's covenant, as indicated by Romans 3:21–26.
Paul's conversion fundamentally changed his basic beliefs regarding God's covenant and the inclusion of Gentiles into this covenant.
Paul believed Jesus' death was a voluntary sacrifice, that reconciled sinners with God.
The law only reveals the extent of people's enslavement to the power of sin—a power that must be broken by Christ.
Before his conversion Paul believed Gentiles were outside the covenant that God made with Israel; after his conversion, he believed Gentiles and Jews were united as the people of God in Christ.
Before his conversion he believed circumcision was the rite through which males became part of Israel, an exclusive community of God's chosen people; after his conversion he believed that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but that the new creation is what counts in the sight of God, and that this new creation is a work of Christ in the life of believers, making them part of the church, an inclusive community of Jews and Gentiles reconciled with God through faith.
According to E. P. Sanders, who initiated the New Perspective on Paul with his 1977 publication Paul and Palestinian Judaism, Paul saw the faithful redeemed by participation in Jesus' death and rising.
Though "Jesus' death substituted for that of others and thereby freed believers from sin and guilt," a metaphor derived from "ancient sacrificial theology,"[note 11] the essence of Paul's writing is not in the "legal terms" regarding the expiation of sin, but the act of "participation in Christ through dying and rising with him."[citation needed] According to Sanders, "those who are baptized into Christ are baptized into his death, and thus they escape the power of sin [...] he died so that the believers may die with him and consequently live with him." By this participation in Christ's death and rising, "one receives forgiveness for past offences, is liberated from the powers of sin, and receives the Spirit."
Relationship with Judaism
Main articles: Paul the Apostle and Judaism and New Perspective on Paul
Some scholars see Paul as completely in line with 1st-century Judaism (a Pharisee and student of Gamaliel as presented by Acts), others see him as opposed to 1st-century Judaism (see Marcionism), while the majority see him as somewhere in between these two extremes, opposed to insistence on keeping the "Ritual Laws" (for example the circumcision controversy in early Christianity) as necessary for entrance into God's New Covenant, but in full agreement on "Divine Law". These views of Paul are paralleled by the views of Biblical law in Christianity.
Paul redefined the people of Israel, those he calls the "true Israel" and the "true circumcision" as those who had faith in the heavenly Christ, thus excluding those he called "Israel after the flesh" from his new covenant.
He also held the view that the Torah given to Moses was valid "until Christ came," so that even Jews are no longer "under the Torah," nor obligated to follow the commandments or mitzvot as given to Moses.
Tabor 2013
Paul is critical both theologically and empirically of claims of moral or lineal superiority of Jews while conversely strongly sustaining the notion of a special place for the Children of Israel.
Paul's theology of the gospel accelerated the separation of the messianic sect of Christians from Judaism, a development contrary to Paul's own intent.
He wrote that faith in Christ was alone decisive in salvation for Jews and Gentiles alike, making the schism between the followers of Christ and mainstream Jews inevitable and permanent.
He argued that Gentile converts did not need to become Jews, get circumcised, follow Jewish dietary restrictions, or otherwise observe Mosaic laws to be saved.
According to Paula Fredriksen, Paul's opposition to male circumcision for Gentiles is in line with Old Testament predictions that "in the last days the gentile nations would come to the God of Israel, as gentiles (e.g., Zechariah 8:20–23), not as proselytes to Israel." For Paul, Gentile male circumcision was therefore an affront to God's intentions.
According to Hurtado, "Paul saw himself as what Munck called a salvation-historical figure in his own right," who was "personally and singularly deputized by God to bring about the predicted ingathering (the "fullness") of the nations."
According to Sanders, Paul insists that salvation is received by the grace of God; according to Sanders, this insistence is in line with Judaism of c. 200 BC until 200 AD, which saw God's covenant with Israel as an act of grace of God.
Observance of the Law is needed to maintain the covenant, but the covenant is not earned by observing the Law, but by the grace of God.
Sanders' publications have since been taken up by Professor James Dunn who coined the phrase "The New Perspective on Paul". N.T. Wright, the Anglican Bishop of Durham, notes a difference in emphasis between Galatians and Romans, the latter being much more positive about the continuing covenant between God and his ancient people than the former.
Wright also contends that performing Christian works is not insignificant but rather proof of having attained the redemption of Jesus Christ by grace (free gift received by faith). He concludes that Paul distinguishes between performing Christian works which are signs of ethnic identity and others which are a sign of obedience to Christ.
World to come
See also: Christian eschatology, Second Coming, and World to come
According to Bart Ehrman, Paul believed that Jesus would return within his lifetime.
Paul expected that Christians who had died in the meantime would be resurrected to share in God's kingdom, and he believed that the saved would be transformed, assuming heavenly, imperishable bodies.
Paul's teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his first and second letters to the Christian community of Thessalonica.
He assures them that the dead will rise first and be followed by those left alive.
This suggests an imminent end but he is unspecific about times and seasons and encourages his hearers to expect a delay.
The form of the end will be a battle between Jesus and the man of lawlessness whose conclusion is the triumph of Christ.
Before his conversion he believed God's messiah would put an end to the old age of evil, and initiate a new age of righteousness; after his conversion, he believed this would happen in stages that had begun with the resurrection of Jesus, but the old age would continue until Jesus returns.
Role of women
Paul the Apostle, (16th-century) attributed to Lucas van Leyden
Main article: Paul the Apostle and women
See also: 1 Timothy 2:12 ("I suffer not a woman")
The second chapter of the first letter to Timothy—one of the six disputed letters—is used by many churches to deny women a vote in church affairs, reject women from serving as teachers of adult Bible classes, prevent them from serving as missionaries, and generally disenfranchise women from the duties and privileges of church leadership.
— 1 Timothy 2:9–15
The King James Bible (Authorised Version) translation of this passage taken literally says that women in the churches are to have no leadership roles vis-à-vis men.
Fuller Seminary theologian J. R. Daniel Kirk finds evidence in Paul's letters of a much more inclusive view of women.
He writes that Romans 16 is a tremendously important witness to the important role of women in the early church.
Paul praises Phoebe for her work as a deaconess and Junia who is described by Paul in Scripture as being respected among the Apostles.
It is Kirk's observation that recent studies have led many scholars to conclude that the passage in 1 Corinthians 14 ordering women to "be silent" during worship was a later addition, apparently by a different author, and not part of Paul's original letter to the Corinthians.
Other scholars, such as Giancarlo Biguzzi, believe that Paul's restriction on women speaking in 1 Corinthians 14 is genuine to Paul but applies to a particular case where there were local problems of women, who were not allowed in that culture to become educated, asking questions or chatting during worship services.
He does not believe it to be a general prohibition on any woman speaking in worship settings since in 1 Corinthians Paul affirms the right (responsibility) of women to prophesy.
Biblical prophecy is more than "fore-telling": two-thirds of its inscripturated form involves "forth-telling", that is, setting the truth, justice, mercy, and righteousness of God against the backdrop of every form of denial of the same.
Thus, to speak prophetically was to speak boldly against every form of moral, ethical, political, economic, and religious disenfranchisement observed in a culture that was intent on building its own pyramid of values vis-a-vis God's established system of truth and ethics.— Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology
There were women prophets in the highly patriarchal times throughout the Old Testament.
The most common term for prophet in the Old Testament is nabi in the masculine form, and nebiah in the Hebrew feminine form, is used six times of women who performed the same task of receiving and proclaiming the message given by God.
These women include Miriam, Aaron and Moses' sister, Deborah, the prophet Isaiah's wife, and Huldah, the one who interpreted the Book of the Law discovered in the temple during the days of Josiah.
There were false prophetesses just as there were false prophets.
The prophetess Noadiah was among those who tried to intimidate Nehemiah.
Apparently they held equal rank in prophesying right along with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Elisha, Aaron, and Samuel.
Kirk's third example of a more inclusive view is Galatians 3:28:
There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.— Galatians 3:28
In pronouncing an end within the church to the divisions which are common in the world around it, he concludes by highlighting the fact that "there were New Testament women who taught and had authority in the early churches, that this teaching and authority was sanctioned by Paul, and that Paul himself offers a theological paradigm within which overcoming the subjugation of women is an anticipated outcome".
Classicist Evelyn Stagg and theologian Frank Stagg believe that Paul was attempting to "Christianize" the societal household or domestic codes that significantly oppressed women and empowered men as the head of the household.
The Staggs present a serious study of what has been termed the New Testament domestic code, also known as the Haustafel.
The two main passages that explain these "household duties" are Paul's letters to the Ephesians and to the Colossians.
An underlying Household Code is also reflected in four additional Pauline letters and 1 Peter: 1 Timothy 2:1ff, 8ff; 3:1ff, 8ff; 5:17ff; 6:1f; Titus 2:1–10 and 1 Peter.
Biblical scholars have typically treated the Haustafel in Ephesians as a resource in the debate over the role of women in ministry and in the home.
Margaret MacDonald argues that the Haustafel, particularly as it appears in Ephesians, was aimed at "reducing the tension between community members and outsiders".
E. P. Sanders has labeled Paul's remark in 1 Corinthians about women not making any sound during worship as "Paul's intemperate outburst that women should be silent in the churches". Women, in fact, played a very significant part in Paul's missionary endeavors:
He became a partner in ministry with the couple Priscilla and Aquila who are specifically named seven times in the New Testament—always by their couple name and never individually.
Of the seven times they are named in the New Testament, Priscilla's name appears first in five of those instances, suggesting to some scholars that she was the head of the family unit.
They lived, worked, and traveled with the Apostle Paul, becoming his honored, much-loved friends and coworkers in Jesus.
In Romans 16:3–4, thought to have been written in 56 or 57, Paul sends his greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and proclaims that both of them "risked their necks" to save Paul's life.
Chloe was an important member of the church in Corinth.
Phoebe was a "deacon" and a "benefactor" of Paul and others
Romans 16 names eight other women active in the Christian movement, including Junia ("prominent among the apostles"), Mary ("who has worked very hard among you"), and Julia
Women were frequently among the major supporters of the new Christian movement
Views on homosexuality
See also: Homosexuality in the New Testament
Most Christian traditions say Paul clearly portrays homosexuality as sinful in two specific locations: Romans 1:26–27, and 1 Corinthians 6:9-10. Another passage, 1 Timothy 1:8–11, addresses the topic more obliquely.
Since the 19th century, however, most scholars have concluded that 1 Timothy (along with 2 Timothy and Titus) is not original to Paul, but rather an unknown Christian writing in Paul's name some time in the late-1st to mid-2nd century.
Influence
Statue of St.
Paul (1606) by Gregorio Fernández.
Paul is widely depicted in artwork.
Paul's influence on Christian thinking arguably has been more significant than any other New Testament author.
Paul declared that "Christ is the end of the law", exalted the Christian church as the body of Christ, and depicted the world outside the Church as under judgment.
Paul's writings include the earliest reference to the "Lord's Supper", a rite traditionally identified as the Christian communion or Eucharist.
In the East, church fathers attributed the element of election in Romans 9 to divine foreknowledge.
The themes of predestination found in Western Christianity do not appear in Eastern theology.
Pauline Christianity
Main article: Pauline Christianity
Paul had a strong influence on early Christianity.
Hurtado notes that Paul regarded his own Christological views and those of his predecessors and that of the Jerusalem Church as essentially similar.
According to Hurtado, this "work[s] against the claims by some scholars that Pauline Christianity represents a sharp departure from the religiousness of Judean 'Jesus movements'."
Marcion
Main articles: Marcion and Marcionites
Marcionism, regarded as heresy by contemporary mainstream Christianity, was an Early Christian dualist belief system that originated in the teachings of Marcion of Sinope at Rome around the year 144.[note 12] Marcion asserted that Paul was the only apostle who had rightly understood the new message of salvation as delivered by Christ.
Marcion believed Jesus was the savior sent by God, and Paul the Apostle was his chief apostle, but he rejected the Hebrew Bible and the God of Israel.
Marcionists believed that the wrathful Hebrew God was a separate and lower entity than the all-forgiving God of the New Testament.
Augustine
In his account of his conversion experience, Augustine of Hippo gave his life to Christ after reading Romans 13. Augustine's foundational work on the gospel as a gift (grace), on morality as life in the Spirit, on predestination, and on original sin all derives from Paul, especially Romans.
Reformation
Main article: ReformationIn his account of his conversion Martin Luther wrote about righteousness in Romans 1 praising Romans as the perfect gospel, in which the Reformation was birthed.
Martin Luther's interpretation of Paul's writings influenced Luther's doctrine of sola fide.
John Calvin
John Calvin said the Book of Romans opens to anyone an understanding of the whole Scripture.
Modern theology
Visit any church service, Roman Catholic, Protestant or Greek Orthodox, and it is the apostle Paul and his ideas that are central – in the hymns, the creeds, the sermons, the invocation and benediction, and of course, the rituals of baptism and the Holy Communion or Mass.
Whether birth, baptism, confirmation, marriage or death, it is predominantly Paul who is evoked to express meaning and significance.
Professor James D. Tabor for the Huffington Post
See also: Pauline Christianity and Jesuism
In his commentary The Epistle to the Romans (German: Der Römerbrief; particularly in the thoroughly re-written second edition of 1922), Karl Barth argued that the God who is revealed in the cross of Jesus challenges and overthrows any attempt to ally God with human cultures, achievements, or possessions.
In addition to the many questions about the true origins of some of Paul's teachings posed by historical figures as noted above, some modern theologians also hold that the teachings of Paul differ markedly from those of Jesus as found in the Gospels.
Barrie Wilson states that Paul differs from Jesus in terms of the origin of his message, his teachings and his practices.
Some have even gone so far as to claim that, due to these apparent differences in teachings, that Paul was actually no less than the "second founder" of Christianity (Jesus being its first).
As in the Eastern tradition in general, Western humanists interpret the reference to election in Romans 9 as reflecting divine foreknowledge.
Views on Paul
Jewish views
A statue of Paul holding a scroll (symbolising the Scriptures) and the sword (symbolising his martyrdom)
Main article: Paul the Apostle and Judaism
See also: Messianic Judaism
Jewish interest in Paul is a recent phenomenon.
Before the positive historical reevaluations of Jesus by some Jewish thinkers in the 18th and 19th centuries, he had hardly featured in the popular Jewish imagination and little had been written about him by the religious leaders and scholars.
Arguably, he is absent from the Talmud and rabbinical literature, although he makes an appearance in some variants of the medieval polemic Toledot Yeshu (as a particularly effective spy for the rabbis).
However, with Jesus no longer regarded as the paradigm of gentile Christianity, Paul's position became more important in Jewish historical reconstructions of their religion's relationship with Christianity.
He has featured as the key to building barriers (e.g.
Heinrich Graetz and Martin Buber) or bridges (e.g.
Isaac Mayer Wise and Claude G. Montefiore) in interfaith relations, as part of an intra-Jewish debate about what constitutes Jewish authenticity (e.g.
Joseph Klausner and Hans Joachim Schoeps), and on occasion as a dialogical partner (e.g.
Richard L. Rubenstein and Daniel Boyarin).
He features in an oratorio (by Felix Mendelssohn), a painting (by Ludwig Meidner) and a play (by Franz Werfel), and there have been several novels about Paul (by Shalom Asch and Samuel Sandmel). Jewish philosophers (including Baruch Spinoza, Leo Shestov, and Jacob Taubes) and Jewish psychoanalysts (including Sigmund Freud and Hanns Sachs) have engaged with the apostle as one of the most influential figures in Western thought.
Scholarly surveys of Jewish interest in Paul include those by Hagner 1980, pp. 143–65, Meissner 1996, Langton 2010, Langton 2011a, pp. 55–72 and Langton 2011b, pp. 585–87.
Gnosticism
In the 2nd (and possibly late 1st) century, Gnosticism was a competing religious tradition to Christianity which shared some elements of theology.
Elaine Pagels concentrated on how the Gnostics interpreted Paul's letters and how evidence from gnostic sources may challenge the assumption that Paul wrote his letters to combat "gnostic opponents" and to repudiate their statement that they possess secret wisdom.[page needed]
Muslim views
Muslims have long believed that Paul purposefully corrupted the original revealed teachings of Jesus, through the introduction of such elements as paganism, the making of Christianity into a theology of the cross, and introducing original sin and the need for redemption.
Sayf ibn Umar claimed that certain rabbis persuaded Paul to deliberately misguide early Christians by introducing what Ibn Hazm viewed as objectionable doctrines into Christianity.
Ibn Hazm repeated Sayf's claims.
The Karaite scholar Jacob Qirqisani also believed that Paul created Christianity by introducing the doctrine of Trinity.
Paul has been criticized by some modern Muslim thinkers.
Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas wrote that Paul misrepresented the message of Jesus, and Rashid Rida accused Paul of introducing shirk (polytheism) into Christianity.
Mohammad Ali Jouhar quoted Adolf von Harnack's critical writings of Paul.
In Sunni Muslim polemics, Paul plays the same role (of deliberately corrupting the early teachings of Jesus) as a later Jew, Abdullah ibn Saba', would play in seeking to destroy the message of Islam from within.
Among those who supported this view were scholars Ibn Taymiyyah (who believed while Paul ultimately succeeded, Ibn Saba failed) and Ibn Hazm (who claimed that the Jews even admitted to Paul's sinister purpose).
Other views
The critics of Paul the Apostle include US president Thomas Jefferson, a Deist, who wrote that Paul was the "first corrupter of the doctrines of Jesus." Christian anarchists Leo Tolstoy and Ammon Hennacy took a similar view.
In the Baha'i faith, scholars have various viewpoints on Paul.
Discussions in Bahá'í scholarship have focused on whether Paul changed the original message of Christ or delivered the true Gospel, with proponents of both positions.
See also
Achaicus of Corinth
Collegiate Parish Church of St Paul's Shipwreck
List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources
New Perspective on Paul
Old Testament: Christian views of the Law
Paul, Apostle of Christ, 2018 film
Pauline mysticism
Pauline privilege
Persecution of Christians in the New Testament
Persecution of religion in ancient Rome
Peter and Paul, 1981 miniseries
Psychagogy
St.
Paul's Cathedral
References
Notes
Latin: Paulus; Ancient Greek: Παῦλος, romanized: Paulos; Coptic: ⲡⲁⲩⲗⲟⲥ; Biblical Hebrew: פאולוס השליח
Biblical Hebrew: שאול התרסי, romanized: Sha'ūl ha-Tarsī; Arabic: بولس الطرسوسي; Ancient Greek: Σαῦλος Ταρσεύς, romanized: Saũlos Tarseús; Turkish: Tarsuslu Pavlus; Latin: Paulus Tarsensis
a b Acts 8:1 "at Jerusalem"; Acts 9:13 "at Jerusalem"; Acts 9:21 "in Jerusalem"; Acts 26:10 "in Jerusalem". In Galatians 1:13, Paul states that he "persecuted the church of God and tried to destroy it," but does not specify where he persecuted the church.
In Galatians 1:22 he states that more than three years after his conversion he was "still unknown by sight to the churches of Judea that are in Christ," seemingly ruling out Jerusalem as the place he had persecuted Christians.
Tertullian knew the Letter to the Hebrews as being "under the name of Barnabas" (De Pudicitia, chapter 20 where Tertullian quotes Hebrews 6:4–8); Origen, in his now lost Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews, is reported by Eusebius as having written "if any Church holds that this epistle is by Paul, let it be commended for this.
For not without reason have the ancients handed it down as Paul's.
But who wrote the epistle, in truth, God knows.
The statement of some who have gone before us is that Clement, bishop of the Romans, wrote the epistle, and of others, that Luke, the author of the Gospel and the Acts, wrote it
Paul's undisputed epistles are 1 Thessalonians, Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Philippians, and Philemon.
The six letters believed by some to have been written by Paul are Ephesians, Colossians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus.
a b c 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus may be "Trito-Pauline", meaning they may have been written by members of the Pauline school a generation after his death.
The only indication as to who is leading is in the order of names.
At first, the two are referred to as Barnabas and Paul, in that order.
Later in the same chapter, the team is referred to as Paul and his companions.
This clause is not found in some major sources: Codex Sinaiticus, Codex Alexandrinus, Codex Vaticanus or Codex Laudianus
Paul does not exactly say that this was his second visit.
In Galatians, he lists three important meetings with Peter, and this was the second on his list.
The third meeting took place in Antioch.
He does not explicitly state that he did not visit Jerusalem in between this and his first visit.
Note that Paul only writes that he is on his way to Jerusalem, or just planning the visit.
There might or might not have been additional visits before or after this visit, if he ever got to Jerusalem.
Sanders 2019: "Paul [...] only occasionally had the opportunity to revisit his churches.
He tried to keep up his converts' spirit, answer their questions, and resolve their problems by letter and by sending one or more of his assistants (especially Timothy and Titus).
Paul's letters reveal a remarkable human being: dedicated, compassionate, emotional, sometimes harsh and angry, clever and quick-witted, supple in argumentation, and above all possessing a soaring, passionate commitment to God, Jesus Christ, and his own mission.
Fortunately, after his death one of his followers collected some of the letters, edited them very slightly, and published them.
They constitute one of history's most remarkable personal contributions to religious thought and practice.
Dunn 1982, p. n.49 quotes Stendahl 1976, p. 2 "... a doctrine of faith was hammered out by Paul for the very specific and limited purpose of defending the rights of Gentile converts to be full and genuine heirs to the promise of God to Israel"
Westerholm 2015, pp. 4–15: "For Paul, the question that 'justification by faith' was intended to answer was, 'On what terms can Gentiles gain entrance to the people of God?" Bent on denying any suggestion that Gentiles must become Jews and keep the Jewish law, he answered, 'By faith—and not by works of the (Jewish) law.'" Westerholm refers to: Stendahl 1963
Westerholm quotes Sanders: "Sanders noted that 'the salvation of the Gentiles is essential to Paul's preaching; and with it falls the law; for, as Paul says simply, Gentiles cannot live by the law'. (496). On a similar note, Sanders suggested that the only Jewish 'boasting' to which Paul objected was that which exulted over the divine privileges granted to Israel and failed to acknowledge that God, in Christ, had opened the door of salvation to Gentiles."
According to the Jewish Encyclopedia (1906), "The Mishnah says that sins are expiated (1) by sacrifice, (2) by repentance at death or on Yom Kippur, (3) in the case of the lighter transgressions of the positive or negative precepts, by repentance at any time [...] The graver sins, according to Rabbi, are apostasy, heretical interpretation of the Torah, and non-circumcision (Yoma 86a). The atonement for sins between a man and his neighbor is an ample apology (Yoma 85b)."
The Jewish Encyclopedia further writes: "Most efficacious seemed to be the atoning power of suffering experienced by the righteous during the Exile.
This is the idea underlying the description of the suffering servant of God in Isa. liii. 4, 12, Hebr. [...] of greater atoning power than all the Temple sacrifices was the suffering of the elect ones who were to be servants and witnesses of the Lord (Isa. xlii. 1–4, xlix. 1–7, l. 6). This idea of the atoning power of the suffering and death of the righteous finds expression also in IV Macc. vi. 27, xvii. 21–23; M. Ḳ. 28a; Pesiḳ. xxvii. 174b; Lev. R. xx.; and formed the basis of Paul's doctrine of the atoning blood of Christ (Rom. iii. 25)."
115 years and 6 months from the Crucifixion, according to Tertullian's reckoning in Adversus Marcionem, xv
Citations
"Saul of Tarsus: Rooted in Three Worlds". In the Footsteps of Paul.
PBS. 2003. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
a b c Brown 1997, p. 436.
Harris 2003, p. 42: He was probably martyred in Rome about 64–65 AD
a b Harris 2003.
Domar: the calendrical and liturgical cycle of the Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church, Armenian Orthodox Theological Research Institute, 2003, p. 446.
Acts 22:3
Brown 1997, p. 442.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Sanders 2019.
a b c Powell 2009.
Dunn 2001, p. 577, Ch 32.
Rhoads 1996, p. 39.
Acts 26:5
Dunn 2009, pp. 345–346.
Acts 8:1
Acts 9:2
Acts 26:13–14
Acts 22:7–9
Acts 22:11
Acts 9:3–22
Brown 1997, p. 407.
Eusebius (1885). "Book VI/Chapter 25" . Church History . S.13 – via Wikisource.
a b Brown, Fitzmyer & Murphy 1990, p. 920, col.2, Ch 60:2.
Kümmel 1975, pp. 392–94, 401–03.
"Paul and His Influence in Early Christianity". United Methodist Church.
Archived from the original on 23 August 2000.
Carson & Moo 2009.
Aageson 2008, p. 1.
a b c d Dunn 2003, p. 21.
a.
Marrow, Stanley B. (1986). Paul: His Letters and His Theology : an Introduction to Paul's Epistles.
Paulist Press. pp. 5, 7. ISBN 978-0809127443.
b. "Why did God change Saul's name to Paul?". Catholic Answers.
Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2014.
Acts 22:25–29
Greek lexicon G4569 Σαύλος (Saul)Greek lexicon G3972 Παύλος (Paul)Hebrew lexicon H7586 שׁאוּל (Shaul/Saul)
Acts 16:37, 22:25–28
a b c d e f Prat 1911.
Lewis & Short 1879, Paulus: "a Roman surname (not a praenomen;)".
Cole 1989.
Acts 9:4; 22:7; 26:14
Acts 26:14
Acts 9:11
Acts 9:17; 22:13
Acts 13:9
1 Corinthians 9:19–23
"Why did God change Saul's name to Paul?". Catholic Answers.
Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2014.
a b Dunn 2003, pp. 19–20.
a b c d e f g h i j k l Cross & Livingstone 2005, St Paul.
a b Martin, Dale B. (2009). "Introduction to the New Testament History and Literature – 5. The New Testament as History". Open Yale Courses.
Yale University.
Ehrman 2000, pp. 262–65.
Ladeuze 1909.
White 2007, pp. 145–47.
Koester 2000, p. 107.
Acts 16:37,Acts 22:25–29
a b Wright 1974, p. 404.
Philippians 3:5
a b c d Dunn 2003, pp. 21–22.
Acts 23:6
Dunn 2003, p. 22.
Acts 23:16
a b Romans 16:7
2 Timothy 1:3
Philippians 3:5–6
Acts 18:1–3
Dunn 2003, pp. 41–42.
Acts 18:3
Romans 16:4
Acts 22:3
Acts 23:16
Acts 7:58–60; 22:20
Dunn 2009, pp. 242–44.
Bruce 2000, p. 43.
Lee 2006, pp. 13–26.
Kee 1983, p. 208.
Galatians 1:13–14, Philippians 3:6, Acts 8:1–3
Dunn 2009, pp. 246–47, 277.
Dunn 2009, pp. 246–47.
a b Dunn 2009, p. 277.
a b Bromiley 1979, p. 689.
Barnett 2002, p. 21.
Niswonger 1992, p. 200.
Galatians 1:16
1 Corinthians 15:8
Acts 9:4–5
Acts 9:1–22
Acts 9:17
Acts 9:18
Aslan 2014, p. 184.
McRay 2007, p. 66.
Eskola 2001.
Churchill 2010.
Acts 9:20–22
Hengel 1997, p. 43.
2 Corinthians 11:32
Galatians 1:17
Lake 1911, pp. 320–23.
Wright 1996, pp. 683–92.
Hengel 2002, pp. 47–66.
Galatians 1:13–24
Galatians 4:24–25
Galatians 1:11–16
Harris 2003, p. 517.
Galatians 1:22–24
a b Galatians 2:1–10
Barnett 2005, p. 200.
Dunn 2009, p. 369.
Acts 11:26
Dunn 2009, p. 297.
Dunn 2009.
Ogg 1962.
Barnett 2005, p. 83.
Acts 11:26
Acts 13–14
Dunn 2009, p. 370.
Acts 13:8–12
"Saul Of Tarsus (known as Paul, the Apostle of the Heathen)". JewishEncyclopedia.com. 2011. Retrieved 12 February 2020. His quotations from Scripture, which are all taken, directly or from memory, from the Greek version, betray no familiarity with the original Hebrew text (…) Nor is there any indication in Paul's writings or arguments that he had received the rabbinical training ascribed to him by Christian writers
Acts 13:13–48
Acts 14:28
Spence-Jones 2015, p. 16.
Brown 1997, p. 445.
Brown 1997, pp. 428–29.
Brown 1997, pp. 428–29, 445.
Acts 15:2
Galatians 2:1
a b c d Bechtel 1910.
Acts 15:2,Galatians 2:1
a b c White 2007, pp. 148–49.
Acts 11:27–30
a b Galatians 1:18–20
Bruce 2000, p. 151.
a b c Galatians 2:11–14
White 2007, p. 170.
McGrath 2006.
Mills 2003, pp. 1109–10.
Köstenberger, Kellum & Quarles 2009, p. 400.
Acts 16:6–10
Acts 16:5
Acts 16:16–24}
Acts 16:25–40
Acts 18:2
Acts 18:18–21
Acts 18:18
Driscoll 1911.
Acts 18:19–21
Acts 18:21
"Pulpit Commentary on Acts 18". biblehub.com.
Retrieved 4 October 2015.
Acts 21:29
Crease 2019, pp. 309–10.
Acts 20:34
McRay 2007, p. 185.
Jerusalem Bible (1966), Introduction to Saint Paul, p. 260
a b Acts 20:1–2
Sanday n.d., p. 202.
Romans 15:19
Burton 2000, p. 26.
Petit 1909.
Acts 21:8–10, Acts 21:15
1st Clement – Lightfoot translation Early Christian Writings
After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, [5:6] having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance".
Where Lightfoot has "had preached" above, the Hoole translation has "having become a herald".
See also the endnote (3) by Arthur Cleveland Coxe on the last page of wikisource 1st Clement regarding Paul's preaching in Britain.
Chrysostom's Homilies on 2 Timothy, verse 4:20
Cyril on Paul and gifts of the Holy Ghost (Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series II Volume VII, Lecture 17, para. 26)
The Muratorian Fragment lines 38–39 Bible Research
Acts 9:26–27
Galatians 1:17–18
Acts 11:29–30, Acts 12:25
Acts 11:30, 12:25
Acts 15
Galatians 2:1
Acts 15:1–19
Acts 15:36–40
Acts 18:21–22
Acts 21:17ff
Acts 24:17
Romans 15:25, 2 Corinthians 8–9, 1 Corinthians 16:1–3
Acts 21:21
Acts 21:22–26
Acts 21:27–36
Acts 22:22
Acts 22:30
Acts 23:10
Acts 23:12
Acts 23:23
Acts 24:1
Acts 24:22
Acts 24:23
a b Capes, Reeves & Richards 2011, p. 203.
Acts 27:39–44
Acts 28:1–10
Acts 28:11–14
Acts 28:30–31
Irenaeus Against Heresies 3.3.2: the "...Church founded and organized at Rome by the two most glorious apostles, Peter and Paul; as also [by pointing out] the faith preached to men, which comes down to our time by means of the successions of the bishops. [...] The blessed apostles, then, having founded and built up the Church, committed into the hands of Linus the office of the episcopate"; Christian Classics Ethereal Library
Acts 28:14–15
Romans 1:1, 7, 11–13; 15:23–29
MaGee Greg. "The Origins of the Church at Rome" Bible.org; Accessed 18 March 2013
2 Timothy 4:13
Brown 1984, pp. 31–46.
Pope Clement I, First Epistle to the Corinthians, 5:7
Ignatius of Antioch, Epistle to the Ephesians, 12:55
Eusebius, Church History, Book 2, Chapter 22, Paragraph 3
Eusebius, Church History, Book 2, Chapter 25, Paragraph 8
Tertullian, De Praescriptione Haereticorum, Chapter 36
Lactantius. "Of the Manner in Which the Persecutors Died, addressed to Donatus". ccel.org.
Jerome, De Viris Illustribus, Chapter 5
John Chrysostom, Concerning the Lowliness of Mind, Chapter 4
Sulpicius Severus, Chronica, Chapter 29
a b Ratzinger, Joseph Aloisius (2009). General Audience of 4 February 2009: St Paul's martyrdom and heritage.
Paul VI Audience Hall, Rome: Libreria Editrice Vaticana.
Retrieved 1 April 2016.
De Leonardis & Masi 1999, p. 21.
James 1924.
Who was Lucina? by Hedvig Ehrenheim (University of Stockholm)
a b c Eusebius (1885). "Book II/Chapter 25" . Church History  – via Wikisource.
Jerome. "On Illustrious Men : Chapter 5". New Advent.
Retrieved 3 June 2015.
Silver 2013, p. 18.
St Paul's tomb unearthed in Rome from BBC News (8 December 2006); Vatican to open Apostle Paul's tomb
"Remains of St.
Paul confirmed". The Washington Times. 29 June 2009.
Brown & Meier 1983, p. 124.
Butler 1866, 30 June: St.
Paul, the Apostle.
2 Timothy 4:13
Cuming, H. Syer (December 1870). "Notes on a group of reliquaries". Journal of the British Archaeological Association.
"Chambers' The Book of Days". 1869. Retrieved 9 February 2012.
"The Calendar". The Church of England.
Retrieved 27 March 2021.
Barnstone 1984, p. 447.
Malherbe 1986, p. 170.
Budge 1901, p. 531, The History of the Contending of Saint Paul.
Budge 1901, p. 501, The Acts of Saint Peter.
Barnes 1844, p. 212.
a b c Aune 2010, p. 9.
a b Dunn & Rogerson 2003, p. 1274.
a b Perkins 1988, pp. 4–7.
1 Corinthians 11:17–34
Powell 2009, p. 234.
Wiley 2002, p. 21.
Donaldson 2010, p. 53.
Donaldson 2010, p. 39.
Bitner 2015, p. 268.
Andria 2012, p. 271.
Dunn 2010, pp. 170–71.
MacDonald & Harrington 2000, p. 58.
1 Corinthians 7:8–9
Brown 1984, p. 48.
a b Aherne 1908.
Barrett 1963, pp. 4ff.
Ehrman 2006, p. 98.
Williams 1957, pp. 22, 240.
Shillington 2007, p. 18.
Marshall 1980, p. 42.
Romans 1
Galatians 1:16
1 Corinthians 9:1
Galatians 1:12–15, 1 Corinthians 15:10
2 Corinthians 12:7
Coogan, Michael D.; Brettler, Marc Z.; Newsom, Carol A.; Perkins, Pheme, eds. (2010). "The Second Letter Of Paul To The Corinthians". The New Oxford Annotated Bible: New Revised Standard Version With The Apocrypha (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 2038. [Footnote 7] Nature of the thorn is unknown.
Horrell 2006, p. 30.
a b Philippians 3:6
1 Thessalonians 2:14–16
a b Powell 2009, p. 236.
Acts 9:1–2
1 Timothy 1:13
Romans 1:3
1 Thessalonians 4:14–18
1 Thessalonians 5:23
1 Corinthians 1:2
2 Corinthians 12:8–9
1 Thessalonians 3:11
1 Corinthians 16:22
Romans 10:9–13
Philippians 2:10–11
1 Corinthians 6:11
Romans 6:3
1 Corinthians 11:17–34
1 Thessalonians 4:15–17
Hurtado 2005, pp. 134–52.
Cross & Livingstone 2005, Atonement.
Ephesians 2:8–9
Galatians 4:4–7
Stendahl 1963.
Dunn 1982, p. n.49.
Finlan 2004, p. 2.
Westerholm 2015, pp. 4–15.
Gal 2.14
Mack 1997, pp. 88–89, 92.
Mack 1997, pp. 91–92.
Romans 5:6–10, Philippians 2:8
Romans 3:20b, Romans 7:7–12
Galatians 3:28
Philippians 3:3–5
Galatians 6:15
Romans 6:4
Jewish Encyclopedia, SIN
Jewish Encyclopedia (1906), ATONEMENT
Orr 1915, p. 2276.
a b c Sanders 1977.
Dunn 1982.
Galatians 6:16
Philippians 3:3
Galatians 3–4
Romans 2:16–26
Romans 9–11
Zechariah 8:20–23
a b c Larry Hurtado (4 December 2018 ), "When Christians were Jews": Paula Fredriksen on "The First Generation"
Romans 11:25
Cooper 2014. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCooper2014 (help)
a b Sanders 1983.
Dunn 1982, pp. 95–122.
a b "New Perspectives on Paul". Ntwrightpage.com. 28 August 2003. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Romans 2:13ff
Ehrman 2006.
1 Corinthians 15:51–53
1 Thessalonians 4:16ff
Rowland 1985, p. 113.
2 Thessalonians 2:3
Romans 16:25,  1 Corinthians 10:11, Galatians 1:4
Kroeger & Kroeger 1998.
1 Timothy 2:9–15
Wright 2006, pp. 5–10.
Kirk, J. R. Daniel. "Faculty". fuller.edu.
Archived from the original on 24 April 2012.
1 Corinthians 14
1 Corinthians 11
Giguzzi 2004, pp. 95–107.
a b c "Prophet, Prophetess, Prophecy". Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology.
Exodus 15:20
Judges 4:4
Isaiah 8:3
2 Kings 22:14, 2 Chronicles 34:22
Nehemiah 6:14
Galatians 3:28
Kirk 2012.
Stagg & Stagg 1978.
Ephesians 5:22–6:5
Colossians 3:18–4:1
Titus 2:1–10
1 Peter 3:1–9
Gombis 2005, pp. 317–30.
MacDonald 2004, p. 109.
1 Corinthians 14:34–36
Achtemeier 1985, p. 882.
Keller 2010.
Romans 16:3–4
1 Corinthians 1:11
Romans 16:1–2
Romans 16
"Catechism of the Catholic Church – Article 6: The sixth commandment". vatican.va. 10 January 1951.
M. Mikhail. "The Coptic Orthodox Church's View on Homosexuality."
"Christianity and Homosexuality". CARM – The Christian Apologetics & Research Ministry. 25 November 2008.
Romans 1:26–27
1 Corinthians 6:9–10
1 Timothy 1:8–11
Ehrman 2000, p. 393.
Collins 2002, p. 4.
Romans 10:4
1 Corinthians 10:14–17, 1 Corinthians 11:17–34
Romans 9
Hurtado 2005, p. 160.
Mack 1995.
"Guzik". 15 December 2015.
Augustine 2019, pp. 354–430.
Herrmann 2016, pp. 475–488.
Parker 1993.
"Christianity Before Paul". HuffPost. 29 November 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2017.
Maccoby 1998, p. 14.
Wilson 2011, chapters 9, 10, 12.
Dwyer 1998, p. 27.
Wrede 1907, p. 179.
Langton (2010), pp. 23–56
Langton (2010), pp. 57–96
Langton (2010), pp. 97–153
Langton (2010), pp. 154–76
Langton (2010), pp. 178–209
Langton (2010), pp. 210–30
Langton (2010), pp. 234–62
Langton (2010), pp. 263–78
Pagels 1992.
Hindson & Caner 2008, p. 280.
De Young 2004, p. 60.
a b Riddell 2001, p. 235.
a b Waardenburg 1999, p. 276.
a b Waardenburg 1999, p. 255.
De Young 2004, p. 64.
a b c Adang 1996, pp. 105–06.
a b Anthony 2011, p. 68.
a b Brann 2010, pp. 65–66.
Pall 2013, p. 55.
Jefferson 1854.
Tolstoy 1891, p. 17
Hennacy 2010
"Christianity from a Bahá'í Perspective". bahai-library.com.
Retrieved 26 December 2021.
Bibliography
Aageson, James W. (2008). Paul, the Pastoral Epistles, and the Early Church.
Hendrickson.
ISBN 978-1-59856-041-1.
Achtemeier, Paul J. (1985). Harper's Bible dictionary.
Harper & Row.
ISBN 978-0-06-069862-1 – via Society of Biblical Literature.
Adang, Camilla (1996). Muslim Writers on Judaism and the Hebrew Bible: From Ibn Rabban to Ibn Hazm.
Brill.
ISBN 978-90-04-10034-3.
Aherne, Cornelius (1908). "Epistle to the Colossians" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Anthony, Sean (2011). The Caliph and the Heretic: Ibn Sabaʾ and the Origins of Shīʿism.
Brill.
ISBN 978-90-04-21606-8.
Andria, Solomon (2012). Romans.
Harpercollins Christian Pub.
ISBN 978-9966-003-06-5.
Aslan, Reza (2014). Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth.
Random House.
ISBN 978-0-8129-8148-3.
Augustine (2019).  Thomas Williams (ed.). Confessions.
Hackett.
ISBN 978-1-62466-782-4. OCLC 1057245526.
Aulén, Gustaf.
Christus Victor (SPCK 1931)
Aune, David E. (2010). The Blackwell Companion to The New Testament.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-1-4443-1894-4.
Barnes, Albert (1844). Notes on the New Testament Explanatory and Practical.
Vol. VI. II. Corinthians and Galatians.
Glasgow: Blackie & Son.
Barrett, C. K. (1963). The Pastoral Epistles.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Barnett, Paul (2002). Jesus and the Rise of Early Christianity: A History of New Testament Times.
InterVarsity Press.
ISBN 978-0-8308-2699-5.
Barnett, Paul (2005). The Birth of Christianity: The First Twenty Years.
Wm. B. Eerdmans.
ISBN 978-0-8028-2781-4.
Barnstone, Willis (1984). The Other Bible.
Harper & Row.
ISBN 978-0-06-250031-1.
Bitner, Bradley J. (2015). Paul's Political Strategy in 1 Corinthians 1-4. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-1-107-08848-1.
Bechtel, Florentine Stanislaus (1910). "Judaizers" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Black, C. Clifton; Smith, D. Moody; Spivey, Robert A., eds. (2019) . "Paul: Apostle to the Gentiles". Anatomy of the New Testament (8th ed.). Minneapolis: Fortress Press. pp. 187–226. doi:10.2307/j.ctvcb5b9q.17. ISBN 978-1-5064-5711-6. OCLC 1082543536. S2CID 242771713.
Brann, Ross (2010). Power in the Portrayal: Representations of Jews and Muslims in Eleventh- and Twelfth-Century Islamic Spain.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-14673-7.
Bromiley, Geoffrey William (1979). The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia.
Vol. A–D. Wm. B. Eerdmans.
ISBN 978-0-8028-3781-3.
Brown, Raymond Edward; Meier, John P. (1983). Antioch and Rome: New Testament Cradles of Catholic Christianity.
Paulist Press.
ISBN 978-0-8091-2532-6.
Brown, Raymond Edward (1984). The Churches the Apostles Left Behind.
Paulist Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-8091-2611-8.
Brown, Raymond Edward; Fitzmyer, Joseph A.; Murphy, Roland Edmund (1990). The New Jerome Biblical Commentary. G. Chapman.
ISBN 978-0-225-66640-3.
Brown, Raymond Edward (1997). An Introduction to the New Testament.
Doubleday.
ISBN 978-0-385-24767-2.
Bruce, F. F. "Is the Paul of Acts the Real Paul?" Bulletin John Rylands Library 58 (1976) 283–305
Bruce, Frederick Fyvie (2000). Paul: Apostle of the Heart Set Free.
Eerdmans.
ISBN 978-0-8028-4778-2.
Budge, E.A. Wallis (1901). The Contendings of the Twelve Apostles: Being the Histories and the Lives and Martyrdomes and Deaths of the Twelve Apostles and Evangelists.
Vol. 2. The English Translation.
London: Henry Frowde.
Burton, Ernest de Witt (2000). A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians. A&C Black.
ISBN 978-0-567-05029-8.
Butler, Alban (1866). "Saint Paul, the Apostle.
June 30". The Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Other Principal Saints.
Compiled from Original Monuments and Authentic Records.
Vol. VI: June.
Dublin: James Duffy – via bartleby.com.
Calisi, Antonio. (February 2021). Paul Apostle of Christ: Call, Journeys, Epistles, Teachings, Martyrdom.
ISBN 978-9-9189-5171-0.
Capes, David B.; Reeves, Rodney; Richards, E. Randolph (2011). Rediscovering Paul: An Introduction to His World, Letters and Theology.
InterVarsity Press.
ISBN 978-0-8308-3941-4.
Carson, D. A.; Moo, Douglas J. (2009). An Introduction to the New Testament.
Zondervan.
ISBN 978-0-310-53955-1.
Churchill, Timothy W. R. (2010). Divine Initiative and the Christology of the Damascus Road Encounter.
Eugene: Pickwick.
Conzelmann, Hans, The Acts of the Apostles – A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles (Augsburg Fortress 1987)
Cole, R. Alan (1989). The Letter of Paul to the Galatians: An Introduction and Commentary.
Wm. B. Eerdmans.
ISBN 978-0-8028-0478-5.
Collins, Raymond F. (2002). 1 & 2 Timothy and Titus: A Commentary.
Westminster John Knox Press.
ISBN 978-0-664-22247-5.
Crease, Robert P. (18 March 2019). "The rise and fall of scientific authority – and how to bring it back". Nature. 567 (7748): 309–10. Bibcode:2019Natur.567..309C. doi:10.1038/d41586-019-00872-w.
S2CID 81987842. Hanging in the Louvre Museum in Paris is an imposing painting, The Preaching of St Paul at Ephesus.
In this 1649 work by Eustache Le Sueur, the fiery apostle lifts his right hand as if scolding the audience, while clutching a book of scripture in his left.
Among the rapt or fearful listeners are people busily throwing books into a fire.
Look carefully, and you see geometric images on some of the pages.
Cross, F. L.; Livingstone, E. A., eds. (2005), The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd Revised ed.), Oxford: University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3
De Leonardis, Serena; Masi, Stefano (1999). Art and History: Rome and the Vatican.
Casa Editrice Bonechi.
ISBN 978-88-476-0178-9.
De Young, James (2004). Terrorism, Islam, and Christian Hope: Reflections on 9-11 and Resurging Islam.
Wipf and Stock.
ISBN 978-1-59752-005-8.
Donaldson, Terence (2010). "Ch. 3 Introduction to the Pauline Corpus".  In John Muddiman; John Barton (eds.). The Pauline Epistles.
The Oxford Bible Commentary.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-958026-2.
Driscoll, James F. (1911). "Nazarite" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 10. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Dunn, James D. G. (1982). "The New Perspective on Paul". Bulletin of the John Rylands Library.
Manson Memorial Lecture, 4 November 1982. 65 (2): 95–122. doi:10.7227/BJRL.65.2.6.
Dunn, James D. G. (1990), Jesus, Paul, and the Law: Studies in Mark and Galatians, Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, ISBN 0-664-25095-5
Dunn, James (2001).  McDonald, Lee Martin; Sanders, James A. (eds.). The Canon Debate.
Baker.
ISBN 978-1-4412-4163-4.
Dunn, James D. G., ed. (2003), The Cambridge Companion to St.
Paul, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-78155-8
Dunn, James D. G. (2009), Christianity in the Making Volume 2: Beginning from Jerusalem, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing
Dunn, J.D.G. (2010). "Ch. 8 Ephesians".  In John Muddiman; John Barton (eds.). The Pauline Epistles.
The Oxford Bible Commentary.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-958026-2.
Dunn, James D. G., Jesus, Paul, and the Gospels (Grand Rapids, MI), Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2011
Dwyer, John C. (1998). Church History: Twenty Centuries of Catholic Christianity.
Paulist Press.
ISBN 978-0-8091-3830-2.
Dunn, James D. G.; Rogerson, John William, eds. (2003). Eerdmans Commentary on the Bible.
Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8028-3711-0.
Ehrman, Bart D. (2000). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings.
Oxford: University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-512639-6.
Ehrman, Bart D (2006). Peter, Paul and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in History and Legend.
Oxford: University Press. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-19-974113-7.
Eisenman, Robert (1996). "Paul as Herodian". Journal of Higher Criticism. 3 (1): 110–22. Retrieved 13 February 2020.
Eskola, Timo (2001). Messiah and the Throne: Jewish Merkabah Mysticism and Early Exaltation Discourse.
Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck.
Finlan, Stephen (2004), The Background and Content of Paul's Cultic Atonement Metaphors, Society of Biblical Literature
Freeman, Charles (2010). "What Did Paul Achieve?". A New History of Early Christianity.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press. pp. 45–65. doi:10.12987/9780300166583. ISBN 978-0-300-12581-8. JSTOR j.ctt1nq44w.
LCCN 2009012009. S2CID 170124789.
Giguzzi, Giancarlo (2004), "Paolo, un apostolo contro le donne?", Credere Oggi: in dialogo con San Paolo e le sue lettere, Padova: Edizioni Messaggero, no. 124, pp. 95–107
Gombis, Timothy (June 2005). "A Radically Different New Humanity: The Function of the Haustafel in Ephesians" (PDF). Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society. 48 (2): 317–30. Retrieved 14 February 2013.
Hagner, Donald (1980).  Hagner, Donald (ed.). Paul in Modern Jewish Thought in Pauline Studies.
Exeter: Paternoster Press.
Hanson, Anthony T. Studies in Paul's Technique and Theology.
Eerdmans, 1974. ISBN 0-8028-3452-3
Harris, Stephen L. (2003). Understanding the Bible.
McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 978-0-7674-2916-0. OCLC 436028175.
Hengel, Martin (1997). Paul Between Damascus and Antioch: The Unknown Years.
Westminster John Knox Press.
ISBN 978-0-664-25736-1.
Hengel, Martin (2002). "Paul in Arabia" (PDF). Bulletin for Biblical Research. 12 (1): 47–66. doi:10.2307/26422340. JSTOR 26422340. S2CID 53622634.
Hennacy, Ammon (2010). The Book of Ammon.
Wipf and Stock.
ISBN 978-1-60899-053-5.
Herrmann, Erik H. (2016). Preface to the Wittenberg Edition of Luther's German Writings, 1539. The Annotated Luther, Volume 4. Augsburg Fortress. doi:10.2307/j.ctt19qgg0d.20. ISBN 978-1-4514-6510-5.
Hindson, Ed; Caner, Ergun (2008). The Popular Encyclopedia of Apologetics: Surveying the Evidence for the Truth of Christianity.
Harvest House.
ISBN 978-0-7369-3635-4.
Horrell, David G. (2006). An Introduction to the Study of Paul (2nd ed.). A&C Black.
ISBN 978-0-567-04083-1.
Hurtado, Larry (2005). Lord Jesus Christ: Devotion to Jesus in Earliest Christianity.
Eerdmans.
ISBN 978-0-8028-3167-5.
Irenaeus, Against Heresies
James, Montague Rhodes (1924). "The Acts of Paul". The Apocryphal New Testament.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jefferson, Thomas (1854).  H. A. Washington (ed.). The Writings of Thomas Jefferson: Being his Autobiography, Correspondence, Reports, Messages, Addresses, and Other Writings, Official and Private.
Published by the Order of the Joint Committee of Congress on the Library, from the Original Manuscripts, Deposited in the Department of State, With Explanatory Notes, Tables of Contents, and a Copious Index to Each Volume, as well as a General Index to the Whole.
Vol. VII. Washington, D.C.: Taylor Maury.
Kee, Howard Clark (1983). Understanding the New Testament.
Prentice-Hall.
ISBN 978-0-13-936591-1.
Keller, Marie Noël (2010). Priscilla and Aquila: Paul's Coworkers in Christ Jesus.
Liturgical Press.
ISBN 978-0-8146-5284-8.
Kim, Yung Suk.
A Theological Introduction to Paul's Letters.
Eugene, Oregon: Cascade Books, 2011. ISBN 978-1-60899-793-0
Kirk, J. R. Daniel (2012). Jesus Have I Loved, but Paul?: A Narrative Approach to the Problem of Pauline Christianity.
Baker Academic.
ISBN 978-1-4412-3625-8.
Koester, Helmut (2000). History and Literature of Early Christianity.
Walter de Gruyter.
ISBN 978-3-11-014970-8.
Köstenberger, Andreas J.; Kellum, Leonard Scott; Quarles, Charles L. (2009). The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An Introduction to the New Testament. B&H. ISBN 978-0-8054-4365-3.
Kroeger, Richard Clark; Kroeger, Catherine Clark (1998). I Suffer Not a Woman: Rethinking I Timothy 2:11–15 in Light of Ancient Evidence.
Baker.
ISBN 978-0-8010-5250-7.
Kümmel, Werner Georg (1975). Introduction to the New Testament.
Abingdon Press.
ISBN 978-0-687-19576-3.
Ladeuze, Paulin (1909). "Epistle to the Ephesians" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Lake, Kirsopp (1911). The earlier Epistles of St.
Paul, their motive and origin.
London.
Langton, Daniel R. (2010). The Apostle Paul in the Jewish Imagination.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-51740-9.
Langton, Daniel (2011a).  Westerholm, Stephen (ed.). Jewish Readings of Paul in Blackwell Companion to Paul.
Blackwell.
Langton, Daniel (2011b).  Levine, Amy-Jill (ed.). Paul in Jewish Thought in The Jewish Annotated New Testament.
Oxford University Press.
Lee, Michelle V. (2006), Paul, the Stoics, and the Body of Christ, Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series, vol. 137, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, doi:10.1017/CBO9780511584541, ISBN 978-0-51-158454-1
Lewis, Charlton T.; Short, Charles, eds. (1879). A Latin Dictionary.
Oxford: University Press.
Lightfoot, Joseph Barber (1890). The Apostolic Fathers: A Revised Text with Introductions, Notes, Dissertations, and Translations.
Macmillan. p. 274. ISBN 0-8010-5612-8. OCLC 54248207.
Maccoby, Hyam (1998). The Mythmaker: Paul and the Invention of Christianity.
Barnes & Noble.
ISBN 978-0-7607-0787-6.
MacDonald, Dennis Ronald, 1983. The Legend and the Apostle: The Battle for Paul in Story and Canon Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983. ISBN 978-0664244644
MacDonald, Margaret Y.; Harrington, Daniel J. (2000). Colossians and Ephesians.
Liturgical Press.
ISBN 978-0-8146-5819-2.
MacDonald, Margaret Y. (2004). The Pauline Churches: A Socio-Historical Study of Institutionalization in the Pauline and Deutrero-Pauline Writings.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-61605-8.
Mack, Burton L. (1995), Who wrote the New Testament? The making of the Christian myth, HarperSan Francisco, ISBN 978-0-06-065517-4
Mack, Burton L. (1997) , Wie schreven het Nieuwe Testament werkelijk? Feiten, mythen en motieven. (Who Wrote the New Testament? The Making of the Christian Myth), Uitgeverij Ankh-Hermes bv
Malherbe, Abraham J. (1986). "A Physical Description of Paul". Harvard Theological Review. 79 (1–3): 170–175. doi:10.1017/S0017816000020435. ISSN 0017-8160. JSTOR 1509409. S2CID 162687215.
Marrow, Stanley B. (1986). Paul: His Letters and His Theology: An Introduction to Paul's Epistles.
Paulist Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0809127443.
Marshall, I. Howard (1980). The Acts of the Apostles.
Grand Rapids: W.B. Eerdmans.
ISBN 0-8028-1423-9.
McDowell, Sean (2016). The Fate of the Apostles: Examining the Martyrdom Accounts of the Closest Followers of Jesus.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-317-03190-1.
McGrath, Alister E. (2006). Christianity: An Introduction.
Wiley.
ISBN 978-1-4051-0901-7.
McRay, John (2007). Paul: His Life and Teaching.
Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic.
ISBN 978-1441205742.
Meissner, Stefan (1996). Die Heimholung des Ketzers.
Tübingen: Mohr.
Mills, Watson E. (2003). Mercer Commentary on the New Testament.
Mercer University Press.
ISBN 978-0-86554-864-0.
Montague, George T. (1966). The Living Thought of St.
Paul.
Milwaukee: Bruce Publishing Co.
Ogg, George (1962). "Chronology of the New Testament".  In Black, Matthew (ed.). Peake's Commentary on the Bible.
Nelson.
OL 5847288M.
Niswonger, Richard L. (1992). New Testament History.
Zondervan.
ISBN 978-0-310-31201-7.
Orr, James, ed. (1915). The International Standard Bible Encyclopaedia.
Vol. IV. Chicago: Howard-Severance.
Pagels, Elaine (1992). The Gnostic Paul: Gnostic Exegesis of the Pauline Letters.
Bloomsbury.
ISBN 978-1-85539-591-6.
Parker, Thomas Henry Louis. (1993). Calvin's New Testament commentaries. T. and T. Clark.
ISBN 0-567-29241-X. OCLC 716774834.
Perkins, Pheme (1988). Reading the New Testament: An Introduction.
Paulist Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-8091-2939-3.
Petit, Louis (1909). "Archdiocese of Durazzo" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Powell, Mark Allan (2009). Introducing the New Testament: A Historical, Literary, and Theological Survey.
Baker.
ISBN 978-0-8010-2868-7.
Prat, Ferdinand (1911). "St.
Paul" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia.
Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Rhoads, David M. (1996). The Challenge of Diversity: The Witness of Paul and the Gospels.
Fortress Press.
ISBN 978-1-4514-0617-7.
Riddell, Peter G. (2001). Islam and the Malay-Indonesian World: Transmission and Responses.
University of Hawaii Press.
ISBN 978-0-8248-2473-0.
Rowland, Christopher (1985). Christian Origins: An Account of the Setting and Character of the Most Important Messianic Sect of Judaism.
SPCK. ISBN 978-0-281-04110-7.
Sanday, W. (n.d.). "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans".  In Ellicott, Charles John (ed.). A Bible commentary for English readers.
London: Cassell.
Sanders, E. P. (1977). Paul and Palestinian Judaism: A Comparison of Patterns of Religion.
Fortress.
ISBN 978-1-4514-0740-2.
Sanders, E. P. (1983). Paul, the Law, and the Jewish People.
SCM Press.
ISBN 978-1-4514-0741-9.
Sanders, E. P. (27 December 2019). "Saint Paul, the Apostle". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved 8 January 2013.
Seifrid, Mark A. (1992), "Justification by Faith: The Origin and Development of a Central Pauline Theme", Novum Testamentum Supplements, Leiden: Brill Publishers, ISBN 90-04-09521-7, ISSN 0167-9732
Shillington, V. George (2007). An Introduction to the Study of Luke-Acts. A&C Black.
ISBN 978-0-567-03053-5.
Silver, Sandra Sweeny (2013). Footprints in Parchment: Rome Versus Christianity 30-313 Ad.
Author House.
ISBN 978-1-4817-3374-8.
Spence-Jones, Henry (2015). The Pulpit Commentary.
Vol. 8. Delmarva Publications.
GGKEY:EER24GEUYX4.
Spong, John Shelby, "The Man From Tarsus", in Rescuing the Bible From Fundamentalism, reprint ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1992).
Stagg, Evelyn; Stagg, Frank (1978). Woman in the World of Jesus.
Westminster Press.
ISBN 978-0-664-24195-7.
Stendahl, Krister (1963). "The Apostle Paul and the Introspective Conscience of the West" (PDF). Harvard Theological Review. 56 (3): 199–215. doi:10.1017/S0017816000024779. ISSN 0017-8160. S2CID 170331485.
Stendahl, Krister (1976). Paul Among Jews and Gentiles, and Other Essays.
Fortress Press.
ISBN 978-0-8006-1224-5.
<ref>Tabor, James D (16 September 2013). "Paul the Jew as Founder of Christianity?". HuffPost.
Retrieved 28 August 2017.
Tolstoy, Leo (1891). Church and State and Other Essays: Including Money; Man and Woman: Their Respective Functions; The Mother; A Second Supplement to the Kreutzer Sonata. B. R. Tucker. p. 17.
Waardenburg, Jacques (1999). Muslim Perceptions of Other Religions: A Historical Survey.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-535576-5.
Westerholm, Stephen (2015). "The New Perspective on Paul in Review". Direction. 44 (1): 4–15.
White, L. Michael (2007). From Jesus to Christianity.
San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins.
ISBN 978-0-06-081610-0.
Wiley, Tatha (2002). Original Sin: Origins, Developments, Contemporary Meanings.
Paulist Press.
ISBN 978-0-8091-4128-9.
Wilken, Robert Louis (2013). "Ephesus, Rome, and Edessa: The Spread of Christianity". The First Thousand Years: A Global History of Christianity.
Choice Reviews Online.
Vol. 50. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. pp. 17–27. doi:10.5860/choice.50-5552. ISBN 978-0-300-11884-1. JSTOR j.ctt32bd7m.6. LCCN 2012021755. S2CID 160590164.
Williams, Charles Stephan Conway (1957). A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles.
Harper.
Wilson, Barrie (2011). How Jesus Became Christian: The Early Christians And The Transformation Of A Jewish Teacher Into The Son Of God.
Orion.
ISBN 978-1-78022-206-6.
Wrede, William (1907). Paul.
Translated by Edward Lummis.
London: Philip Green.
Wright, G. Ernest (1974). Great People of the Bible and How They Lived.
Pleasantville, NY: The Reader's Digest Association, Inc.
Wright, N. T. (1996). "Paul, Arabia, and Elijah (Galatians 1:17)" (PDF). Journal of Biblical Literature. 115 (4): 683–92. doi:10.2307/3266349. ISSN 0021-9231. JSTOR 3266349.
Wright, N.T. (2006). "The Biblical Basis for Women's Service in the Church" (PDF). Priscilla Papers. 20 (4).
Pall, Zoltan (2013). Lebanese Salafis Between the Gulf and Europe: Development, Fractionalization and Transnational Networks of Salafism in Lebanon.
Amsterdam University Press.
ISBN 978-90-8964-451-0.
Further reading
Agosto, Efrain (2012). Servant Leadership: Jesus and Paul.
Chalice Press.
ISBN 978-0-8272-3506-9.
Bradford, Ernle.
Paul the Traveller: Saint Paul and his World.
Allen Lane, 1974.
Davies, W. D. Paul and Rabbinic Judaism: Some Rabbinic Elements in Pauline Theology. S.P.C.K., 3rd ed., 1970. ISBN 0-281-02449-9
Davies, W. D. "The Apostolic Age and the Life of Paul" in Matthew Black, ed.
Peake's Commentary on the Bible.
London: T. Nelson, 1962. ISBN 0-8407-5019-6
Fredriksen, Paula (2018). When Christians Were Jews: The First Generation.
Yale University Press.
ISBN 978-0-300-24074-0.
Hans-Joachim Schoeps.
Paul: The Theology of the Apostle in the Light of Jewish Religious History (Library of Theological Translations); 34 pages, Lutterworth Press (July 2002); ISBN 978-0-227-17013-7
Holzbach, Mathis Christian, Die textpragmat.
Bedeutung d.
Kündereinsetzungen d.
Simon Petrus u.d.
Saulus Paulus im lukan.
Doppelwerk, in: Jesus als Bote d.
Heils.
Stuttgart 2008, 166–72.
Murphy-O'Connor, Jerome, Jesus and Paul: Parallel Lives (Collegeville, Minn.: Liturgical Press, 2007) ISBN 0-8146-5173-9
Murphy-O'Connor, Jerome, Paul the Letter-Writer: His World, His Options, His Skills (Collegeville, Minn.: Liturgical Press, 1995) ISBN 0-8146-5845-8
Murphy-O'Connor, Jerome, Paul: A Critical Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996) ISBN 0-19-826749-5
Pinchas Lapide, Peter Stuhlmacher.
Paul: Rabbi and Apostle; 77 pages, Augsburg Publishing House; (December 1984)
Pinchas Lapide, Leonard Swidler, Jürgen Moltmann.
Jewish Monotheism and Christian Trinitarian Doctrine; 94 pages, Wipf & Stock Publishers (2002)
Reece, Steve.
Paul's Large Letters: Pauline Subscriptions in the Light of Ancient Epistolary Conventions.
London: T&T Clark, 2016.
Rashdall, Hastings, The Idea of Atonement in Christian Theology (1919)
Ruef, John, Paul's First Letter to Corinth (Penguin 1971)
Segal, Alan F. Paul, the Convert, (New Haven/London, Yale University Press, 1990) ISBN 0-300-04527-1
Segal, Alan F., "Paul, the Convert and Apostle" in Rebecca's Children: Judaism and Christianity in the Roman World (Harvard University Press 1986) ISBN 978-0674750760
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Paul of Tarsus.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paul of Tarsus.
Wikisource has original works by or about:Paul the Apostle
Look up Pauline conversion in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Listen to this article (1 hour and 14 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 23 February 2019 (2019-02-23), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help · More spoken articles)
St Paul on In Our Time at the BBC
Lecture on Paul of Tarsus s by Dr.
Henry Abramson
Catholic Encyclopedia: Paul of Tarsus
Documentary film on Apostle Paul
Bartlet, James Vernon (1911). "Paul, the Apostle" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 20 (11th ed.). pp. 938–55.
Novena to Saint Paul Apostle
Paul's mission and letters From PBS Frontline series on the earliest Christians.
Representations of Saint Paul
"Saint Paul, the Apostle". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 2009.
The Apostle and the Poet: Paul and Aratus Dr.
Riemer Faber
The Apostle Paul's Shipwreck: An Historical Examination of Acts 27 and 28
Works by or about Paul the Apostle in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Why Paul Went West: The Differences Between the Jewish Diaspora Biblical Archaeology Review
Santiebeati: Saint Paul
Catholic Online: Saint Paul
Footsteps of St.
Paul by Christian Tours
Old maps showing the travels of Paul from the Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, National Library of Israel
Journeys of Paul the ApostleFirst journey
1. Antioch
2. Seleucia
3. Cyprus
Salamis
Paphos
4. Perga
5. Antioch of Pisidia
6. Konya (Iconium)
7. Derbe
8. Lystra
9. Antalya
Second journey
1. Cilicia
2. Derbe
3. Lystra
4. Phrygia
5. Galatia
6. Mysia (Alexandria Troas)
7. Samothrace
8. Neapolis
9. Philippi
9. Amphipolis
Third journey
1. Galatia
2. Phrygia
3. Ephesus
4. Macedonia
5. Corinth
6. Cenchreae
7. Macedonia (again)
8. Troas
9. Assos
Acts of the ApostlesBible chapters(New Testament)
Acts 1
Events
Ascension
Pentecost
Conversion of Paul
Peter's vision
Peter's liberation
Council of Jerusalem
Areopagus sermon
Book burning at Ephesus
People
Aeneas
Agabus
Agrippa
Agrippa II
Ananias (Damascus)
Ananias (High Priest)
Ananias (Judea)
Apollos
Aquila
Aristarchus
Bar-jesus
Barnabas
Berenice
Blastus
Cornelius
Demetrius
Dionysius
Dorcas
Drusilla
Ethiopian eunuch
Eutychus
Felix
Festus
Gallio
Gamaliel
James the Just
Jason
Jesus
Joseph Barsabbas
Judas Barsabbas
Judas of Galilee
Lucius
Luke
Lydia
Lysias
Manaen
(John) Mark
Mary mother of John Mark
Matthias
Nicanor
Nicholas
Parmenas
Paul
Paullus
Peter
Philip
Priscilla
Prochorus
Publius
Rhoda
Sapphira
Sceva
Seven Deacons
Silas/Silvanus
Simeon Niger
Simon the Sorcerer
Sopater
Stephen
Theophilus
Theudas
Timothy
Titus
Trophimus
Tychicus
Places
Achaea
Alexandria
Amphipolis
Antioch of Pisidia
Antioch of Syria
Antipatris
Asia
Assos
Atalia
Athens
Berea
Bithynia
Caesarea
Cenchrea
Chios
Cilicia
Corinth
Cos
Creta
Cyprus
Derbe
Ephesus
Forum Appii
Galatia
Iconium
Italy
Jerusalem
Lycaonia
Lystra
Macedonia
Malta
Mytilene
Miletus
Mysia
Neapolis
Paphos
Pamphilia
Patara
Perga
Philippi
Phrygia
Pisidia
Pontus
Ptolemais
Puteoli
Regium
Rodos
Rome
Salamis
Samos
Samothrace
Seleucia
Syracuse
Syria
Thessalonica
Thyatira
Tyre
Three Taverns
Troas
Phrases
Christians
Synagogue of the Libertines
Related
Apostolic Age
Luke–Acts
Authorship
Luke the Evangelist
Historical reliability
Holy Spirit
Textual variants
Gamaliel's principle
Sources
Greek Text
Latin Vulgate
Wycliffe Version
King James Version
American Standard Version
World English Version
In popular culture
The Visual Bible: Acts (1994 film)
Gospel of John (chapter 21)
Bible portal Christianity portal
Epistle to the Romans (chapter 1) 
New Testament peopleJesus Christ
In Christianity
Historical
Life of Jesus in the New Testament
GospelsIndividuals
Alphaeus
Anna the Prophetess
Annas
Barabbas
Bartimaeus
Blind man (Bethsaida)
Caiaphas
Celidonius
Cleopas
Clopas
Devil
Penitent thief ("Dismas")
Elizabeth
Gabriel
Impenitent thief ("Gestas")
Jairus' daughter
Joanna
John the Baptist
Joseph
Joseph of Arimathea
Jude
Lazarus
Legion
Luke
Lysanias
Malchus
Martha
Mary, mother of Jesus
Mary Magdalene
Mary, mother of James
Mary of Bethany
Mary of Clopas
Naked fugitive
Son of Nain's widow
Nicodemus (Nicodemus ben Gurion)
Salome
Samaritan woman
Satan
Simeon
Simon, brother of Jesus
Simon of Cyrene
Simon the Leper
Simon the Pharisee
Susanna
Syrophoenician woman
Theophilus
Zacchaeus
Zebedee
Zechariah
Multiple
people named James
people named John
people named Joseph (or Joses)
people named Judas or Jude
people named Mary
people named Simon or Simeon
Groups
Angels
Jesus's brothers
Demons
Disciples
Evangelists
Female disciples of Jesus
God-fearers
Herodians
Magi
Myrrhbearers
Nameless
Pharisees
Proselytes
Sadducees
Samaritans
Sanhedrin
Scribes
Seventy disciples
Shepherds
Women at the crucifixion
Zealots
Apostles
Andrew
Bartholomew
Nathanael
James, son of Alphaeus
Less
James, son of Zebedee
John
Evangelist
Patmos
"Disciple whom Jesus loved"
Judas Iscariot
Judas Thaddaeus
Matthew
Philip
Simon Peter
Simon the Zealot
Thomas
Acts
Aeneas
Agabus
Ananias (Damascus)
Ananias (Judaea)
Ananias son of Nedebeus
Apollos
Aquila
Aristarchus
Barnabas
Blastus
Cornelius
Damaris
Demetrius
Dionysius
Dorcas
Elymas
Egyptian
Ethiopian eunuch
Eutychus
Gamaliel
James, brother of Jesus
Jason
Joseph Barsabbas
Judas Barsabbas
Judas of Galilee
Lucius
Luke
Lydia
Manaen
(John) Mark
Evangelist
cousin of Barnabas
Mary, mother of (John) Mark
Matthias
Mnason
Nicanor
Nicholas
Parmenas
Paul
Philip
Priscilla
Prochorus
Publius
Rhoda
Sapphira
Sceva
Seven Deacons
Silas / Silvanus
Simeon Niger
Simon Magus
Sopater
Sosthenes
Stephen
Theudas
Timothy
Titus
Trophimus
Tychicus
Zenas
RomansHerod's familyGospels
Antipas
Archelaus
Herod the Great
Herodias
Longinus
Philip
Pilate
Pilate's wife
Quirinius
Salome
Tiberius
Acts
Agrippa
Agrippa II
Berenice
Cornelius
Drusilla
Felix
Festus
Gallio
Lysias
Paullus
Epistles
Achaicus
Alexander of Ephesus
Alexander the Coppersmith
Andronicus
Archippus
Aretas IV
Artemas
Carpus
Claudia
Crescens
Demas
Diotrephes
Epaphras
Epaphroditus
Erastus
Eunice
Euodia and Syntyche
Herodion
Hymenaeus
Jesus Justus
Junia
Linus
Lois
Mary
Michael
Nymphas
Olympas
Onesimus
Onesiphorus
Pudens
Philemon
Philetus
Phoebe
Quartus
Sosipater
Tertius
Tryphena and Tryphosa
Revelation
Antipas
Four Horsemen
Apollyon
Two witnesses
Woman
Beast
Three Angels
Whore of Babylon
Twelve Apostles of JesusApostles
Andrew
Bartholomew
Nathanael
James, son of Alphaeus
the Less
James, son of Zebedee
John
Beloved
Evangelist
Patmos
Judas Iscariot
Judas Thaddaeus
Matthew
Philip
Simon Peter
Simon the Zealot
Thomas
Later
Seventy disciples
Matthias
Paul
conversion
James, brother of Jesus
Barnabas
Related
Commissioning of the Twelve
calling of the disciples
calling of Matthew
Mission Discourse
coming persecutions
Holy Kinship
Last Supper
Farewell Discourse
Great Commission
Apostolic Age
Apostolic see
Acts of the Apostles
Pentecost
Dispersion
Pauline epistles
Relics and burial sites
Apostolic succession
Apostles' Creed
History of Catholic theologyKey figuresGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
Timeline
History of the papacy
Papal primacy
Ecumenical councils
Catholic Bible
Vulgate
Biblical canon
History of Christian theology
Early Church
Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian
Constantine toPope Gregory I
Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I
Early Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena
High Middle Ages
Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon
Mysticism and reforms
Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Bridget of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
ReformationCounter-Reformation
Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales
Baroque period toFrench Revolution
Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Pierre Gassendi
René Descartes
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
António Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri
Joseph Görres
Félicité de La Mennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben
Émile Boutroux
Modernism
Neo-scholasticism
Léon Bloy
Désiré-Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von Hügel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux
G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Daniel-Rops
Jean Guitton
Josemaría Escrivá
Nouvelle théologie
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Frederick Copleston
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
René Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen
Pope John Paul II
Alice von Hildebrand
Carlo Maria Martini
Pope Benedict XVI
Alasdair MacIntyre
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Michał Heller
Peter Kreeft
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík
Aidan Nichols
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron
Edward Feser
Catholicism portal
Seven virtues in Christian ethicsFourcardinal virtues
Prudence (Prudentia)
Justice (Iustitia)
Fortitude (Fortitudo)
Temperance (Temperantia)
Sources: Plato
Republic, Book IV
Cicero
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Thomas Aquinas
Threetheological virtues
Faith (Fides)
Hope (Spes)
Love (Caritas)
Sources: Paul the Apostle
Seven deadly sins
Lust (Luxuria)
Gluttony (Gula)
Greed (Avaritia)
Sloth (Acedia)
Wrath (Ira)
Envy (Invidia)
Pride (Superbia)
Source: Prudentius, Psychomachia
People: Evagrius Ponticus
John Cassian
Pope Gregory I
Dante Alighieri
Peter Binsfeld
Related concepts
Ten Commandments
Great Commandment
Eschatology
Sin
Original sin
Old Covenant
Hamartiology
Christian philosophy
Saints of the Catholic ChurchCongregation for the Causes of SaintsStages of canonization: Servant of God      Venerable      Blessed      SaintVirgin Mary
Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition
Titles of Mary
Joseph (husband)
Apostles
Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Great
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas
Archangels
Gabriel
Michael  in the Catholic Church
Raphael
Confessors
Anatolius
Anthony of Kiev
Athanasius the Confessor
Chariton the Confessor
Dominic
Edward the Confessor
Francis of Assisi
Francis Borgia
Homobonus
Lazarus Zographos
Louis Bertrand
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Peter Claver
Salonius
Sergius of Radonezh
Seraphim of Sarov
Theophanes the Confessor
Disciples
Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples
Doctors of the Church
Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek
Irenaeus
Evangelists
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
ChurchFathers
Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of Lérins
Zephyrinus
Martyrs
Abda and Abdjesus
Charles de Foucauld
Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala
Christina of Persia
Devasahayam Pillai
Dismas the Good Thief
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Gerard of Csanád
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
John Fisher
Korean Martyrs
Lorenzo Ruiz
Martyrs of Lübeck
Luigi Versiglia
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of Algeria
Martyrs of Cajonos
Martyrs of Drina
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Gorkum
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of La Rioja
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of Prague
Martyrs of Sandomierz
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Martyrs of Zenta
Maximilian Kolbe
Óscar Romero
Pedro Calungsod
Perpetua and Felicity
Peter Chanel
Pietro Parenzo
Philomena
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Teresa Benedicta of the Cross
Titus Brandsma
Thomas Becket
Thomas More
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs
Valentine of Rome
Victor and Corona
Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia
Missionaries
Augustine of Canterbury
Boniface
Damien of Molokai
Evermode of Ratzeburg
Francis Xavier
François de Laval
Gregory the Illuminator
Junípero Serra
Nico of Georgia
Patrick of Ireland
Remigius
Patriarchs
Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs
Popes
Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Paul VI
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus
Prophets
Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah
Virgins
Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Angela of the Cross
Æthelthryth
Bernadette Soubirous
Catherine of Bologna
Brigid of Kildare
Catherine Labouré
Catherine of Siena
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of Mérida
Euphemia
Faustina Kowalska
Faustina and Liberata of Como
Genevieve
Hiltrude of Liessies
Joan of Arc
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
María de las Maravillas de Jesús
Narcisa de Jesús
Patricia of Naples
Rosalia
Rose of Lima
Teresa of the Andes
Teresa of Calcutta
Trasilla and Emiliana
Ubaldesca Taccini
See also
Calendar of saints
Congregation for the Causes of Saints
Four Holy Marshals
Fourteen Holy Helpers
Military saints
Athleta Christi
Miles Christianus
Church Militant
Seven Champions
Virtuous pagan
Catholic Church portal
Saints portal
Coptic saintsPatriarchs
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Prophets
Moses
Job
Samuel
David
Hosea
Amos
Micah
Joel
Obadiah
Jonah
Nahum
Noah
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Baruch
Ezekiel
Daniel
John the Baptist
Theotokos
Mary, Our Lady of
Assiut
Warraq
Zeitoun
Seven Archangels
Michael
Gabriel
Raphael
Suriel
Zedekiel
Sarathiel
Aniel
Apostles
Andrew
Bartholomew
James, son of Alphaeus
James, son of Zebedee
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas
Disciples
Apollos
Barnabas
Mary Magdalene
Phoebe the Deaconess
Philemon
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples
Evangelists
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Martyrs
Abāmūn
Abāmūn
Abanoub
Abaskhiron
Alexandrian Martyrs
Arianus
Apollonia
Barbara
Bashnouna
Basilides and Potamiana
Catherine
Chrysanthus and Daria
Chiaffredo
Colluthus
Cosmas and Damian
Cyprian and Justina
Cyrus and John
Dasya
Demiana
Dorothea
Elias and companions
Epimachus
Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius
Felix and Regula
Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly
Gallicanus
George
George Bishop of Assiut
George El Mozahem
Gereon
Hor, Besoy, and Daydara
Imbaba Martyrs
Isaac of Dafra
John of Senhout
Kosheh martyrs
Malati
Marina the Martyr
Maspero Martyrs
Maurice
Memnon
Menas
Mohrael
Moura
Nag Hammadi
Otimus
Philomena
Philotheos
Rais
Sarah
Sidhom Bishay
Theban Legion
Thecla
Theoclia
Theodora and Didymus
Theodore Stratelates
Varus
Veronica
Wadamoun
Wanas
Popes
Mark I
Anianus
Avilius
Kedron
Justus
Eumenes
Markianos
Celadion
Agrippinus
Julian
Demetrius I
Heraclas
Dionysius
Theonas
Felix of Rome
Peter I
Alexander I
Athanasius I
Peter II
Timothy I
Theophilus I
Cyril I
Dioscorus I
Timothy II
Peter III
Dioscorus II
Timothy III
Theodosius I
Peter IV
Damian
Anastasius
Andronicus
Benjamin I
Agathon
Simeon I
Alexander II
Theodore I
Michael I
John IV
Mark II
James
Simeon II
Joseph I
Michael II
Cosmas II
Michael III
Gabriel I
Cosmas III
Abraham
Zacharias
Cyril II
Macarius II
Matthew I
Gabriel VII
John XIV
Cyril V
Macarius III
Cyril VI
Bishops
Abadiu of Antinoe
Abraam of Faiyum
Alexander of Jerusalem
Amun of Scetes
Basil of Caesarea
Cyril of Jerusalem
Epiphanius of Cyprus
Eusebius of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Gregory of Neocaesarea
Ignatius of Antioch
Jacob of Nisibis
James of Jerusalem
John of Nikiû
John of Jerusalem
Karas of California
Mikhaeil of Asyut
Narcissus of Jerusalem
Nicholas of Myra
Paphnutius of Scetes
Paphnutius of Thebes
Polycarp of Smyrna
Porphyry of Gaza
Psote of Ebsay
Serapion of Thmuis
Severian of Gabala
Yousab el-Abah of Girga
Monks and nuns
Abdel Messih El-Makari
Abib and Apollo
Abraham of Farshut
Abraham of Scetes
Amun
Anthony the Great
Awgin
Bashnouna
Hilarion
Hospitius
Mother Irini
Isaac of Nineveh
Isidore of Pelusium
John Climacus
John the Dwarf
Macarius of Alexandria
Macarius of Egypt
Marina the Monk
Moses the Black
Nilus of Sinai
Pachomius the Great
Pambo
Parsoma
Patapios
Paul of Thebes
Paul of Tammah
Paul the Simple
Pishoy
Poemen
Samuel the Confessor
Sisoes the Great
Tekle Haymanot
Theodorus of Tabennese
Theodora of Alexandria
Anchorites
Karas
Mary
Misael
Onuphrius
Paphnutius
Paul
Pijimi
Shenouda
Thomas
Zosimas
Other saints
Ambrose
Clement of Alexandria
Didymus the Blind
Euphrosyne
Habib Girgis
Candidus
Simon the Tanner
Three Holy Children
Maximus and Domatius
Verena
Christianity portal
History of Christianity
Early Centers
Spread
Centuries
Origins andApostolic Age
Background
Jesus
Baptism
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Holy Spirit
Apostles in the New Testament
Jewish Christians
Paul the Apostle
Council of Jerusalem
Split with Judaism
New Testament
Gospels
Acts
Pauline epistles
General epistles
Revelation
Ante-Niceneperiod
Diversity
Adoptionism
Arianism
Docetism
Donatism
Gnosticism
Marcionism
Montanism
Canon development
Persecution
Church / Apostolic Fathers
Clement of Rome
Polycarp
Ignatius
Irenaeus
Justin Martyr
Tertullian
Origen
Early African
Late antiquity(Great Church)
Constantine
Constantinian shift
Monasticism
Councils
Nicaea I
Nicene Creed
Athanasius
Jerome
Augustine
Constantinople I
Ephesus I
Chalcedon
Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian
Biblical canon
Catholicism
Papacy
Development of primacy
Eastern Orthodox opposition
Crusading movement
Lateran IV
Art patronage of Julius II
Leo X
Counter-Reformation
Trent
Art
Catholic Reformation
Jesuits
Xavier
Thomas More
Monastery dissolution
Wars
Mass rocks and priest holes
Guadalupe
Jansenists
Molinists
Neo-Scholasticism
Teresa
Modernism
Independent Catholics
Vatican I and Vatican II
Ecclesial community
Timeline
EasternChristianity
Eastern Orthodoxy
Church of the East
Oriental Orthodoxy
Chrysostom
Nestorianism
Icons
Iconodulism
Iconoclasm
Great Schism
Fall of Constantinople
Armenia
Georgia
Greece
Egypt
Syriac
Serbian
Ethiopia
Ottoman Empire
Russia
America
Middle Ages
Pelagianism
Gregory I
Celtic
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Franks
Gothic
Scandinavian
Iceland
Slavs
Bohemia
Bulgaria
Kievan Rus'
Moravia
Poland
Pomerania
Investiture
Anselm
Abelard
Bernard
Bogomils
Bosnian
Cathars
Apostolic Brethren
Dulcinian
Crusades
Waldensians
Inquisition
Early Scholasticism
Christian mysticism
Dominic
Francis
Bonaventure
Aquinas
Five Ways
Wycliffe
Avignon
Papal Schism
Bohemian Reformation
Hus
Conciliarism
Synods
ReformationandProtestantism
Erasmus
Eucharist
Calvinist–Arminian debate
Arminianism
Wars
Resistance theories
Separation of church and state
Nicodemites
Hymnody of continental Europe
Formal and material principles
Literature
Protestant work ethic
Lutheranism
Luther
Diet of Worms
Theology
Bible
Melanchthon
Book of Concord
Orthodoxy
Scholasticism
Eucharist
Art
Calvinism
Zwingli
Calvin
Huguenots
Presbyterianism
Scotland
Knox
TULIP
Baptism
Law and Gospel
Dort
Three Forms of Unity
Westminster
Scholasticism
Metrical psalters
Anglicanism
Timeline
Henry VIII
Cranmer
Elizabethan
Puritans
Civil War
Church music
Book of Common Prayer
King James Version
Anabaptism
Theology
Radical Reformation
Grebel
Swiss Brethren
Müntzer
Martyrs' Synod
Menno Simons
Smyth
Martyrs Mirror
Ausbund
Revivalism
Missionaries
Baptists
Separation of church and state
Edicts of toleration
Congregationalism
First Great Awakening
Methodism
Millerism
Pietism
Fostering of early experimental science
Neo- and Old Lutherans
Camp meeting
Holiness movement
Second Great Awakening
Restorationists
Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Seventh-day Adventist
Adventism
Oxford Movement
Laestadianism
Finnish Awakening
Christian existentialism
Third Great Awakening
Azusa Revival
Gospel music
Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy
Pacifism
Ecumenism
Five solae
Jesus movement
Pentecostalism
Charismatics
Liberation theology
Reformed epistemology
Fourth Great Awakening
Evangelical and Mainline Protestants
Christian right and left
Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America
Timeline
Missions
Martyrs
Theology
Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Catholicism
Portals: Ancient Rome Saints Bible Christianity Biography
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
RISM (France)
RERO (Switzerland)
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 11:24 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
