Popular culture - Wikipedia
Popular culture
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Set of norms or trends dominant in a society at a given time
"Pop Culture" redirects here.
For the song, see Pop Culture (song).
Popular culture (also called mass culture or pop culture) is generally recognized by members of a society as a set of the practices, beliefs, and objects that are dominant or prevalent in a society at a given point in time.
Popular culture also encompasses the activities and feelings produced as a result of interaction with these dominant objects.
The primary driving force behind popular culture is mass appeal, and it is produced by what cultural analyst Theodor Adorno refers to as the "culture industry".
Heavily influenced in modern times by mass media, this collection of ideas permeates the everyday lives of people in a given society.
Therefore, popular culture has a way of influencing an individual's attitudes towards certain topics.
However, there are various ways to define pop culture.
Because of this, popular culture is something that can be defined in a variety of conflicting ways by different people across different contexts.
It is generally viewed in contrast to other forms of culture such as folk cults, working-class culture, or high culture, and also through different academic perspectives such as psychoanalysis, structuralism, postmodernism, and more.
The common pop-culture categories are: entertainment (such as film, music, television and video games), sports, news (as in people/places in the news), politics, fashion, technology, and slang.
Contents
History
‹ The template below (Globalize) is being considered for merging.
See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. ›The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the Anglosphere and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject.
You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: Cultural history
In the past folk culture functioned analogously to the popular culture of the masses and of the nations.
The phrase "popular culture" was coined in the 19th century or earlier.
Traditionally,[when?] popular culture was associated[by whom?] with poor education and with the lower classes, as opposed to the "official culture" and higher education of the upper classes. 
With the rise of the Industrial Revolution in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Britain experienced social changes that resulted in increased literacy rates, and with the rise of capitalism and industrialization, people began to spend more money on entertainment, such as (commercialised) pubs and sports.
Reading also gained traction.
Labelling penny dreadfuls the Victorian equivalent of video games, The Guardian in 2016 described penny fiction as "Britain's first taste of mass-produced popular culture for the young". A growing consumer culture and an increased capacity for travel via the newly invented railway (the first public railway, Stockton and Darlington Railway, opened in north-east England in 1825) created both a market for cheap popular literature, and the ability for its distribution on a large scale.
The first penny serials were published in the 1830s to meet the growing demand.
The stress in the distinction from "official culture" became more pronounced towards the end of the 19th century,[need quotation to verify] a usage that became established by the interbellum period.[need quotation to verify]
From the end of World War II, following major cultural and social changes brought by mass media innovations, the meaning of "popular culture" began to overlap with the connotations of "mass culture", "media culture", "image culture", "consumer culture", and "culture for mass consumption".
The abbreviated form "pop" for "popular", as in "pop music", dates from the late 1950s.
Although terms "pop" and "popular" are in some cases used interchangeably, and their meaning partially overlap, the term "pop" is narrower.
Pop is specific of something containing qualities of mass appeal, while "popular" refers to what has gained popularity, regardless of its style.
Definition
According to author John Storey, there are various definitions of popular culture.
The quantitative definition of culture has the problem that much "high culture" (e.g., television dramatizations of Jane Austen) is also "popular." "Pop culture" is also defined as the culture that is "leftover" when we have decided what high culture is.[citation needed] However, many works straddle the boundaries, e.g., William Shakespeare and Charles Dickens, Leo Tolstoy, and George Orwell.
A third definition equates pop culture with "mass culture" and ideas.
This is seen as a commercial culture, mass-produced for mass consumption by mass media.
From a Western European perspective, this may be compared to American culture.[clarification needed] Alternatively, "pop culture" can be defined as an "authentic" culture of the people, but this can be problematic as there are many ways of defining the "people."[page needed] Storey argued that there is a political dimension to popular culture; neo-Gramscian hegemony theory "... sees popular culture as a site of struggle between the 'resistance' of subordinate groups in society and the forces of 'incorporation' operating in the interests of dominant groups in society." A postmodernist approach to popular culture would "no longer recognize the distinction between high and popular culture."
Jean Baudrillard argued that the vague conception "Public Opinion" is a subjective and inaccurate illusion which is more complicit in populism rather than in factuality, for it attributes a sovereignty to consumers that they do not really possess.
Storey claims that popular culture emerged from the urbanization of the Industrial Revolution.
Studies of Shakespeare (by Weimann, Barber, or Bristol, for example) locate much of the characteristic vitality of his drama in its participation in Renaissance popular culture, while contemporary practitioners like Dario Fo and John McGrath use popular culture in its Gramscian sense that includes ancient folk traditions (the commedia dell'arte for example).[need quotation to verify]
Popular culture is constantly evolving and occurs uniquely in place and time.
It forms currents and eddies, and represents a complex of mutually interdependent perspectives and values that influence society and its institutions in various ways.
For example, certain currents of pop culture may originate from, (or diverge into) a subculture, representing perspectives with which the mainstream popular culture has only limited familiarity.
Items of popular culture most typically appeal to a broad spectrum of the public.
Important contemporary contributions for understanding what popular culture means have been given by the German researcher Ronald Daus, who studies the impact of extra-European cultures in North America, Asia, and especially in Latin America.
Levels
Within the realm of popular culture, there exists an organizational culture.
From its beginning, popular culture has revolved around classes in society and the push-back between them.
Within popular culture, there are two levels that have emerged, high and low.
High culture can be described as art and works considered of superior value, historically, aesthetically and socially.
Low culture is regarded by some as that of the lower classes, historically.
Folklore
Main article: Folklore
Adaptations based on traditional folklore provide a source of popular culture.
This early layer of cultural mainstream still persists today, in a form separate from mass-produced popular culture, propagating by word of mouth rather than via mass media, e.g. in the form of jokes or urban legends.
With the widespread use of the Internet from the 1990s, the distinction between mass media and word-of-mouth has become blurred.[citation needed]
Although the folkloric element of popular culture engages heavily with the commercial element, communities amongst the public have their own tastes and they may not always embrace every cultural or subcultural item sold.
Moreover, certain beliefs and opinions about the products of commercial culture may spread by word-of-mouth, and become modified in the process and in the same manner that folklore evolves.[citation needed]
Criticism
Popular culture in the West has been critiqued for its being a system of commercialism that privileges products selected and mass-marketed by the upper-class capitalist elite; such criticisms are most notable in many Marxist theorists such as Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, bell hooks, Antonio Gramsci, Guy Debord, Fredric Jameson, Terry Eagleton, as well as certain postmodern philosophers such as Jean-François Lyotard, who has written about the commercialisation of information under capitalism, and Jean Baudrillard, as well as others.
The Culture Industry
Main article: Culture industry
The most influential critiques of popular culture came from Marxist theorists of the Frankfurt School during the twentieth century.
Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer analysed the dangers of the culture industry in their influential work the Dialectic of Enlightenment by drawing upon the works of Kant, Marx, Nietzsche and others.
Capitalist popular culture, as Adorno argued, was not an authentic culture of the people but a system of homogenous and standardised products manufactured in the service of capitalist domination by the elite.
The consumer demand for Hollywood films, pop tunes and consumable books is influenced by capitalist industries like Hollywood and the elite who decide which commodities are to be promoted in the media, including television and print journalism.
Adorno wrote, "The industry bows to the vote it has itself rigged." It is the elite who commodify products in accordance with their narrow ideological values and criteria, and Adorno argues that the audience becomes accustomed to these formulaic conventions, making intellectual contemplation impossible.
Adorno's work has had a considerable influence on culture studies, philosophy and the New Left.
Writing in the New Yorker in 2014, music critic Alex Ross, argued that Adorno's work has a renewed importance in the digital age: "The pop hegemony is all but complete, its superstars dominating the media and wielding the economic might of tycoons...Culture appears more monolithic than ever, with a few gigantic corporations—Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon—presiding over unprecedented monopolies." There is much scholarship on how Western entertainment industries strengthen transnational capitalism and reinforce a Western cultural dominance.  Hence, rather than being a local culture, commercial entertainment is artificially reinforced by transnational media corporations. 
Jack Zipes, a professor of German and literature, critiqued the mass commercialisation and corporate hegemony behind the Harry Potter franchise.
He argued that the commodities of the culture industry are "popular" because they are homogenous and obey standard conventions; the media then influences the tastes of children.
In his analysis of Harry Potter's global brand, Zipes wrote, "It must conform to the standards of exception set by the mass media and promoted by the culture industry in general.
To be a phenomenon means that a person or commodity must conform to the hegemonic groups that determine what makes up a phenomenon".
Imperialism
Main articles: Imperialism and Cultural imperialism
According to John M. MacKenzie, many products of popular culture have been designed to promote imperialist ideologies and to glorify the British upper classes rather than present a democratic view of the world.  Although there are many films which do not contain such propaganda, there have been many films that promote racism and militarist imperialism.  
Feminist critique
bell hooks, an influential feminist, argues that commercial commodities and celebrities cannot be symbols of progressiveness when they collaborate with imperialist capitalism and promote ideals of beauty; hooks uses Beyoncé as an example of a commodity reinforced by capitalist corporations complicit in imperialism and patriarchy.
Propaganda
Main article: Propaganda
Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky critiqued the mass media in their 1988 work Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media.
They argue that mass media is controlled by a powerful hegemonic elite who are motivated by their own interests that determine and manipulate what information is present in the mainstream.
The mass media is therefore a system of propaganda.
In sum, a propaganda approach to media coverage suggests a systematic and highly political dichotomization in news coverage based on serviceability to important domestic power interests.
This should be observable in dichotomized choices of story and in the volume and quality of coverage... such dichotomization in the mass media is massive and systematic: not only are choices for publicity and suppression comprehensible in terms of system advantage, but the modes of handling favored and inconvenient materials (placement, tone, context, fullness of treatment) differ in ways that serve political ends. 
Consumerism
Main article: Consumerism
According to the postmodern sociologist Jean Baudrillard, the individual is trained into the duty of seeking the relentless maximisation of pleasure lest he or she become asocial.
Therefore, "enjoyment" and "fun" become indistinguishable from the need to consume.
Whereas the Frankfurt School believed consumers were passive, Baudrillard argued that consumers were trained to consume products in a form of active labour in order to achieve upward social mobility.  Thus, consumers under capitalism are trained to purchase products such as pop albums and consumable fiction in order to signal their devotion to social trends, fashions and subcultures.
Although the consumption may arise from an active choice, the choice is still the consequence of a social conditioning which the individual is unconscious of.
Baudrillard says, "One is permanently governed by a code whose rules and meaning-constraints—like those of language—are, for the most part, beyond the grasp of individuals."
In Baudrillard's understanding, the products of capitalist popular culture can only give the illusion of rebellion, since they are still complicit in a system controlled by the powerful.
Baudrillard stated in an interview, critiquing the content and production of The Matrix:
The Matrix paints the picture of a monopolistic superpower, like we see today, and then collaborates in its refraction.
Basically, its dissemination on a world scale is complicit with the film itself.
On this point it is worth recalling Marshall McLuhan: the medium is the message.
The message of The Matrix is its own diffusion by an uncontrollable and proliferating contamination. 
Sources
Print culture
Main article: Print culture
With the invention of the printing press in the sixteenth century, mass-produced, cheap books, pamphlets and periodicals became widely available to the public.
With this, the transmission of common knowledge and ideas was possible.
Radio culture
Main article: Radio broadcasting
In the 1890s, Nikola Tesla and Guglielmo Marconi created the radiotelegraph, allowing for the modern radio to be born.
This led to the radio being able to influence a more "listened-to" culture, with individuals being able to feel like they have a more direct impact.
This radio culture is vital, because it was imperative to advertising, and it introduced the commercial.
Films
Main article: Film
Films and cinema are highly influential to popular culture, as films as an art form are what people seem to respond to the most.
With moving pictures being first captured by Eadweard Muybridge in 1877, films have evolved into elements that can be cast into different digital formats, spreading to different cultures. 
The impact of films and cinema are most evident when analyzing in the search of what the films aim to portray.
Films are used to seek acceptance and understanding of many subjects because of the influence the films carry—an example of an early representation of this can be seen in Casablanca (1942): the film introduced war subjects to the public after the United States entered World War II, and it meant to increase pro-war sentiment for the allies.  Films are a known massive influencer to popular culture yet not all films create a movement that contributes enough to be part of the popular culture that starts movements.[citation needed] The content must resonate to most of the public so the knowledge in the material connects with the majority.[citation needed] Popular culture is a set of beliefs in trends and entail to change a person's set of ideologies and create social transformation.
The beliefs are still a trend that change more rapidly in the modern age that carries a continuation of outpouring media and more specifically films.
The trend does not last but it also carries a different effect based on individuals that can be grouped to generalized groups based on age and education.[citation needed] The creation of culture by films is seen in fandoms, religions, ideologies, and movements.
The culture of film is more evident through social media.
Social media is an instant source of feedback and creates discussion on films.  A repeating event that has been set in modern culture within the trend setting phase is the creation of movements in social media platforms to defend a featured subject on a film.
Popular culture or mass culture, is reached easily with films which are easily shared and reached worldwide.
Television programs
Main article: Television program
A television program is a segment of audiovisual content intended for broadcast (other than a commercial, trailer, or other content not serving as attraction for viewership).
Television programs may be fictional (as in comedies and dramas), or non-fictional (as in documentary, light entertainment, news and reality television). They may be topical (as in the case of a local newscast and some made-for-television movies), or historical (as in the case of many documentaries and fictional series). They can be primarily instructional or educational, or entertaining as is the case in situation comedy and game shows.[citation needed]
Music
Main article: Popular music
Popular music is music with wide appeal that is typically distributed to large audiences through the music industry.
These forms and styles can be enjoyed and performed by people with little or no musical training.
It stands in contrast to both art music and traditional or "folk" music.
Art music was historically disseminated through the performances of written music, although since the beginning of the recording industry, it is also disseminated through recordings.
Traditional music forms such as early blues songs or hymns were passed along orally, or to smaller, local audiences.
Sports
Main article: Sport
Sports include all forms of competitive physical activity or games which, through casual or organised participation, aim to use, maintain or improve physical ability and skills while providing enjoyment to participants, and in some cases, entertainment for spectators.
Corporate branding
Main article: Corporate branding
Corporate branding refers to the practice of promoting the brand name of a corporate entity, as opposed to specific products or services.
Personal branding
Main article: Personal branding
Personal branding includes the use of social media to promotion to brands and topics to further good repute among professionals in a given field, produce an iconic relationship between a professional, a brand and its audience that extends networks past the conventional lines established by the mainstream and to enhance personal visibility.
Popular culture: is generally recognized by members of a society as a set of the practices, beliefs, and objects that are dominant or prevalent in a society at a given point in time.[circular reference] As celebrities online identities are extremely important in order to create a brand to line-up sponsorships, jobs, and opportunities.
As influencers, micro-celebrities, and users constantly need to find new ways to be unique or stay updated with trends, in order to maintain followers, views, and likes.
For example, Ellen DeGeneres has created her own personal branding through her talk show The Ellen DeGeneres Show.
As she developed her brand we can see the branches she created to extend her fan base such as Ellen clothing, socks, pet beds, and more.
Social media
Main article: Social media
See also: Information Age
Social media is interactive computer-mediated technologies that facilitate the creation or sharing of information, ideas, career interests and other forms of expression via virtual communities and networks.[circular reference] Social media platforms such as Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, TikTok and Snapchat are the most popular applications used on a daily basis for younger generations.
Social media tends to be implemented into the daily routine of individuals in our current society.
Social media is a vital part of our culture as it continues to impact the forms of communication used to connect with those in our communities, families, or friend groups.
We often see that terms or slang is used online that is not used in face to face conversations, thus, adding to a persona users create through the screens of technology.
For example, some individuals respond to situations with a hashtag or emojis.
See also
Society portal
Bread and circuses
Cultural appropriation
Culture industry
Fads
Journal of Popular Culture
Lowbrow
MTV Generation
Pop art
Pop icon
Pop culture fiction
Popular culture studies
Notes
Lane Crothers (2021). Globalization and American Popular Culture.
Rowman & Littlefield. p. 48. ISBN 9781538142691.
McGaha, Julie. "Popular Culture & Globalization". Multicultural Education 23.1 (2015): 32–37. SocINDEX with Full Text.
Web. 5 Aug. 2016.
Strinati, D. (2004). An introduction to theories of popular culture.
Routledge.
Storey, J. (2018). Cultural theory and popular culture: An introduction.
Routledge.
"What Is Pop Culture? By Gary West". Archived from the original on 2016-08-29. Retrieved 2015-03-17.
Inventing Popular Culture: From Folklore to Globalization, by John Storey (John Wiley & Sons, 2009 - ISBN 9781405172653 - Chapter 1: "Popular Culture as Folk Culture".
Although the Oxford English Dictionary lists the first use as 1854, it appears in an address by Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi in 1818: Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich (1818). The Address of Pestalozzi to the British Public.
I see that it is impossible to attain this end without founding the means of popular culture and instruction upon a basis which cannot be got at otherwise than in a profound examination of Man himself; without such an investigation and such a basis all is darkness.
Per Adam Siljeström [sv], The educational institutions of the United States, their character and organization, J. Chapman, 1853, p. 243: "Influence of European emigration on the state of civilization in the United States: Statistics of popular culture in America". John Morley presented an address On Popular Culture at the Birmingham Town Hall in 1876, dealing with the education of the lower classes.
Rabelais and Bakhtin: Popular Culture in "Gargantua and Pantagruel" p.13
Rabelais's Radical Farce p. 9
"Penny dreadfuls: the Victorian equivalent of video games". The Guardian.
Retrieved 23 November 2018.
"Penny dreadfuls". The British Library.
Retrieved 2020-06-29.
Johnson, Charles (1836). Lives of the Most Notorious Highwaymen, Footpads and Murderers.
Lloyd, Purkess & Strange.
"Learning is dishonored when she stoops to attract," cited in a section "Popular Culture and True Education" in University extension, Issue 4, The American society for the extension of university teaching, 1894.
e.g. "the making of popular culture plays [in post-revolutionary Russian theater]", Huntly Carter, The new spirit in the Russian theatre, 1917–28: And a sketch of the Russian kinema and radio, 1919–28, showing the new communal relationship between the three, Ayer Publishing, 1929, p. 166.
"one look at the sheer mass and volume of what we euphemistically call our popular culture suffices", from Winthrop Sargeant, 'In Defense of the High-Brow', an article from  LIFE magazine, 11 April 1949, p. 102.
The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, volume 15, p. 85 entry Pop music
Steinem, Gloria.
Outs of pop culture, in LIFE magazine, 20 August 1965, p. 73 quotations: Pop Culture-although big, mercurial, and slippery to define-is really an umbrella term that covers anything currently in fashion, all or most of whose ingredients are familiar to the public-at-large.
The new dances are a perfect example... Pop Art itself may mean little to the average man, but its vocabulary...is always familiar.
Bill Lamb, "What Is Pop Music? A Definition", About.com, retrieved 8 March 2012 quotation: It is tempting to confuse pop music with popular music.
The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, the musicologist's ultimate reference resource, identifies popular music as the music since industrialization in the 1800s that is most in line with the tastes and interests of the urban middle class.
This would include an extremely wide range of music from vaudeville and minstrel shows to  heavy metal.
Pop music, on the other hand, has primarily come into usage to describe music that evolved out of the rock 'n roll revolution of the mid-1950s and continues in a definable path to today.
John Storey.
Cultural Theory and Popular Culture, pp. 4–8
Sérgio Campos Gonçalves, "Cultura e Sociedade de Consumo: um olhar em retrospecto", InRevista – Núcleo de Produção Científica em Comunicação – UNAERP (Ribeirão Preto), v. 3, pp. 18–28, 2008, ISSN 1980-6418.
Baudrillard. J. (1998). The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures.
Page 86
Robert Weimann [de], Shakespeare and the Popular Tradition (1967)
Robert Shaughnessy, The Cambridge companion to Shakespeare and popular culture (2007) p. 24
Danesi, Marcel (2018-07-12). Popular Culture: Introductory Perspectives.
TAMU Libraries: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 6,7. ISBN 9781538107447.
On the Ambiguity of the Three Wise Monkeys A. W. Smith Folklore, Vol. 104, No. 1/2 (1993), pp. 144–150
Lyotard, Jean-François (1979). La condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir.
Paris: Minuit.
Frederic Jameson: Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 1991.
Adorno & Horkheimer: Dialectic of Enlightenment. p. 106.
Adorno & Horkheimer: Dialectic of Enlightenment. p. 100.
Held, D. (1980). Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas.
Berkeley, University of California Press.
Ross, Alex (8 September 2014). "The Naysayers". The New Yorker.
Retrieved 20 July 2021.{{cite magazine}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
Lee Artz (2015). Global Entertainment Media: A Critical Introduction. 167-175. 
Hearts and Mines: The US Empire’s Culture Industry Tanner Mirrlees . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2016. 336 pp.
Zipes, J. (2002). Sticks and Stones: The Troublesome Success of Children's Literature from Slovenly Peter to Harry Potter. p. 175.
John M. MacKenzie. "Imperialism and Popular Culture". 1986, Manchester University Press 155
John M. MacKenzie. "Imperialism and Popular Culture". 1986, Manchester University Press 155
bell hooks: 
bell hooks.
Beyoncé's Lemonade is capitalist money-making at its best.
Guardian. 2016
Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media. 1988. Page 19-20. Noam Chomsky & Edward S. Herman
Baudrillard. J. (1998). The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures. p. 80.
Baudrillard. J. (1998). The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures. p. 110.
Baudrillard. J. (1998). The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures. p. 61.
Genosko, Gary; Bryx, Adam (July 2004). "The Matrix Decoded: Le Nouvel Observateur Interview With Jean Baudrillard". International Journal of Baudrillard Studies. 1 (2). ISSN 1705-6411.
Danesi, Marcel (2018-07-12). Popular Culture: Introductory Perspectives.
TAMU Libraries: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 112. ISBN 9781538107447.
Danesi, Marcel (2018-07-12). Popular Culture: Introductory Perspectives.
TAMU Libraries: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 157. ISBN 9781538107447.
a b Danesi, Marcel (2018-07-12). Popular Culture: Introductory Perspectives.
TAMU Libraries: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 195. ISBN 9781538107447.
"Films as Social and Cultural History". historymatters.gmu.edu.
Retrieved 2020-12-01.
Jackson, Kathy (2000). "Playing it again and again: Casablanca's impact on American mass media and popular culture". Journal of Popular Film & Television. 27 (4): 33–41, 9p. doi:10.1080/01956050009602813. S2CID 191490559.
Kubrak, Tina (2020). "Impact of Films: Changes in Young People's Attitudes after Watching a Movie". Behavioral Sciences. 10 (5): 86. doi:10.3390/bs10050086. PMC 7288198. PMID 32370280.
Hallinan, Blake. "Recommended for you: The Netflix Prize and the production of algorithmic culture". New Media and Society. 2016: 117–137.
a b Popular Music. (2015). Funk & Wagnalls New World Encyclopedia
"Definition of "popular music" | Collins English Dictionary". 
a b Arnold, Denis (1983). The New Oxford Companion Music, Volume 1: A–J. Oxford University Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-19-311316-9.
Tagg, Philip (1982). "Analysing popular music: theory, method and practice" (PDF). Popular Music. 2: 37–67. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.628.7469. doi:10.1017/S0261143000001227. S2CID 35426157. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-07-21.
"Definition of sport". SportAccord.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2011.
Council of Europe. "The European sport charter". Retrieved 5 March 2012.
"Pop Culture: An Overview – Issue 64". Philosophy Now.
Retrieved July 2, 2018.
"Popular culture", Wikipedia, 2020-03-31, retrieved 2020-04-03
Harris, L; Rae, A (2011). "Building a personal brand through social networking". Journal of Business Strategy.
Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 32 (5): 14–21. doi:10.1108/02756661111165435.
"Social media", Wikipedia, 2020-04-03, retrieved 2020-04-04
a b c "How social media influences culture and language". The Johns Hopkins News-Letter.
Retrieved 2020-04-04.
References
Ashby, LeRoy. "The Rising of Popular Culture: A Historiographical Sketch," OAH Magazine of History, 24 (April 2010), 11–14.
Ashby, LeRoy.
With Amusement for All: A History of American Popular Culture since 1830 (2006).
Moritz Baßler [de]: Der deutsche Pop-Roman.
Die neuen Archivisten (The German Pop-Novel.
The new archivists), C.H. Beck, München 2002, ISBN 3-406-47614-7.
Bakhtin, M. M. and Michael Holquist, Vadim Liapunov, Kenneth Brostrom (1981). The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays (University of Texas Press Slavic Series). Ed.
Michael Holquist.
Trans.
Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist.
Austin and London: University of Texas Press.
Browne, Ray B. and Pat Browne, eds.
The Guide to U.S. Popular Culture (2001), 1010 pages; essays by experts on many topics.
Burke, Peter. "Popular Culture Reconsidered," Storia della Storiografia 1990, Issue 17, pp. 40–49.
Freitag, Sandria B. "Popular Culture in the Rewriting of History: An Essay in Comparative History and Historiography," Journal of Peasant Studies, 1989, Vol. 16 Issue 3, pp. 169–198.
Gans, Herbert J. Popular Culture and High Culture: an Analysis and Evaluation of Taste.
New York: Basic Books, 1974. xii, 179 p.
ISBN 0-465-06021-8
Gerson, Stéphane. "' A World of Their Own': Searching for Popular Culture in the French Countryside," French Politics, Culture and Society, Summer 2009, Vol. 27 Issue 2, pp. 94–110
Golby, J. M. and A.W. Purdue, The civilisation of the crowd: popular culture in England, 1750–1900 (1985) online
Griffin, Emma. "Popular Culture in Industrializing England," Historical Journal, (2002) 45#3 pp. 619–635. online, Historiography
Hassabian, Anahid (1999). "Popular", Key Terms in Popular Music and Culture, eds.: Horner, Bruce and Swiss, Thomas.
Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers.
ISBN 0-631-21263-9.
Kamaludeen Mohamed Nasir, 2016: Globalized Muslim Youth in the Asia Pacific: Popular Culture in Singapore and Sydney, New York: Palgrave.
ISBN 978-1-137-54264-9.
Knight, Robert H. The Age of Consent: the Rise of Relativism and the Corruption of Popular Culture.
Dallas, Tex.: Spence Publishing Co., 1998. xxiv, 253,  p.
ISBN 1-890626-05-8
Ross, Andrew.
No Respect: Intellectuals & Popular Culture.
New York: Routledge, 1989. ix, 269 p.
ISBN 0-415-90037-9 (pbk.)
Seabrook, John.
NoBrow : the culture of marketing the marketing of culture, New York: A.A. Knopf, 2000. ISBN 0-375-40504-6.
Storey, John (2006). Cultural theory and popular culture.
Pearson Education.
ISBN 978-0-13-197068-7.
Stoykov, Lubomir (January 2014). "Politics and pop culture.
Celebrity and communicative perspectives of the modern politician". Media and Social Communications.
The University of National and World Economy/Alma communication (19).
Swirski, Peter (2010). Ars Americana Ars Politica: Partisan Expression in Contemporary American Literature and Culture.  Montreal, London: McGill-Queen's University Press.  ISBN 978-0-7735-3766-8.
Swirski, Peter (2005). From Lowbrow to Nobrow.  Montreal, London: McGill-Queen's University Press.  ISBN 978-0-7735-3019-5.
On Religion and Popular Culture
Further reading
Duncan, Barry (1988). Mass Media and Popular Culture.
Toronto, Ont.: Harcourt, Brace & Co.
Canada.
ISBN 0-7747-1262-7.
Rosenberg, Bernard, and David Manning White, joint. eds.
Mass Culture: the Popular Arts in America. [New York]: Free Press of Glencoe, 1957.
Cowen, Tyler, "For Some Developing Countries, America's Popular Culture Is Resistible". The New York Times, 22 February 2007, sec. C, p. 3.
Furio, Joanne, "The Significance of MTV and Rap Music in Popular Culture". The New York Times, 29 December 1991, sec.
VI, p. 2.
External links
Media related to Popular culture at Wikimedia Commons
Quotations related to Popular culture at Wikiquote
The dictionary definition of popular culture at Wiktionary
Western world and cultureFoundations
Cradle of civilization
Old World
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Rome
Roman Empire
Western
Eastern
Roman legacy
Romanization
Romano-Germanic culture
Christendom
History
European Bronze Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
early
high
late
Renaissance
Early modern period
Age of Discovery
Reformation
Age of Enlightenment
Scientific Revolution
Late modern period
Age of Revolution
Abolitionism
Emancipation
Capitalism
Industrial Revolution
Great Divergence
Modern era
World War I
Interwar period
Universal suffrage
World War II
Cold War
Post–Cold War era
Information age
War on terror
Second Cold War
Culture
Alphabet
Greek
Latin
Cyrillic
Architecture
Art
Periods
Calendar
Cuisine
Diet
Classical tradition
Studies
Clothing
History
Dance
Esotericism
Astrology
Folklore
Law
Languages
Eurolinguistics
Standard Average European
Literature
Canon
Media
Internet
Music
Chant
Classical
Folk
Mythology
Painting (contemporary)
Philosophy
Science
Values
Religion
East–West Schism
Western Christianity
Decline
Secularism
Philosophy
Hellenistic philosophy
Judeo-Christian ethics
Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Christian existentialism
Humanism
Christian humanism
Secular humanism
Liberalism
Conservatism
Socialism
Continental philosophy
Analytic philosophy
Post-structuralism
Tolerance
Paradox
Relativism
Peritrope
Atlanticism
Religion
Judaism
Culture
Christianity
Culture
Western/Eastern
Catholic Church
Latin Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Paganism
Baltic
Celtic
Finnish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Frankish
Gothic
Old Norse
Hellenistic
Roman
Slavic
Neo
Agnosticism
Atheism
Law
Natural law
Rule of law
Equality before the law
Constitutionalism
Human rights
Life
Thought
Speech
Press
Religion
Property
Democracy
International law
Contemporaryintegration
ABCANZ Armies
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
ANZUS
Arctic Council
AUKUS
Baltic Assembly
Benelux
British–Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
EEA
EFTA
ESA
EU
EU Customs Union
Eurozone
EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Five Eyes
G7
Lancaster House Treaties
Lublin Triangle
NATO
Nordic Council
OSCE
Pacific Islands Forum
PROSUL/PROSUR
Rio Treaty
Schengen
Special Relationship
Three Seas Initiative
USMCA
Visegrád Group
West Nordic Council
Western Bloc
Western European and Others Group
Westernization
Culture OutlineSciences
Cultural anthropology
Cultural astronomy
Cultural ecology
Cultural geography
Cultural neuroscience
Cultural studies
Culturology
Culture theory
Security culture
Neuroculture
Subfields
Bioculture
Cross-cultural studies
Cross-cultural communication
Cross-cultural leadership
Cross-cultural psychiatry
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural analytics
Cultural economics
Cultural entomology
Cultural history
Cultural mapping
Cultural mediation
Cultural psychology
Cultural values
Culturomics
Intercultural learning
Intercultural relations
Internet culture
Philosophy of culture
Popular culture studies
Postcritique
Semiotics of culture
Sociology of culture
Sound culture
Theology of culture
Transcultural nursing
Types
Constructed culture
Dominant culture
Folk culture
High culture
Individualistic culture
Legal culture
Low culture
Microculture
Official culture
Political culture
Civic
Popular culture
Urban
Primitive culture
Subculture
Alternative culture
list
Super culture
Vernacular culture
Culture by location
Aspects
Acculturation
Cultural appreciation
Cultural appropriation
Cultural area
Cultural artifact
Cultural baggage
Cultural behavior
Cultural bias
Cultural capital
Cross-cultural
Cultural communication
Cultural conflict
Cultural cringe
Cultural dissonance
Cultural emphasis
Cultural framework
Cultural heritage
Cultural icon
Cultural identity
Cultural industry
Cultural invention
Cultural landscape
Cultural learning
Cultural leveling
Cultural memory
Cultural pluralism
Cultural practice
Cultural property
Cultural reproduction
Cultural system
Cultural technology
Cultural universal
Cultureme
Enculturation
High- and low-context cultures
Interculturality
Manuscript culture
Material culture
Non-material culture
Organizational culture
Print culture
Protoculture
Relational mobility
Safety culture
Technoculture
Trans-cultural diffusion
Transculturation
Visual culture
Politics
Colonial mentality
Consumer capitalism
Cross cultural sensitivity
Cultural assimilation
Cultural attaché
Cultural backwardness
Cultural Bolshevism
Cultural conservatism
Cultural contracts
Cultural deprivation
Cultural diplomacy
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural exception
Cultural feminism
Cultural genocide
Cultural globalization
Cultural hegemony
Cultural imperialism
Cultural intelligence
Cultural liberalism
Cultural nationalism
Cultural pessimism
Cultural policy
Cultural racism
Cultural radicalism
Cultural retention
Cultural Revolution
Cultural rights
Cultural safety
Cultural silence
Cultural subsidy
Cultural Zionism
Culture change
Culture minister
Culture of fear
Culture war
Deculturalization
Dominator culture
Interculturalism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism
Biculturalism
Multiracial democracy
Pluriculturalism
Polyculturalism
Transculturism
Religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Catholicism
Cultural Christians
Protestantism
Role of Christianity in civilization
Eastern Orthodoxy
Mormonism
Cultural Hindus
Islam
Cultural Muslims
Judaism
Sikhism
Related
Animal culture
Archaeological culture
Bennett scale
Cannabis culture
Circuit of culture
Civilization
Coffee culture
Cross-cultural
Cultural center
Cultural competence
Cultural critic
Cultural determinism
Cultural diversity
Cultural evolutionism
Cultural homogenization
Cultural institution
Cultural jet lag
Cultural lag
Cultural literacy
Cultural mosaic
Cultural movement
Cultural mulatto
Cultural probe
Cultural relativism
Culture speculation
Cultural tourism
Pop-culture
Cultural translation
Cultural turn
Cultural sensibility
Culture and menstruation
Culture and positive psychology
Culture and social cognition
Culture gap
Culture hero
Culture industry
Culture shock
Culturgen
Children's culture
Culturalism
Cyberculture
Death and culture
Disability culture
Deaf culture
Eastern culture
Emotions and culture
Intercultural communication
Intercultural competence
Languaculture
Living things in culture
Media culture
Oppositional culture
Participatory culture
Permission culture
Rape culture
Remix culture
Tea culture
Transformation of culture
Urban culture
Welfare culture
Western culture
Youth culture
Category
Commons
WikiProject
Changes
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Other
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 6 October 2022, at 15:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
