Printing - Wikipedia
Printing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Process for reproducing text and images using a master form or template
This article is about the process of reproducing text and images.
For the handwriting method, see block letters.
For other uses, see Print (disambiguation).
From top to bottom, left to right: cylinder seal of a scene, block used for woodblock printing, movable type, printing press, lithograph press, offset press used for modern lithographic printing, linotype machine for hot metal typesetting, digital printer, 3D printer in action.
Part of a series on theHistory of printing
TechniquesWoodblock printing200Movable type1040Intaglio (printmaking)1430Printing pressc. 1440Etchingc. 1515Mezzotint1642Relief printing1690Aquatint1772Lithography1796Chromolithography1837Rotary press1843Hectograph1860Offset printing1875Hot metal typesetting1884Mimeograph1885Daisy wheel printing1889Photostat and rectigraph1907Screen printing1911Spirit duplicator1923Dot matrix printing1925Xerography1938Spark printing1940Phototypesetting1949Inkjet printing1950Dye-sublimation1957Laser printing1969Thermal printingc. 1972Solid ink printing1972Thermal-transfer printing19813D printing1986Digital printing1991
Marketing
Marketing
Marketing management
Key concepts
Distribution
Pricing
Retail
Service
Activation
Brand licensing
Brand management
Co-creation
Dominance
Effectiveness
Ethics
Promotion
Segmentation
Strategy
Account-based marketing
Digital marketing
Product marketing
Social marketing
Influencer marketing
Attribution
Annoyance factor
Horizontal integration
Vertical integration
Promotional content
Advertising
Branding
Corporate anniversary
Direct marketing
Loyalty marketing
Mobile marketing
On-hold messaging
Personal selling
Premiums
Prizes
Product placement
Propaganda
Publicity
Sales promotion
Sex in advertising
Underwriting spot
Promotional media
Behavioral targeting
Brand ambassador
Display advertising
Drip marketing
In-game advertising
Mobile advertising
Native advertising
New media
Online advertising
Out-of-home advertising
Point of sale
Product demonstration
Promotional merchandise
Promotional representative
Visual merchandising
Web banner
Word-of-mouth
Research
Market research
Marketing research
Mystery shopping
Printing is a process for mass reproducing text and images using a master form or template.
The earliest non-paper products involving printing include cylinder seals and objects such as the Cyrus Cylinder and the Cylinders of Nabonidus.
The earliest known form of printing as applied to paper was woodblock printing, which appeared in China before 220 AD for cloth printing.
However, it would not be applied to paper until the seventh century.
Later developments in printing technology include the movable type invented by Bi Sheng around 1040 AD and the printing press invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century.
The technology of printing played a key role in the development of the Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution and laid the material basis for the modern knowledge-based economy and the spread of learning to the masses.
Contents
History
Main article: History of printing
Woodblock printing
Main article: Woodblock printing
Woodblock printing is a technique for printing text, images or patterns that was used widely throughout East Asia.
It originated in China in antiquity as a method of printing on textiles and later on paper.
As a method of printing on cloth, the earliest surviving examples from China date to before 220 A.D.
In East Asia
The intricate frontispiece of the Diamond Sutra from Tang-dynasty China, 868 AD (British Library)
Main article: History of printing in East Asia
The earliest surviving woodblock printed fragments are from China.
They are of silk printed with flowers in three colours from the Han Dynasty (before 220 A.D.). The earliest examples of woodblock printing on paper appear in the mid-seventh century in China.
By the ninth century, printing on paper had taken off, and the first extant complete printed book containing its date is the Diamond Sutra (British Library) of 868.  By the tenth century, 400,000 copies of some sutras and pictures were printed, and the Confucian classics were in print.
A skilled printer could print up to 2,000 double-page sheets per day.
Printing spread early to Korea and Japan, which also used Chinese logograms, but the technique was also used in Turpan and Vietnam using a number of other scripts.
This technique then spread to Persia and Russia.
This technique was transmitted to Europe by around 1400 and was used on paper for old master prints and playing cards.
In Middle East
Block printing, called tarsh in Arabic, developed in Arabic Egypt during the ninth and tenth centuries, mostly for prayers and amulets.
There is some evidence to suggest that these print blocks made from non-wood materials, possibly tin, lead, or clay.
The techniques employed are uncertain.
Block printing later went out of use in Islamic Timurid Renaissance.  The printing technique in Egypt was embraced reproducing texts on paper strips and supplying them in different copies to meet the demand.
In Europe
The earliest known woodcut, 1423, Buxheim, with hand-colouring
Block printing first came to Europe as a method for printing on cloth, where it was common by 1300. Images printed on cloth for religious purposes could be quite large and elaborate.
When paper became relatively easily available, around 1400, the technique transferred very quickly to small woodcut religious images and playing cards printed on paper.
These prints produced in very large numbers from about 1425 onward.
Around the mid-fifteenth-century, block-books, woodcut books with both text and images, usually carved in the same block, emerged as a cheaper alternative to manuscripts and books printed with movable type.
These were all short heavily illustrated works, the bestsellers of the day, repeated in many different block-book versions: the Ars moriendi and the Biblia pauperum were the most common.  There is still some controversy among scholars as to whether their introduction preceded or, the majority view, followed the introduction of movable type, with the range of estimated dates being between about 1440 and 1460.
Movable-type printing
Copperplate of 1215–1216 5000 cash paper money with ten bronze movable types
Jikji, "Selected Teachings of Buddhist Sages and Son Masters" from Korea, the earliest known book printed with movable metal type, 1377. Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris
Main article: Movable type
See also: History of Western typography
Movable type is the system of printing and typography using movable pieces of metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches.
Movable type allowed for much more flexible processes than hand copying or block printing.
Around 1040, the first known movable type system was created in China by Bi Sheng out of porcelain.
Bi Sheng used clay type, which broke easily, but Wang Zhen by 1298 had carved a more durable type from wood.
He also developed a complex system of revolving tables and number-association with written Chinese characters that made typesetting and printing more efficient.
Still, the main method in use there remained woodblock printing (xylography), which "proved to be cheaper and more efficient for printing Chinese, with its thousands of characters".
Copper movable type printing originated in China at the beginning of the 12th century.
It was used in large-scale printing of paper money
issued by the Northern Song dynasty.
Movable type spread to Korea during the Goryeo dynasty.
Around 1230, Koreans invented a metal type movable printing using bronze.
The Jikji, published in 1377, is the earliest known metal printed book.
Type-casting was used, adapted from the method of casting coins.
The character was cut in beech wood, which was then pressed into a soft clay to form a mould, and bronze poured into the mould, and finally the type was polished.
Eastern metal movable type was spread to Europe between the late 14th and early 15th centuries.
The Korean form of metal movable type was described by the French scholar Henri-Jean Martin as "extremely similar to Gutenberg's".  Authoritative historians Frances Gies and Joseph Gies claimed that "The Asian priority of invention movable type is now firmly established, and that Chinese-Korean technique, or a report of it traveled westward is almost certain."
A case of cast metal type pieces and typeset matter in a composing stick
The printing press
Main article: Printing press
The invention of printing, anonymous, design by Stradanus, collection Plantin-Moretus Museum
Around 1450, Johannes Gutenberg introduced the first movable type printing system in Europe.
He advanced innovations in casting type based on a matrix and hand mould, adaptations to the screw-press, the use of an oil-based ink, and the creation of a softer and more absorbent paper.
Gutenberg was the first to create his type pieces from an alloy of lead, tin, antimony, copper and bismuth – the same components still used today.
Johannes Gutenberg started work on his printing press around 1436, in partnership with Andreas Dritzehen – whom he had previously instructed in gem-cutting – and Andreas Heilmann, the owner of a paper mill.[page needed]
Compared to woodblock printing, movable type page setting and printing using a press was faster and more durable.
Also, the metal type pieces were sturdier and the lettering more uniform, leading to typography and fonts.
The high quality and relatively low price of the Gutenberg Bible (1455) established the superiority of movable type for Western languages.
The printing press rapidly spread across Europe, leading up to the Renaissance, and later all around the world.[citation needed]
Page-setting room – c. 1920
Time Life magazine called Gutenberg's innovations in movable type printing the most important invention of the second millennium.
Rotary printing press
Main article: Rotary printing press
The rotary printing press was invented by Richard March Hoe in 1843. It uses impressions curved around a cylinder to print on long continuous rolls of paper or other substrates.
Rotary drum printing was later significantly improved by William Bullock.
There are multiple types of rotary printing press technologies that are still used today: sheetfed offset, rotogravure, and flexographic printing.[citation needed]
Printing capacity
The table lists the maximum number of pages which various press designs could print per hour.
Hand-operated presses
Steam-powered presses
Gutenberg-style c. 1600
Stanhope press c. 1800
Koenig press 1812
Koenig press 1813
Koenig press 1814
Koenig press 1818
Impressions per hour
1,100
2,000
2,400
Conventional printing technology
All printing process are concerned with two kinds of areas on the final output:
Image area (printing areas)
Non-image area (non-printing areas)
After the information has been prepared for production (the prepress step), each printing process has definitive means of separating the image from the non-image areas.
Conventional printing has four types of process:
Planographics, in which the printing and non-printing areas are on the same plane surface and the difference between them is maintained chemically or by physical properties, the examples are: offset lithography, collotype, and screenless printing.
Relief, in which the printing areas are on a plane surface and the non printing areas are below the surface, examples: flexography and letterpress.
Intaglio, in which the non-printing areas are on a plane surface and the printing area are etched or engraved below the surface, examples: steel die engraving, gravure, etching, collagraph.
Porous or Stencil, in which the printing areas are on fine mesh screens through which ink can penetrate, and the non-printing areas are a stencil over the screen to block the flow of ink in those areas, examples: screen printing, stencil duplicator, risograph.
Crop marks
To print an image without a blank area around the image, the non-printing areas must be trimmed after printing.  Crop marks can be used to show the printer where the printing area ends, and the non-printing area begins.  The part of the image which is trimmed off is called bleed.
Letterpress
Miehle press printing Le Samedi journal.
Montreal, 1939.
Main article: Letterpress printing
Letterpress printing is a technique of relief printing.
A worker composes and locks movable type into the bed of a press, inks it, and presses paper against it to transfer the ink from the type which creates an impression on the paper. 
There is different paper for different works the quality of paper shows different ink to use.
Letterpress printing was the normal form of printing text from its invention by Johannes Gutenberg in the mid-15th century and remained in wide use for books and other uses until the second half of the 20th century, when offset printing was developed.
More recently, letterpress printing has seen a revival in an artisanal form.
Offset
Main article: Offset press
Offset printing is a widely used modern printing process.
This technology is best described as when a positive (right-reading) image on a printing plate is inked and transferred (or "offset") from the plate to a rubber blanket.
The blanket image becomes a mirror image of the plate image.
An offset transfer moves the image to a printing substrate (typically paper), making the image right-reading again.
Offset printing utilizes a lithographic process which is based on the repulsion of oil and water.
The offset process employs a flat (planographic) image carrier (plate) which is mounted on a press cylinder.
The image to be printed obtains ink from ink rollers, while the non-printing area attracts an (acidic) film of water, keeping the non-image areas ink-free.
Most offset presses utilize three cylinders: Plate, blanket, impression.
Currently, most books and newspapers are printed using offset lithography.
Gravure
Main article: Rotogravure
Gravure printing is an intaglio printing technique, where the image being printed is made up of small depressions in the surface of the printing plate.
The cells are filled with ink, and the excess is scraped off the surface with a doctor blade.
Then a rubber-covered roller presses paper onto the surface of the plate and into contact with the ink in the cells.
The printing cylinders are usually made from copper plated steel, which is subsequently chromed, and may be produced by diamond engraving; etching, or laser ablation.
Gravure printing is used for long, high-quality print runs such as magazines, mail-order catalogues, packaging and printing onto fabric and wallpaper.
It is also used for printing postage stamps and decorative plastic laminates, such as kitchen worktops.
Flexography
Flexography is a type of relief printing.
The relief plates are typically made from photopolymers.
The process is used for flexible packaging, corrugated board, labels, newspapers and more.
In this market it competes with gravure printing by holding 80% of the market in USA, 50% in Europe but only 20% in Asia.
Other printing techniques
The other significant printing techniques include:
Dye-sublimation printer
Inkjet, used typically to print a small number of books or packaging, and also to print a variety of materials: from high quality papers simulating offset printing, to floor tiles.
Inkjet is also used to apply mailing addresses to direct mail pieces
Laser printing (toner printing) mainly used in offices and for transactional printing (bills, bank documents). Laser printing is commonly used by direct mail companies to create variable data letters or coupons.
Pad printing, popular for its ability to print on complex three-dimensional surfaces
Relief print, mainly used for catalogues
Screen-printing for a variety of applications ranging from T-shirts to floor tiles, and on uneven surfaces
Intaglio, used mainly for high value documents such as currencies.
Thermal printing, popular in the 1990s for fax printing.
Used today for printing labels such as airline baggage tags and individual price labels in supermarket deli counters.
Impact of German movable type printing press
Quantitative aspects
European output of books printed by movable type from ca. 1450 to 1800
Main article: History of printing
It is estimated that following the innovation of Gutenberg's printing press, the European book output rose from a few million to around one billion copies within a span of less than four centuries.
Religious impact
Samuel Hartlib, who was exiled in Britain and enthusiastic about social and cultural reforms, wrote in 1641 that "the art of printing will so spread knowledge that the common people, knowing their own rights and liberties, will not be governed by way of oppression".
Replica of the Gutenberg press at the International Printing Museum in Carson, California
In the Muslim world, printing, especially in Arabic scripts, was strongly opposed throughout the early modern period, partially due to the high artistic renown of the art of traditional calligraphy.
However, printing in Hebrew or Armenian script was often permitted.  Thus, the first movable type printing in the Ottoman Empire was in Hebrew in 1493, after which both religious and non-religious texts were able to be printed in Hebrew.  According to an imperial ambassador to Istanbul in the middle of the sixteenth century, it was a sin for the Turks, particularly Turkish Muslims, to print religious books.
In 1515, Sultan Selim I issued a decree under which the practice of printing would be punishable by death.
At the end of the sixteenth century, Sultan Murad III permitted the sale of non-religious printed books in Arabic characters, yet the majority were imported from Italy.
Ibrahim Muteferrika established the first press for printing in Arabic in the Ottoman Empire, against opposition from the calligraphers and parts of the Ulama.
It operated until 1742, producing altogether seventeen works, all of which were concerned with non-religious, utilitarian matters.  Printing did not become common in the Islamic world until the 19th century.
Hebrew language printers were banned from printing guilds in some Germanic states; as a result, Hebrew printing flourished in Italy, beginning in 1470 in Rome, then spreading to other cities including Bari, Pisa, Livorno, and Mantua.
Local rulers had the authority to grant or revoke licenses to publish Hebrew books, and many of those printed during this period carry the words 'con licenza de superiori' (indicating their printing having been officially licensed) on their title pages.
It was thought that the introduction of printing 'would strengthen religion and enhance the power of monarchs.' The majority of books were of a religious nature, with the church and crown regulating the content.
The consequences of printing 'wrong' material were extreme.
Meyrowitz used the example of William Carter who in 1584 printed a pro-Catholic pamphlet in Protestant-dominated England.
The consequence of his action was hanging.
Social impact
Print gave a broader range of readers access to knowledge and enabled later generations to build directly on the intellectual achievements of earlier ones without the changes arising within verbal traditions.
Print, according to Acton in his 1895 lecture On the Study of History, gave "assurance that the work of the Renaissance would last, that what was written would be accessible to all, that such an occultation of knowledge and ideas as had depressed the Middle Ages would never recur, that not an idea would be lost".
Bookprinting in the 16th century
Print was instrumental in changing the social nature of reading.
Elizabeth Eisenstein identifies two long-term effects of the invention of printing.
She claims that print created a sustained and uniform reference for knowledge and allowed comparisons of incompatible views.
Asa Briggs and Peter Burke identify five kinds of reading that developed in relation to the introduction of print:
Critical reading: Because texts finally became accessible to the general population, critical reading emerged as people were able to form their own opinions on texts.
Dangerous reading: Reading was seen as a dangerous pursuit because it was considered rebellious and unsociable, especially in the case of women, because reading could stir up dangerous emotions such as love, and if women could read, they could read love notes.
Creative reading: Printing allowed people to read texts and interpret them creatively, often in very different ways than the author intended.
Extensive reading: Once print made a wide range of texts available, earlier habits of intensive reading of texts from start to finish began to change, and people began reading selected excerpts, allowing much more extensive reading on a wider range of topics.
Private reading: Reading was linked to the rise of individualism because, before print, reading was often a group event in which one person would read to a group.
With print, both literacy and the availability of texts increased, and solitary reading became the norm.
The invention of printing also changed the occupational structure of European cities.
Printers emerged as a new group of artisans for whom literacy was essential, while the much more labour-intensive occupation of the scribe naturally declined.
Proof-correcting arose as a new occupation, while a rise in the numbers of booksellers and librarians naturally followed the explosion in the numbers of books.
Educational impact
Gutenberg's printing press had profound impacts on universities as well.
Universities were influenced in their "language of scholarship, libraries, curriculum, [and] pedagogy"
The language of scholarship
Before the invention of the printing press, most written material was in Latin.
However, after the invention of printing the number of books printed expanded as well as the vernacular.
Latin was not replaced completely, but remained an international language until the eighteenth century.
University libraries
At this time, universities began establishing accompanying libraries. "Cambridge made the chaplain responsible for the library in the fifteenth century but this position was abolished in 1570 and in 1577 Cambridge established the new office of university librarian.
Although, the University of Leuven did not see a need for a university library based on the idea that professor were the library.
Libraries also began receiving so many books from gifts and purchases that they began to run out of room.
However, the issue was solved in 1589 by a man named Merton who decided books should be stored on horizontal shelves rather than lecterns.
Curriculum
The printed press changed university libraries in many ways.
Professors were finally able to compare the opinions of different authors rather than being forced to look at only one or two specific authors.
Textbooks themselves were also being printed in different levels of difficulty, rather than just one introductory text being made available.
Comparison of printing methods
Comparison of printing methods
Printing process
Transfer method
Pressure applied
Drop size
Dynamic viscosity
Ink thickness on substrate
Notes
Cost-effective run length
Offset printing
rollers
0.5–1.5 μm
high print quality
> 5,000 (A3 trim size, sheet-fed)
> 30,000 (A3 trim size, web-fed)
Rotogravure
rollers
0.8–8 μm
thick ink layers possible, excellent image reproduction, edges of letters and lines are jagged
> 500,000
Flexography
rollers
0.8–2.5 μm
high quality (now HD)
Letterpress printing
platen
0.5–1.5 μm
slow drying
Screen-printing
pressing ink through holes in screen
< 12 μm
versatile method, low quality
Electrophotography
electrostatics
5–10 μm
thick ink
Liquid electrophotography
image formation by Electrostatics and transfer while fixing
High PQ, excellent image reproduction, wide range of media, very thin image
Inkjet printer
thermal
5–30 picolitres (pl)
1–5 mPa·s
< 0.5 μm
special paper required to reduce bleeding
< 350 (A3 trim size)
Inkjet printer
piezoelectric
4–30 pl
5–20 mPa s
< 0.5 μm
special paper required to reduce bleeding
< 350 (A3 trim size)
Inkjet printer
continuous
5–100 pl
1–5 mPa·s
< 0.5 μm
special paper required to reduce bleeding
< 350 (A3 trim size)
Transfer-print
thermal transfer film or water release decal
mass-production method of applying an image to a curved or uneven surface
Aerosol-jet printer
Aerosolized inks carried by gas
2–5 microns in diameter
1–1000 mPa s
< 1 μm
Good printing resolution, High quality
Digital Printers can now not just print leaflets and documents, but also scan, fax, copy and make booklets plus more.
Digital printing
By 2005, digital printing accounts for approximately 9% of the 45 trillion pages printed annually around the world.
Printing at home, an office, or an engineering environment is subdivided into:
small format (up to ledger size paper sheets), as used in business offices and libraries
wide format (up to 3' or 914mm wide rolls of paper), as used in drafting and design establishments.
Some of the more common printing technologies are:
blueprint – and related chemical technologies
daisy wheel – where pre-formed characters are applied individually
dot-matrix – which produces arbitrary patterns of dots with an array of printing studs
line printing – where formed characters are applied to the paper by lines
heat transfer – such as early fax machines or modern receipt printers that apply heat to special paper, which turns black to form the printed image
inkjet – including bubble-jet, where ink is sprayed onto the paper to create the desired image
electrophotography – where toner is attracted to a charged image and then developed
laser – a type of xerography where the charged image is written pixel by pixel using a laser
solid ink printer – where solid sticks of ink are melted to make liquid ink or toner
Vendors typically stress the total cost to operate the equipment, involving complex calculations that include all cost factors involved in the operation as well as the capital equipment costs, amortization, etc.
For the most part, toner systems are more economical than inkjet in the long run, even though inkjets are less expensive in the initial purchase price.
Professional digital printing (using toner) primarily uses an electrical charge to transfer toner or liquid ink to the substrate onto which it is printed.
Digital print quality has steadily improved from early color and black and white copiers to sophisticated colour digital presses such as the Xerox iGen3, the Kodak Nexpress, the HP Indigo Digital Press series, and the InfoPrint 5000. The iGen3 and Nexpress use toner particles and the Indigo uses liquid ink.
The InfoPrint 5000 is a full-color, continuous forms inkjet drop-on-demand printing system.
All handle variable data, and rival offset in quality.
Digital offset presses are also called direct imaging presses, although these presses can receive computer files and automatically turn them into print-ready plates, they cannot insert variable data.
Small press and fanzines generally use digital printing.
Prior to the introduction of cheap photocopying, the use of machines such as the spirit duplicator, hectograph, and mimeograph was common.
Printing payment self service kiosk
Main article: 3D printing
The objects are created by laying down or building up many thin layers of material in succession.
The technique is also known as additive manufacturing, rapid prototyping, or fabricating.[citation needed]
Gang run printing
Gang run printing is a method in which multiple printing projects are placed on a common paper sheet in an effort to reduce printing costs and paper waste.
Gang runs are generally used with sheet-fed printing presses and CMYK process color jobs, which require four or eight separate plates that are hung on the plate cylinder of the press.  Printers use the term "gang run" or "gang" to describe the practice of placing many print projects on the same oversized sheet.
Basically, instead of running one postcard that is 4 x 6 as an individual job the printer would place 15 different postcards on 20 x 18 sheet, therefore using the same amount of press time the printer will get 15 jobs done in roughly the same amount of time as one job.
Printed electronics
Printed electronics is the manufacturing of electronic devices using standard printing processes.
Printed electronics technology can be produced on cheap materials such as paper or flexible film, which makes it an extremely cost-effective method of production.
Since early 2010, the printable electronics industry has been gaining momentum and several large companies, including Bemis Company and Illinois Tool Works have made investments in printed electronics and industry associations including OE-A and FlexTech Alliance are contributing heavily to the advancement of the printed electronics industry.
Printing terminologies
Printing terminologies are the specific terms used in the printing industry.
Airshaft
Anilox
Basis weight
Ben-Day dots
Bleed (printing)
Broadsheet
California Job Case
Camera-ready
Card stock
Catchword
CcMmYK color model
CMYK color model
Colophon (publishing)
Color bleeding (printing)
Composing stick
Computer to film
Computer to plate
Continuous tone
Die (philately)
Dot gain
Dots per centimeter
Dots per inch
Double truck
Dry transfer
Dultgen
Duotone
Duplex printing
Edition (printmaking)
Error diffusion
Flong
Foil stamping
Folio (printing)
For position only
Frisket
Galley proof
Gang run printing
Grammage
Grey component replacement
Halftone
Hand mould
Hellbox
Hexachrome
Hot stamping
Imposition
Inkometer
Iris printer
Iron-on
Job Definition Format
Key plate
Keyline
Kodak Proofing Software
Mezzotint
Nanotransfer printing
Non-photo blue
Overprinting
Pagination
Paste up
Pre-flight (printing)
Prepress
Prepress proofing
Press check (printing)
Registration black
Rich black
Set-off (printing)
Spot color
Stochastic screening
Transfer-print
Trap (printing)
Under color removal
See also
Literature portal
Journalism portal
Visual arts portal
Technology portal
Color printing
Cloud printing
Converters (industry)
Dickerson combination press
Electrotyping
Flexography
In-mould decoration
In-mould labelling
Jang Yeong-sil
Laurens Janszoon Coster
Letterpress printing
Music engraving
Music printing
Print on demand
Printed T-shirt
Printing press check
Security printing
Textile printing
Waterless printing
Early American publishers and printers
References
Shelagh Vainker in Anne Farrer (ed), "Caves of the Thousand Buddhas", 1990, British Museum publications, ISBN 0-7141-1447-2
a b "Great Chinese Inventions". Minnesota-china.com.
Archived from the original on December 3, 2010. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
Rees, Fran.
Johannes Gutenberg: Inventor of the Printing Press
"Oneline Gallery: Sacred Texts". British Library.
Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2012.
Tsuen-Hsuin, Tsien; Needham, Joseph (1985). Paper and Printing.
Science and Civilisation in China.
Vol. 5 part 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 158, 201.
Thomas Franklin Carter, The Invention of Printing in China and its Spread Westward, The Ronald Press, NY 2nd ed. 1955, pp. 176–78
Mayor, A Hyatt (1980). Prints and People.
Vol. 5–18. Princeton: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-0-691-00326-9.
Richard W. Bulliet (1987), "Medieval Arabic Tarsh: A Forgotten Chapter in the History of Printing". Journal of the American Oriental Society 107 (3), pp. 427–38.
See Geoffrey Roper, Muslim Printing Before Gutenberg and the references cited therein.
Bloom, Jonathan (2001). Paper Before Print: The History and Impact of Paper in the Islamic World.
New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 8–10, 42–45. ISBN 0-300-08955-4.
Master E.S., Alan Shestack, Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1967
Beckwith, Christopher I., Empires of the Silk Road: A History of Central Eurasia from the Bronze Age to the Present, Princeton University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-691-15034-5
Tsien 1985, p. 330
Polenz, Peter von. (1991). Deutsche Sprachgeschichte vom Spätmittelalter bis zur Gegenwart: I. Einführung, Grundbegriffe, Deutsch in der frühbürgerlichen Zeit (in German). New York/Berlin: Gruyter, Walter de GmbH.
Thomas Christensen (2007). "Did East Asian Printing Traditions Influence the European Renaissance?". Arts of Asia Magazine (to appear). Retrieved October 18, 2006.
Juan González de Mendoza (1585). Historia de las cosas más notables, ritos y costumbres del gran reyno de la China (in Spanish).
Thomas Franklin Carter, The Invention of Printing in China and its Spread Westward, The Ronald Press, NY 2nd ed. 1955, pp. 176–178
L. S. Stavrianos (1998) . A Global History: From Prehistory to the 21st Century (7th ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
ISBN 978-0-13-923897-0.
Briggs, Asa and Burke, Peter (2002) However, more correctly it should be described as the other way around.
Gutenberg's form of metal movable type was extremely similar to the Korean Jikji's, which was printed 78 years prior to the Gutenberg Bible.
A Social History of the Media: from Gutenberg to the Internet, Polity, Cambridge, pp. 15–23, 61–73.
Gies, Frances and Gies, Joseph (1994) Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel: Technology and Invention in the Middle Age, New York : HarperCollins, ISBN 0-06-016590-1, p. 241.
Steinberg, S. H. (1974). Five Hundred Years of Printing (3rd ed.). Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin.
ISBN 978-0-14-020343-1.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved November 27, 2006, from Encyclopædia Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite DVD – entry "printing"
Polenz, Peter von. (1991). Deutsche Sprachgeschichte vom Spätmittelalter bis zur Gegenwart: I. Einführung, Grundbegriffe, Deutsch in der frühbürgerlichen Zeit (in German). New York/Berlin: Gruyter, Walter de GmbH.
In 1997, Time–Life magazine picked Gutenberg's invention to be the most important of the second millennium.
In 1999, the A&E Network voted Johannes Gutenberg "Man of the Millennium". See also 1,000 Years, 1,000 People: Ranking The Men and Women Who Shaped The Millennium Archived October 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine which was composed by four prominent US journalists in 1998.
Pollak, Michael (1972). "The performance of the wooden printing press". The Library Quarterly. 42 (2): 218–64. doi:10.1086/620028. JSTOR 4306163. S2CID 144726990.
Bolza 1967, p. 80 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBolza1967 (help)
Bolza 1967, p. 83 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBolza1967 (help)
Bolza 1967, p. 87 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBolza1967 (help)
a b Bolza 1967, p. 88 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBolza1967 (help)
Bob deLaubenfels (February 9, 2011). "What are crop marks and why would you want to print them?". Microsoft.
Archived from the original on April 24, 2022.
Joanna Izdebska; Sabu Thomas (September 24, 2015). Printing on Polymers: Fundamentals and Applications.
Elsevier Science. p. 199. ISBN 978-0-323-37500-9.
a b Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: "Charting the 'Rise of the West': Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (2009), pp. 409–45 (417, table 2)
a b Ref: Briggs, Asa and Burke, Peter (2002) A Social History of the Media: from Gutenberg to the Internet, Polity, Cambridge, pp. 15–23, 61–73.
or soon after; Naim A. Güleryüz, Bizans'tan 20. Yüzyıla – Türk Yahudileri, Gözlem Gazetecilik Basın ve Yayın A.Ş., İstanbul, January 2012, p. 90 ISBN 978-9944-994-54-5
Watson, William J., "İbrāhīm Müteferriḳa and Turkish Incunabula", Journal of the American Oriental Society, 1968, volume 88, issue 3, p. 436
"A Lifetime's Collection of Texts in Hebrew, at Sotheby's", Edward Rothstein, New York Times, February 11, 2009
a b Meyrowitz: "Mediating Communication: What Happens?" in "Questioning the Media", p. 41.
Eisenstein in Briggs and Burke, 2002: p. 21
a b c d Modie, G (2014). "Gutenberg's Effects on Universities". History of Education. 43 (4): 17. doi:10.1080/0046760X.2014.930186. S2CID 145093891.
Kipphan, Helmut (2001). Handbook of print media: technologies and production methods (Illustrated ed.). Springer. pp. 130–44. ISBN 978-3-540-67326-2.
a b c d e Kipphan, Helmut (2001). Handbook of print media: technologies and production methods (Illustrated ed.). Springer. pp. 976–79. ISBN 978-3-540-67326-2.
a b Kipphan, Helmut (2001). Handbook of print media: technologies and production methods (Illustrated ed.). Springer. pp. 48–52. ISBN 978-3-540-67326-2.
a b Zeng, Minxiang; Zhang, Yanliang (October 22, 2019). "Colloidal nanoparticle inks for printing functional devices: emerging trends and future prospects". Journal of Materials Chemistry A. 7 (41): 23301–23336. doi:10.1039/C9TA07552F. ISSN 2050-7496. OSTI 1801277. S2CID 203945576.
Hu, Guohua; Kang, Joohoon; Ng, Leonard W. T.; Zhu, Xiaoxi; Howe, Richard C. T.; Jones, Christopher G.; Hersam, Mark C.; Hasan, Tawfique (May 8, 2018). "Functional inks and printing of two-dimensional materials". Chemical Society Reviews. 47 (9): 3265–3300. doi:10.1039/C8CS00084K. ISSN 1460-4744. PMID 29667676.
Paulsen, Jason A.; Renn, Michael; Christenson, Kurt; Plourde, Richard (October 2012). "Printing conformal electronics on 3D structures with Aerosol Jet technology". 2012 Future of Instrumentation International Workshop (FIIW) Proceedings: 1–4. doi:10.1109/FIIW.2012.6378343. ISBN 978-1-4673-2482-3. S2CID 21924851.
"When 2% Leads to a Major Industry Shift Archived February 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine" Patrick Scaglia, August 30, 2007.
"Recent Announcements Show Gains Being Made by PE Industry". Printed Electronics Now.
Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
"Printable transistors usher in 'internet of things'". The Register.
Retrieved September 21, 2012.
Further reading
Edwards, Eiluned (December 2015). Block Printed Textiles of India.
Niyogi Books.
ISBN 978-93-85285-03-5.
Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, Cambridge University Press, September 1980, Paperback, 832 p.
ISBN 0-521-29955-1
Gaskell, Philip (1995). A New Introduction to Bibliography.
Winchester and Newcastle: St Paul's Bibliographies and Oak Knoll Press.
Hargrave, J. (2013). Disruptive Technological History: Papermaking to Digital Printing.
Journal of Scholarly Publishing, 44(3). 221–227.
Lafontaine, Gerard S. (1958). Dictionary of Terms Used in the Paper, Printing, and Allied Industries.
Toronto: H. Smith Paper Mills. 110 p.
Marshall McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (1962) Univ. of Toronto Press (1st ed.); reissued by Routledge & Kegan Paul ISBN 0-7100-1818-5
Nesbitt, Alexander (1957). The History and Technique of Lettering.
Dover Books.
Saunders, Gill; Miles, Rosie (May 1, 2006). Prints Now: Directions and Definitions.
Victoria and Albert Museum.
ISBN 978-1-85177-480-7.
Steinberg, S.H. (1996). Five Hundred Years of Printing.
London and Newcastle: The British Library and Oak Knoll Press.
Tam, Pui-Wing The New Paper Trail, The Wall Street Journal Online, February 13, 2006 p.
R8
Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin (1985). "Paper and Printing". Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. 5 part 1. Cambridge University Press. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Woong-Jin-Wee-In-Jun-Gi No. 11 Jang Young Sil by Baek Sauk Gi. 1987 Woongjin Publishing Co., Ltd. p. 61.
On the effects of Gutenberg's printing
Early printers manuals
The classic manual of early hand-press technology is
Moxon, Joseph (1962) [1683–1684].  Herbert, Davies; Carter, Harry (eds.). "Mechanick Exercises on the Whole Art of Printing" (reprint ed.). New York: Dover Publications. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
A somewhat later one, showing 18th century developments is
Stower, Caleb (1965) . "The Printer's Grammar" (reprint ed.). London: Gregg Press. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
External links
Look up printing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Printing.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Printing.
"Printing" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 22 (11th ed.). 1911.
"Printing" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
Prints & People: A Social History of Printed Pictures, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF)
Centre for the History of the Book
Printing Industries of the Americas – trade association for printers and companies in the graphic arts
The development of book and printing.
English website of the Gutenberg-Museum Mainz (Germany)
BPSnet British Printing Society
Taiwan Culture Portal: Ri Xing Type Foundry – preserving the true character of Chinese type
A collection of printing materials from the 19th Century – Documents printed by R. Mathison Jr., The Job Printer, in Vancouver, B.C. – UBC Library Digital Collections
International Printing Museum, Carson, CA, Web site
Museum of Printing, Andover, MA, Web site
American Printing History Association, NY, Web site
Hamilton Wood Type and Printing Museum, WI, Web site
Printing Quality
History of Printing – Timeline
BooksProduction
Binding
Covers
dust jackets
Design
Editing
Illustration
Illuminated manuscripts
Printing
edition
history
incunabula
instant book
limited edition
Publishing
advance copy
hardcover
paperback
Size
Typesetting
Volume (bibliography)
Collection (publishing)
Book series
Consumption
Awards
Bestsellers
list
Bibliography
Bibliomania (tsundoku)
Bibliophilia
Bibliotherapy
Bookmarks
Bookselling
blurbs
book towns
history
used
Censorship
Clubs
Collecting
Digitizing
Bookworm (insect)
Furniture
bookcases
bookends
Library
Print culture
Reading
literacy
Reviews
By country
Brazil
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Pakistan
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
Other
Genres
fictional
miniature
pop-up
textbook
Grimoire
Formats
audiobooks
Ebooks
Coffee table book
Related
Banned books
Book burning
incidents
Nazi
Book curses
Book packaging
Book swapping
Conservation and restoration
Dog ears
History of books
scroll
codex
Intellectual property
ISBN
Outline
Preservation
The Philobiblon
World Book Day
World Book Capital
Outline
Category
Portal
Paper
Paper engineering / Papermaking
History
Battle of Talas
Missal of Silos
Originators
Cai Lun
Zuo Bo/Tso Po/Tso Tzǔ-yi
Damjing
Developers
Matthias Koops
Friedrich Gottlob Keller
Charles Fenerty
Scholars
Thomas Francis Carter
Dard Hunter
Tsien Tsuen-hsuin
Types
Acid-free
Air-laid
Amate
Asphalt
Banana
Bible
Blotting
Bond
Bristol
Carbon
Cardboard
Cartridge
Coated
Construction
Contact
Copy
Carbonless
Correction
Cotton (rag)
Crêpe
Display
Dó
Electrical insulation
Genkō yōshi
Glassine
Graph
Greaseproof
Hemp
India
Inkjet
Ingres
Korean
Kraft
Butcher
Laid
Lokta
Manila
Mummy
Newsprint
Onionskin
Origami
Paperboard
Parchment
Photographic
Plastic-coated
Red rosin
Rice
Rolling
Scritta
Security
Seed
Stone
Tar
Thermal
Tissue
Tracing
Transfer
Tree-free
Wallpaper
Washi
Wasli
Waterproof
Wax
Wood-free
Wove
Writing
Xuan
Materials
China clay
Corrugated fiberboard
Fiber crop
Paper chemicals
Papyrus
Wood pulp
Specifications
Density
Grammage
Paper sizes
Surface chemistry of paper
Units of paper quantity
Wet strength
Manufactureand process
Bleaching of wood pulp
Calender
Conical refiner
Deinking
Elemental chlorine free
Environmental impact of paper
Handmade paper
Hollander beater
Kraft process
Organosolv
Paper machine
Paper recycling
Papermaking
Soda pulping
Sulfite process
Industry
Paper industry
Canada
Europe
India
Japan
United States
Paper mill
List
Uses
Lined paper
Paper towels
Papier-mache
Cardboard
Clothing
Tissues
Notebooks
Watercolor paper
Paper money
Beverage cartons
Category
Commons
The book publishing processCopy preparation
Submission
Literary agent
Publisher's reader
Contract negotiation
intellectual property rights
royalty rates, format, etc.
Editing
Literary editor
Commissioning editor
Developmental editor
Authors' editor
Book editor
Copy editing
Prepress
Design
Indexing
Typesetting
Proof-reading
List of proofreader's marks
Book production
Printing
Folding
Binding
Trimming
Imprint
Desktop publishing softwareFree software
Collabora Online Draw
LyX
LibreOffice Draw
Scribus
Software freeware
PagePlus SE
PDF-XChange
Fatpaint (Cloud-based)
Proprietary software
Acrobat
FrameMaker
InDesign
PageMaker
Affinity Publisher
Calamus
Corel Ventura
MadCap Flare
Microsoft Publisher
PagePlus
Pages
PageStream
QuarkXPress
Timeworks Publisher
See also
Web design
Mobile publishing
Electronic publishing
Printing
List of PDF software
Comparison of e-book readers
Category
Comparison
List
PackagingGeneraltopics
Active packaging
Child-resistant packaging
Contract packager
Edible packaging
Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging
Overpackaging
Package pilferage
Package testing
Package theft
Packaging engineering
Resealable packaging
Reusable packaging
Reuse of bottles
Shelf life
Shelf-ready packaging
Shelf-stable
Sustainable packaging
Tamper-evident
Tamper resistance
Wrap rage
Productpackages
Alternative wine closure
Banana box
Beer bottle
Box wine
Case-ready meat
Coffee bag
Cosmetic packaging
Currency packaging
Disposable food packaging
Drink can
Egg carton
Evidence packaging
Field ration
Flour sack
Foam food container
Food packaging
Fuel container
Gas cylinder
Glass milk bottle
Growler
Juicebox
Low plastic water bottle
Luxury packaging
Milk bag
Optical disc packaging
Oyster pail
Popcorn bag
Pharmaceutical packaging
Plastic milk container
Sand bag
Self-heating food packaging
Screw cap (wine)
Single-serve coffee container
Water bottle
Wine bottle
Containers
Aerosol spray
Aluminium bottle
Aluminum can
Ampoule
Antistatic bag
Bag-in-box
Bag
Barrel
Biodegradable bag
Blister pack
Boil-in-bag
Bottle
Box
Bulk box
Cage
Case
Carboy
Carton
Chub
Clamshell
Corrugated box design
Crate
Disposable cup
Drum
Endcap
Envelope
Euro container
Flexible intermediate bulk container
Flexi-bag
Folding carton
Glass bottle
Gunny sack
Inhaler
Insulated shipping container
Intermediate bulk container
Jar
Jerrycan
Jug
Keg
Mesh bag
Multilayered packaging
Multi-pack
Packet (container)
Padded envelope
Pail
Paper bag
Paper sack
Plastic bag
Plastic bottle
Retort pouch
Salvage drum
Sachet
Water sachet
Security bag
Shipping container
Shipping tube
Skin pack
Spray bottle
Squround
Stand-up pouch
Steel and tin cans
Tetra Brik
Thermal bag
Tub (container)
Tube
Unit load
Vial
Wooden box
Materialsandcomponents
Adhesive
Aluminium foil
Bail handle
Bioplastic
Biodegradable plastic
BoPET
Bubble wrap
Bung
Cellophane
Closure
Coated paper
Coating
Coextrusion
Corrugated fiberboard
Corrugated plastic
Cushioning
Desiccant
Double seam
Flip-top
Foam peanut
Gel pack
Glass
Hot-melt adhesive
Humidity indicator card
Kraft paper
Label
Lid
Linear low-density polyethylene
Liquid packaging board
Living hinge
Low-density polyethylene
Metallised film
Modified atmosphere
Molded pulp
Nonwoven fabric
Overwrap
Oxygen scavenger
Package handle
Packaging gas
Pallet
Paper
Paper pallet
Paperboard
Plastic-coated paper
Plastic film
Plastic pallet
Plastic wrap
Polyester
Polyethylene
Polypropylene
Pressure-sensitive tape
Pump dispenser
Screw cap
Screw cap (wine)
Security printing
Security tape
Shock detector
Shock and vibration data logger
Shrink wrap
Slip sheet
Staple (fastener)
Strapping
Stretch wrap
Susceptor
Tamper-evident band
Tear tape
Temperature data logger
Time temperature indicator
Tinplate
Velostat
Processes
Aseptic processing
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Blow fill seal
Blow molding
Calendering
Canning
Coating
Containerization
Converting
Corona treatment
Curtain coating
Die cutting
Die forming (plastics)
Electronic article surveillance
Extrusion
Extrusion coating
Flame treatment
Glass production
Graphic design
Hazard analysis and critical control points
Hermetic seal
Induction sealing
Injection moulding
Lamination
Laser cutting
Molding
Package tracking
Papermaking
Plastic extrusion
Plastic welding
Printing
Product development
Production control
Quality assurance
Radio-frequency identification
Roll slitting
Shearing (manufacturing)
Thermoforming
Track and trace
Ultrasonic welding
Vacuum forming
Vacuum packaging
Verification and validation
Machinery
Barcode printer
Barcode reader
Bottling line
Calender
Can seamer
Cartoning machine
Case sealer
Check weigher
Conveyor system
Drum pump
Extended core stretch wrapper
Filler
Heat gun
Heat sealer
Industrial robot
Injection molding machine
Label printer applicator
Lineshaft roller conveyor
Logistics automation
Material-handling equipment
Mechanical brake stretch wrapper
Multihead weigher
Orbital stretch wrapper
Packaging machinery
Pallet inverter
Palletizer
Rotary wheel blow molding systems
Seed-counting machine
Shrink tunnel
Staple gun
Tape dispenser
Turntable stretch wrapper
Vertical form fill sealing machine
Environment,post-use
Biodegradation
Closed-loop box reuse
Environmental engineering
Glass recycling
Industrial ecology
Life-cycle assessment
Litter
Packaging waste
Paper recycling
PET bottle recycling
Plastic recycling
Recycling
Reusable packaging
Reverse logistics
Source reduction
Sustainable packaging
Waste management
Category: Packaging
LabelingLabel construction
Adhesive
Die cutting (web)
Hologram
In-mould labelling
Label
Paper
Perforation
Pressure-sensitive adhesive
Plastic
Printing
Security hologram
Release liner
Security printing
Security label
Smart label
Sticker
Content
Advertising
Barcode
Country of origin
Cigarette warning label
Ecolabel
EU energy label
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
List of food labeling regulations
Mandatory labelling
Nameplate
Nutrition facts label
Plain tobacco packaging
Radio-frequency identification
United Kingdom food information regulations
UPC
Warning label
Wine label
Use
Advertising
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Label dispenser
Label printer
Packaging and labeling
Track and trace
MarketingKey concepts
Distribution
Pricing
Retail
Service
Activation
Brand licensing
Brand management
Co-creation
Corporate identity
Dominance
Effectiveness
Ethics
Management
Promotion
Research
Segmentation
Strategy
Account-based marketing
Digital marketing
Product marketing
Social marketing
Promotional contents
Advertising
Branding
Corporate anniversary
Direct marketing
Loyalty marketing
Mobile marketing
On-hold messaging
Personal selling
Premiums
Prizes
Product placement
Propaganda
Publicity
Sales promotion
Sex in advertising
Underwriting spot
Promotional media
Behavioral targeting
Brand ambassador
Broadcasting
Display advertising
Drip marketing
In-game advertising
Mobile advertising
Native advertising
New media
Online advertising
Out-of-home advertising
Point of sale
Printing
Product demonstration
Promotional merchandise
Publication
Visual merchandising
Web banner
Word-of-mouth
Authority control National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 07:02 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
