Roald Amundsen - Wikipedia
Roald Amundsen
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 22 September 2022.
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Norwegian polar explorer (1872–1928)
This article is about the explorer.
For other uses, see Roald Amundsen (disambiguation).
"Amundsen" redirects here.
For other uses, see Amundsen (disambiguation).
Roald AmundsenAmundsen c. 1923BornRoald Engelbregt Gravning Amundsen(1872-07-16)16 July 1872Borge, Østfold, NorwayDisappeared18 June 1928 (aged 55)Barents SeaOccupationExplorerKnown for
First to reach the South Pole and the North Pole
First to navigate the Northwest Passage
Awards
Hubbard Medal (1907)
Order of Franz Joseph (1907)
Charles P. Daly Medal (1912)
Vega Medal (1913)
Congressional Gold Medal (1928)
Signature
Roald Engelbregt Gravning Amundsen (UK: /ˈɑːmʊndsən/, US: /-məns-/; Norwegian: [ˈrùːɑɫ ˈɑ̂mʉnsən] (listen); 16 July 1872 – c. 18 June 1928) was a Norwegian explorer of polar regions.
He was a key figure of the period known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration.
Born in Borge, Østfold, Norway, Amundsen began his career as a polar explorer as first mate on Adrien de Gerlache's Belgian Antarctic Expedition of 1897–1899. From 1903 to 1906, he led the first expedition to successfully traverse the Northwest Passage on the sloop Gjøa.
In 1909, Amundsen began planning for a South Pole expedition.
He left Norway in June 1910 on the ship Fram and reached Antarctica in January 1911. His party established a camp at the Bay of Whales and a series of supply depots on the Barrier (now known as the Ross Ice Shelf) before setting out for the pole in October.
The party of five, led by Amundsen, became the first to successfully reach the South Pole on 14 December 1911.
Following a failed attempt in 1918 to reach the North Pole by traversing the Northeast Passage on the ship Maud, Amundsen began planning for an aerial expedition instead.
On 12 May 1926, Amundsen and 15 other men in the airship Norge became the first explorers verified to have reached the North Pole.
Amundsen disappeared in June 1928 while flying on a rescue mission for the airship Italia in the Arctic.
The search for his remains, which have not been found, was called off in September of that year.
Contents
Early life
Amundsen was born into a family of Norwegian shipowners and captains in Borge, between the towns Fredrikstad and Sarpsborg.
His parents were Jens Amundsen and Hanna Sahlqvist.
Roald was the fourth son in the family.
His mother wanted him to avoid the family maritime trade and encouraged him to become a doctor, a promise that Amundsen kept until his mother died when he was aged 21. He promptly quit university for a life at sea.
When he was fifteen years old, Amundsen was enthralled by reading Sir John Franklin's narratives of his overland Arctic expeditions.
Amundsen wrote "I read them with a fervid fascination which has shaped the whole course of my life".
Polar treks
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Roald Amundsen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Belgian Antarctic Expedition
RV Belgica frozen in the ice, 1898
Amundsen joined the Belgian Antarctic Expedition as first mate at the age of 25 in 1897. This expedition, led by Adrien de Gerlache using the ship the RV Belgica, became the first expedition to overwinter in Antarctica.
The Belgica, whether by mistake or design, became locked in the sea ice at 70°30′S off Alexander Island, west of the Antarctic Peninsula.
The crew endured a winter for which they were poorly prepared.
By Amundsen's own estimation, the doctor for the expedition, the American Frederick Cook, probably saved the crew from scurvy by hunting for animals and feeding the crew fresh meat.
In cases where citrus fruits are lacking, uncooked meat – particularly offal – from animals often contain enough of the vitamin to prevent scurvy and even partly treat it.
This was an important lesson for Amundsen's future expeditions.
Amundsen and Cook later took over command of the ship when De Gerlache became severely ill.
The Northwest Passage
Amundsen c. 1908
In 1903, Amundsen led the first expedition to successfully traverse Canada's Northwest Passage between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
He planned a small expedition of six men in a 45-ton fishing vessel, Gjøa, in order to have flexibility.
His ship had relatively shallow draft.
His technique was to use a small ship and hug the coast.
Amundsen had the ship outfitted with a small 13 horsepower single-screw paraffin engine.
They traveled via Baffin Bay, the Parry Channel and then south through Peel Sound, James Ross Strait, Simpson Strait and Rae Strait.
They spent two winters at King William Island, in the harbor of what is today Gjoa Haven.
During this time, Amundsen and the crew learned from the local Netsilik Inuit about Arctic survival skills, which he found invaluable in his later expedition to the South Pole.
For example, he learned to use sled dogs for transportation of goods and to wear animal skins in lieu of heavy, woolen parkas, which could not keep out the cold when wet.
Leaving Gjoa Haven, he sailed west and passed Cambridge Bay, which had been reached from the west by Richard Collinson in 1852. Continuing to the south of Victoria Island, the ship cleared the Canadian Arctic Archipelago on 17 August 1905. It had to stop for the winter before going on to Nome on Alaska's Pacific coast.
The nearest telegraph station was 500 miles (800 km) away in Eagle.
Amundsen traveled there overland to wire a success message on 5 December, then returned to Nome in 1906. Later that year he was elected to the American Antiquarian Society.
At this time, Amundsen learned of the dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden, and that he had a new king.
The explorer sent the new king, Haakon VII, news that his traversing the Northwest Passage "was a great achievement for Norway". He said he hoped to do more and signed it "Your loyal subject, Roald Amundsen." The crew returned to Oslo in November 1906, after almost three-and-a-half years abroad.
Gjøa was returned to Norway in 1972. After a 45-day trip from San Francisco on a bulk carrier, she was placed on land outside the Fram Museum in Oslo, where she is now situated inside her own dedicated building at the museum.
South Pole Expedition
Main article: Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Norwegian flag at the South Pole
Amundsen next planned to take an expedition to the North Pole and explore the Arctic Basin.
Finding it difficult to raise funds, when he heard in 1909 that the Americans Frederick Cook and Robert Peary had claimed to reach the North Pole as a result of two different expeditions, he decided to reroute to Antarctica.
He was not clear about his intentions, and Robert F. Scott and the Norwegian supporters felt misled.
Scott was planning his own expedition to the South Pole that year.
Using the ship Fram, earlier used by Fridtjof Nansen, Amundsen left Oslo for the south on 3 June 1910. At Madeira, Amundsen alerted his men that they would be heading to Antarctica, and sent a telegram to Scott: "Beg to inform you Fram proceeding Antarctic – Amundsen."
Nearly six months later, the expedition arrived at the eastern edge of the Ross Ice Shelf (then known as "the Great Ice Barrier"), at a large inlet called the Bay of Whales, on 14 January 1911. Amundsen established his base camp there, calling it Framheim.
Amundsen eschewed the heavy wool clothing worn on earlier Antarctic attempts in favour of adopting Inuit-style furred skins.
Using skis and dog sleds for transportation, Amundsen and his men created supply depots at 80°, 81° and 82° South on the Barrier, along a line directly south to the Pole.
Amundsen also planned to kill some of his dogs on the way and use them as a source for fresh meat.
As he went he butchered some of the dogs and fed them to the remaining dogs, as well as eating some himself.
A small group, including Hjalmar Johansen, Kristian Prestrud and Jørgen Stubberud, set out on 8 September, but had to abandon their trek due to extreme temperatures.
The painful retreat caused a quarrel within the group, and Amundsen sent Johansen and the other two men to explore King Edward VII Land.
A second attempt, with a team of five made up of Olav Bjaaland, Helmer Hanssen, Sverre Hassel, Oscar Wisting and Amundsen, departed base camp on 19 October.
They took four sledges and 52 dogs.
Using a route along the previously unknown Axel Heiberg Glacier, they arrived at the edge of the Polar Plateau on 21 November after a four-day climb.
The team  and 16 dogs arrived at the pole on 14 December, a month before Scott's group.[a] Amundsen named their South Pole camp Polheim.
Amundsen renamed the Antarctic Plateau as King Haakon VII's Plateau.
They left a small tent and letter stating their accomplishment, in case they did not return safely to Framheim.
The team arrived at Framheim on 25 January 1912, with 11 surviving dogs.
They made their way off the continent and to Hobart, Australia, where Amundsen publicly announced his success on 7 March 1912. He telegraphed news to backers.
Amundsen's expedition benefited from his careful preparation, good equipment, appropriate clothing, a simple primary task, an understanding of dogs and their handling, and the effective use of skis.
In contrast to the misfortunes of Scott's team, Amundsen's trek proved relatively smooth and uneventful.
North Polar Expeditions and The Northeast Passage
The Northeast Passage
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Maud in June 1918
In 1918, an expedition Amundsen began with a new ship, Maud, lasted until 1925. Maud was carefully navigated through the ice west to east through the Northeast Passage.
With him on this expedition were Oscar Wisting and Helmer Hanssen, both of whom had been part of the team to reach the South Pole.
In addition, Henrik Lindstrøm was included as a cook.
He suffered a stroke and was so physically reduced that he could not participate.
The goal of the expedition was to explore the unknown areas of the Arctic Ocean, strongly inspired by Fridtjof Nansen's earlier expedition with Fram.
The plan was to sail along the coast of Siberia and go into the ice farther to the north and east than Nansen had.
In contrast to Amundsen's earlier expeditions, this was expected to yield more material for academic research, and he carried the geophysicist Harald Sverdrup on board.
The voyage was to the northeasterly direction over the Kara Sea.
Amundsen planned to freeze the Maud into the polar ice cap and drift towards the North Pole – as Nansen had done with the Fram – and he did so off Cape Chelyuskin.
But, the ice became so thick that the ship was unable to break free, although it was designed for such a journey in heavy ice.
In September 1919, the crew got the ship loose from the ice, but it froze again after eleven days somewhere between the New Siberian Islands and Wrangel Island.
During this time, Amundsen suffered a broken arm and was attacked by polar bears.
As a result, he participated little in the work outdoors, such as sleigh rides and hunting.
He, Hanssen, and Wisting, along with two other men, embarked on an expedition by dog sled to Nome, Alaska, more than 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) away.
But they found that the ice was not frozen solid in the Bering Strait, and it could not be crossed.
They sent a telegram from Anadyr to signal their location.
After two winters frozen in the ice, without having achieved the goal of drifting over the North Pole, Amundsen decided to go to Nome to repair the ship and buy provisions.
Several of the crew ashore there, including Hanssen, did not return on time to the ship.
Amundsen considered Hanssen to be in breach of contract, and dismissed him from the crew.
During the third winter, Maud was frozen in the western Bering Strait.
She finally became free and the expedition sailed south, reaching Seattle, in the American Pacific Northwest in 1921 for repairs.
Amundsen returned to Norway, needing to put his finances in order.
He took with him two young indigenous girls, a four-year-old he adopted, Kakonita, and her companion Camilla.
When Amundsen went bankrupt two years later, however, he sent the girls to be cared for by Camilla's father, who lived in eastern Russia.
In June 1922, Amundsen returned to Maud, which had been sailed to Nome.
He decided to shift from the planned naval expedition to aerial ones, and arranged to charter a plane.
He divided the expedition team in two: one part, led by him, was to winter over and prepare for an attempt to fly over the pole in 1923. The second team on Maud, under the command of Wisting, was to resume the original plan to drift over the North Pole in the ice.
The ship drifted in the ice for three years east of the New Siberian Islands, never reaching the North Pole.
It was finally seized by Amundsen's creditors as  collateral for his mounting debt.
Although they were unable to reach the North Pole, the scientific results of the expedition, mainly the work of Sverdrup, have proven to be of considerable value.
Much of the carefully collected scientific data was lost during the ill-fated journey of Peter Tessem and Paul Knutsen, two crew members sent on a mission by Amundsen.
The scientific materials were later retrieved by Russian scientist Nikolay Urvantsev from where they had been abandoned on the shores of the Kara Sea.
Aerial Expeditions to the North Pole
Amundsen and plane in Svalbard (1925)
The 1923 attempt to fly over the Pole failed.
Amundsen and Oskar Omdal, of the Royal Norwegian Navy, tried to fly from Wainwright, Alaska, to Spitsbergen across the North Pole.
When their aircraft was damaged, they abandoned the journey.
To raise additional funds, Amundsen traveled around the United States in 1924 on a lecture tour.
In 1925, accompanied by Lincoln Ellsworth, pilot Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen, flight mechanic Karl Feucht and two other team members, Amundsen took two Dornier Do J flying boats, the N-24 and N-25, to 87° 44′ north.
It was the northernmost latitude reached by plane up to that time.
The aircraft landed a few miles apart without radio contact, yet the crews managed to reunite.
The N-24 was damaged.
Amundsen and his crew worked for more than three weeks to clean up an airstrip to take off from ice.
They shovelled 600 tons of ice while consuming only one pound (400 g) of daily food rations.
In the end, the six crew members were packed into the N-25. In a remarkable feat, Riiser-Larsen took off, and they barely became airborne over the cracking ice.
They returned triumphant when everyone thought they had been lost forever.
In 1926, Amundsen and 15 other men (including Ellsworth, Riiser-Larsen, Oscar Wisting, and the Italian air crew led by aeronautical engineer Umberto Nobile) made the first crossing of the Arctic in the airship Norge, designed by Nobile.
They left Spitsbergen on 11 May 1926, flew over the North Pole on 12 May, and landed in Alaska the following day.
Controversy over Polar Priority
The three previous claims to have arrived at the North Pole: Frederick Cook in 1908; Robert Peary in 1909; and Richard E. Byrd in 1926 (just a few days before the Norge) are disputed by some, as being either of dubious accuracy or outrightly fraudulent.
If these other claims are false, the crew of the Norge would be the first explorers verified to have reached the North Pole, when they floated over it in the Norge in 1926. If the Norge expedition was the first to the North Pole, Amundsen and Oscar Wisting were the first men to have reached both geographical poles, by ground or by air.
Disappearance and death
Amundsen's Latham 47 flying boat
Amundsen disappeared on 18 June 1928 while flying on a rescue mission in the Arctic.
His team included Norwegian pilot Leif Dietrichson, French pilot René Guilbaud, and three more Frenchmen.
They were seeking missing members of Nobile's crew, whose new airship Italia had crashed while returning from the North Pole.
Amundsen's French Latham 47 flying boat never returned.
Later, a wing-float and bottom gasoline tank from the plane, which had been adapted as a replacement wing-float, were found near the Tromsø coast.
It is assumed that the plane crashed in the Barents Sea, and that Amundsen and his crew were killed in the wreck, or died shortly afterward.
The search for Amundsen and team was called off in September 1928 by the Norwegian government, and the bodies were never found.
In 2004 and in late August 2009, the Royal Norwegian Navy used the unmanned submarine Hugin 1000 to search for the wreckage of Amundsen's plane.
The searches focused on a 40-square-mile (100 km2) area of the sea floor, and were documented by the German production company ContextTV. They found nothing from the Amundsen flight.
Personal life
Amundsen was a lifelong bachelor, though he had a long-time relationship with the Norwegian-born Kristine Elisabeth ('Kiss') Bennett, the wife of an Englishman, Charles Peto Bennett.
He met her in London in 1907 and they remained close for many years, although Amundsen kept the relationship a secret from everyone outside his intimate circle.
Later, he became engaged to Bess Magids, an American divorcée whom he had met in Alaska.
Though there is little evidence, it was said that Amundsen had a brief affair with his landlady in Antwerp – until he came home and found her dead of an apparent suicide.
His biographer Tor Bomann-Larsen also suggests a romantic relationship between Amundsen and Sigrid Castberg, wife of the lawyer Leif Castberg from Gjøvik, in the years before the South Pole expedition, a relationship Amundsen broke up after that expedition in favour of Kiss Bennett.
Author Julian Sancton noted that in his younger years, Amundsen was said to have ignored romantic relationships in pursuit of his goals.
He "found little use in activities that didn't help him fulfill his polar ambitions".
Orders and decorations
Norway:
Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian Order of Saint Olav, 20 November 1906
Commemorative Medal for the 1910–1911 Fram Expedition to the South Pole, 20 August 1912
Medal for Outstanding Civic Service, 1st Class (Gold), 1925
Austria-Hungary: Grand Cross of the Imperial Austrian Order of Franz Joseph, 1907
Belgium: Knight of the Order of Leopold (civil division)
Denmark:
Medal of Merit, in Gold and with Crown, 1907
Hans Egede Medal, 1925
France:
Grand Officer of the National Order of the Legion of Honour
Grand Gold Medal of Exploration and Journeys of Discovery, 1913
Kingdom of Italy: Grand Officer of the Order of the Crown of Italy
Kingdom of Prussia:[b]
Knight of the Royal Order of the Crown, 1st Class
Russian Empire: Knight of the Imperial Order of Saint Anna, 1st Class
Sweden:
Commander Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the North Star, 1912
Vega Medal, 1913
United Kingdom: Livingstone Medal, 1925
United States:
Hubbard Medal, 1907
Charles P. Daly Medal, 1912
Congressional Gold Medal, 29 May 1928
Legacy
See also: List of things named after Roald Amundsen
Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station
Owing to Amundsen's numerous significant accomplishments in polar exploration, many places in both the Arctic and Antarctic are named after him.
The Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station, operated by the United States Antarctic Program, was jointly named in honour of Amundsen and his British rival Robert Falcon Scott.
The 1969 film The Red Tent tells the story of the Nobile expedition and Amundsen's disappearance.
Sean Connery plays the role of Amundsen.
Huntford's book was adapted into the TV serial The Last Place on Earth.
It aired in 1985 and featured Sverre Anker Ousdal as Amundsen.
On 15 February 2019, a biographic Norwegian film titled Amundsen, directed by Espen Sandberg, was released.
European-Inuit descendant claims
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Roald Amundsen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
At least two Inuit in Gjøa Haven with European ancestry have claimed to be descendants of Amundsen, from the period of their extended winter stay on King William Island from 1903 to 1905. Accounts by members of the expedition told of their relations with Inuit women, and historians have speculated that Amundsen might also have taken a partner, although he wrote a warning against this.
Specifically, half-brothers Bob Konona and Paul Ikuallaq say that their father Luke Ikuallaq told them on his deathbed that he was the son of Amundsen.
Konona said that their father Ikuallaq was left out on the ice to die after his birth, as his European ancestry made him illegitimate to the Inuit, threatening their community.
His Inuit grandparents saved him.
In 2012, Y-DNA analysis, with the families' permission, showed that Ikuallaq was not a match to the direct male line of Amundsen.
Not all descendants claiming European ancestry have been tested for a match to Amundsen, nor has there been a comparison of Ikuallaq's DNA to that of other European members of Amundsen's crew.
Works by Amundsen
The North-West Passage; Being the Record of a Voyage of Exploration of the Ship "Gjöa". New York: E.P. Dutton and Co. 1908. OCLC 971379351.
South Pole: An Account of the Norwegian Antarctic Expedition in the "Fram". 1912. OCLC 727260901.
Nordost Passagen: Maudfaerden Langs Asiens Kyst 1918–1920. Kristiania: Gyldendal. 1921. OCLC 576654047.
Our Polar Flight: The Amundsen–Ellsworth Polar Flight.
New York: Dodd, Mead. 1926. OCLC 918183295.
The First Flight Across the Polar Sea.
London: Hutchinson. 1927. OCLC 1026703671.
My Life as an Explorer.
New York: Doubleday. 1927. OCLC 3657624.
See also
Comparison of the Amundsen and Scott Expeditions
List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea
References
Notes
Some sources give the date as 15 December.
Fram crossed the International Date Line shortly before arriving at the Bay of Whales, and thereby "lost" a day.
Since the western and eastern hemispheres are conjoined at the South Pole, either date can be considered as correct, though Amundsen gives 14 December, both in his first telegraphed report on arrival in Hobart, and in his fuller account The South Pole. 
Returned on 24 October 1917 in protest of Germany's unrestricted submarine warfare.
Citations
"Østfold county, Borge in Borge, Parish register (official) nr.
I 6 (1861–1874), Birth and baptism records 1872, page 114". Retrieved 25 July 2012.
"Amundsen, Roald" (US) and "Amundsen, Roald". Lexico UK English Dictionary.
Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 7 November 2021.
"Amundsen". Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
Retrieved 7 March 2019.
a b 
Tierney, John (7 September 2009). "Who Was First at the North Pole?". The New York Times.
Retrieved 20 March 2019.
Holland, Eva (18 August 2017). "Flying to the North Pole in an Airship Was Easy.
Returning Wouldn't Be So Easy". Smithsonian Institution.
Retrieved 20 March 2019.
a b c 
Thomas, Henry; Dana Lee Thomas (1972). Living Adventures in Science.
Ayer Publishing. pp. 196–201. ISBN 978-0-8369-2573-9.
Amundsen, Roald (1927). My Life as an Explorer.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page & company.
a b 
The Houghton Mifflin Dictionary of Biography.
Houghton Mifflin Reference Books. 2003. pp. 43, 1696. ISBN 978-0-618-25210-7.
a b 
Derry, Thomas Kingston (1979). A History of Scandinavia: Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, and Iceland.
University of Minnesota Press. p. 298. ISBN 978-0-8166-3799-7.
"MemberListA | American Antiquarian Society". 
a b c Roald Amundsen and the Exploration of the Northwest Passage.
Oslo: Fram Museum. 2008. pp. 63–65. ISBN 9788282350013.
a b c d 
Simpson-Housley, Paul (1992). Antarctica: Exploration, Perception and Metaphor.
Routledge. pp. 24–37. ISBN 978-0-415-08225-9.
Amundsen, Roald (1913). The South Pole: An Account of the Norwegian Antarctic Expedition ... L. Keedick. p. 1.
Amundsen, Vol. I, p. xvii.
Karpoff, Jonathan M. "Roald Amundsen: Essay prepared for The Encyclopedia of the Arctic" (PDF). University of Washington.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 16 December 2013.
See Roald Amundsen, Store Norske Leksikon.
Accessed 17 April 2011.
"The Northern Explorer Roald Amundsen" (PDF).
Barr, William (1919). The Last Journey of Peter Tessem and Paul Knutsen.
Kenneth P. Czech (12 June 2006). "Roald Amundsen and the 1925 North Pole Expedition". Aviation History magazine.
Retrieved 11 March 2010.
"Roald Amundsen". PBS.org.
Retrieved 11 March 2010.
a b Troy Lennon (12 May 2016). "South Pole conqueror Roald Amundsen won air race to the North Pole". The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved 22 November 2019.
Henderson, Bruce (2005). True North: Peary, Cook, and the Race to the Pole. W. W. Norton and Company.
ISBN 978-0-393-32738-0. OCLC 63397177.
Rawlins, Dennis (January 2000). "Byrd's Heroic 1926 Flight & Its Faked Last Leg" (PDF). DIO, the International Journal of Scientific History. 10: 69–76, also pages 54, 84–88, 99, 105. ISSN 1041-5440. Retrieved 13 July 2007.
"The disastrous Latham-47 Polar rescue, from Caudebec-en-Caux". Normandy Then and Now. 1 July 2017. Retrieved 18 November 2020.
Alexis S. Troubetzkoy (2011). Arctic Obsession: The Lure of the Far North.
Dundurn. p. 232. ISBN 978-1-55488-855-9.
Rincon, Paul (24 August 2009). "BBC". BBC News.
Retrieved 11 March 2010.
"Search for Amundsen". Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Hans Olav Thyvold (2012). Roald Amundsen.
Font Forlag AS. p. 46. ISBN 978-82-8169-179-7.
Tor Bomann-Larsen (2011). Roald Amundsen.
History Press. pp. 189, 355–358. ISBN 978-0-7524-6682-8.
Sancton, p. 149 (footnote); Bomann-Larsen, p. 20.
Bomann-Larsen, Tor (2006). Roald Amundsen.
Phoenix Mill: Sutton Publishing. pp. 72–73, 117, 139. ISBN 0-7509-4343-2.
Sancton, Julian (2021). Madhouse at the End of the Earth.
Crown/Random House. p. 149. ISBN 978-1-9848-2433-2.
a b "Den kongelige norske Sanct Olavs Orden", Norges Statskalender (in Norwegian), 1910, pp. 907–08 – via hathitrust.org
a b c d e f g "Diktere, kunstnere og videnskapsmenn", Norges Statskalender (in Norwegian), 1922, pp. 253–54 – via hathitrust.org
"Ritter-Orden", Hof- und Staatshandbuch der Österreichisch-Ungarischen Monarchie, 1918, p. 264, retrieved 9 April 2021
"Egede medaillen". Geografisk Tidsskrift (in Danish). 84. 1984. Archived from the original on 10 February 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2018.
"Grande Médaille D'or des Explorations et Voyades de Découverte" (in French). Société de géographie.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2014.
Hølaas, Odd; Barlaup, Asbjørn; Storm, Henning; Solheim, John (1957). Norge under Haakon VII 1905–1957 (in Norwegian) (3rd, revised ed.). Oslo: Cappelen. p. 172.
Gerhard Stäblein u. a. (1978), "Traditionen und aktuelle Aufgaben der Polarforschung", Die Erde (in German), 109: 229–67
Sveriges statskalender (in Swedish), 1915, p. 726, retrieved 18 November 2021 – via runeberg.org
"Tidigare medaljörer" (PDF) (in Swedish). Swedish Society for Anthropology and Geography.
August 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2019.
"RSGS".
"American Geographical Society: Charles P. Daly Medal".
Office of the Clerk. "Congressional Gold Medal Recipients: (1776 to Present)". United States House of Representatives.
Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station – National Science Foundation.
Retrieved 16 February 2021
"The Red Tent (1971)" – via 
O'Connor, John J. (20 October 1985). "Tv View; 'the Last Place on Earth' – Not Just About the Antarctic". The New York Times.
Trailer (norsk tekst) (in Norwegian), retrieved 22 February 2019
"Polar explorer's descendant finds Nunavut relatives | CBC News".
"Vi er Amundsens etterkommere" Archived 4 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Aften Posten
a b c "Roald Amundsen Descendants in Gjoa Haven?" Archived 16 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Fram Museum, 27 January 2012
Sources
Amundsen, Roald; Nilsen, Thorvald; Prestrud, Kristian; Chater, A.G. (tr.) (1976) . The South Pole: An Account of the Norwegian expedition in the Fram, 1910–12 (Volumes I and II). London: C. Hurst & Company.
ISBN 978-0-903983-47-1. First published in 1912 by John Murray, London.
Huntford, Roland (1985). The Last Place on Earth.
London and Sydney: Pan Books.
ISBN 978-0-330-28816-3.
Further reading
Stephen Bown.
The Last Viking: The Life of Roald Amundsen: conqueror of the South Pole. (London, Aurum Press, 2012)
Tor Bomann-Larsen.
Roald Amundsen. (Sutton Publishing, 2006)
Garth Cameron.
From Pole to Pole: Roald Amundsen's Journey in Flight. (New York, Skyhorse Publishing, 2014)
Garth Cameron.
Umberto Nobile and the Arctic Search for the Airship Italia. (Stroud, Fonthill Media, 2017)
Hugo Decleir.
Roald Amundsen's Belgica Diary: the first Scientific Expedition to the Antarctic. (Erskine Press, 1999)
Roland Huntford.
The Last Place on Earth: Scott and Amundsen's Race to the South Pole. (1979)
Rainer-K. Langner.
Scott and Amundsen: Duel in the Ice. (London, Haus Publishing, 2007)
Julian Sancton.
Madhouse at the End of the Earth: The Belgica’s Journey into the Dark Antarctic Night. (New York, Crown Publishing, 2021)
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roald Amundsen.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Roald Amundsen.
Works by Roald Amundsen at Biodiversity Heritage Library 
Works by Roald Amundsen at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Roald Amundsen at Open Library 
Works by Roald Amundsen at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Roald Amundsen at Internet Archive
Works by or about Roald Amundsen in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Newspaper clippings about Roald Amundsen in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
AntarcticaGeography
Antarctic sea ice
Climate
Climate change
Ice shelves
Geology
Glaciers
Mountains
Tundra
Volcanoes
Regions
Biogeographic realm
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
ice sheet
shield
Extreme points
Floristic Kingdom
Islands
South Pole
South magnetic pole
West Antarctica
ice sheet
Bodies of Water
Lake CECs
Lake Mercer
Lake Vostok
List of rivers
McMurdo Sound
Ross Sea
Southern Ocean
Weddell Sea
Life
Flora
Microorganisms
Wildlife
Birds
Mammals
Krill
History
Colonization
COVID-19 pandemic
Expeditions
Heroic Age
World War II
Politics
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
Military activity
National programs
Territorial claims
Treaty System
Society
Antarctica Day
Crime
Demographics
Economy
Field camps
Firefighting
Flags
Gateway cities
Midwinter Day
Protected areas
Religion
Research stations
Telecommunications
Time
Tourism
Transport
Women
Famous explorers
Roald Amundsen
Richard E. Byrd
Douglas Mawson
Ui-te-Rangiora
James Clark Ross
Robert Falcon Scott
Ernest Shackleton
Category
Commons
Index
Polar explorationArctic
Ocean
History
Expeditions
Research stations
Farthest NorthNorth Pole
Barentsz
Heemskerck
Hudson
Marmaduke
Carolus
Parry
North magnetic pole
J. Ross
J. C. Ross
Abernethy
Kane
Hayes
Polaris expedition
Polaris
C. F. Hall
Bessels
British Arctic Expedition
HMS Alert
Nares
HMS Discovery
Stephenson
Markham
Lady Franklin Bay Expedition
Greely
Lockwood
Brainard
Nansen's Fram expedition
Fram
Nansen
Johansen
Sverdrup
Jason
Amedeo
Andrée's balloon expedition
S. A. Andrée
F. Cook
SS Roosevelt
Peary
Henson
Sedov
Byrd
Norge
Amundsen
Nobile
Wisting
Riiser-Larsen
Ellsworth
Italia
Nautilus
Wilkins
ANT-25
Chkalov
Baydukov
Belyakov
Drifting ice stations
NP-1
Papanin
Shirshov
E. Fyodorov
Krenkel
NP-36
NP-37
Georgiy Sedov
Badygin
Wiese
USS Nautilus
USS Skate
Plaisted
Herbert
NS Arktika
Barneo
Arktika 2007
Mir submersibles
Sagalevich
Chilingarov
IcelandGreenland
Pytheas
Brendan
Papar
Vikings
Naddodd
Garðar
Ingólfr
Norse colonization of North America
Gunnbjörn
Snæbjörn galti
Erik the Red
Christian IV's expeditions
J. Hall
Cunningham
Lindenov
C. Richardson
Danish colonization
Egede
Scoresby
Jason
Nansen
Sverdrup
Peary
Rasmussen
Northwest PassageNorthern Canada
Cabot
G. Corte-Real
M. Corte-Real
Frobisher
Gilbert
Davis
Hudson
Discovery
Bylot
Baffin
Munk
I. Fyodorov
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Discovery
Clerke
Mackenzie
Kotzebue
J. Ross
HMS Griper
Parry
HMS Hecla
Lyon
HMS Fury
Hoppner
Crozier
J. C. Ross
Coppermine expedition
Franklin
Back
Dease
Simpson
HMS Blossom
Beechey
Franklin's lost expedition
HMS Erebus
HMS Terror
Collinson
Rae–Richardson expedition
Rae
J. Richardson
Austin
McClure expedition
HMS Investigator
McClure
HMS Resolute
Kellett
Belcher
Kennedy
Bellot
Isabel
Inglefield
USS Advance
Kane
Fox
McClintock
HMS Pandora
Young
Fram
Sverdrup
Gjøa
Amundsen
Rasmussen
Karluk
Stefansson
Bartlett
St.
Roch
H. Larsen
Cowper
North East PassageRussian Arctic
Pomors
Koch boats
Willoughby
Chancellor
Barentsz
Heemskerck
Mangazeya
Hudson
Poole
Siberian Cossacks
Perfilyev
Stadukhin
Dezhnev
Popov
Ivanov
Vagin
Permyakov
Great Northern Expedition
Bering
Chirikov
Malygin
Ovtsyn
Minin
V. Pronchishchev
M. Pronchishcheva
Chelyuskin
Kh.
Laptev
D. Laptev
Chichagov
Lyakhov
Billings
Sannikov
Gedenschtrom
Wrangel
Matyushkin
Anjou
Litke
Lavrov
Pakhtusov
Tsivolko
Middendorff
Austro-Hungarian Expedition
Weyprecht
Payer
Vega Expedition
A. E. Nordenskiöld
Palander
Jeannette expedition
USS Jeannette
De Long
Melville
Yermak
Makarov
Zarya
Toll
Kolomeitsev
Matisen
Kolchak
Sedov
Rusanov expedition
Rusanov
Kuchin
Brusilov expedition
Sv.
Anna
Brusilov
Albanov
Konrad
Wiese
Nagórski
Taymyr / Vaygach
Vilkitsky
Maud
Amundsen
AARI
Samoylovich
Begichev
Urvantsev
Sadko
Ushakov
Glavsevmorput
Schmidt
Aviaarktika
Shevelev
A. Sibiryakov
Voronin
Chelyuskin
Krassin
Gakkel
Nuclear-powered icebreakers
Lenin
Arktika-class icebreaker
Antarctic
Continent
History
Expeditions
Southern Ocean
Roché
Bouvet
Kerguelen
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Adventure
Furneaux
Smith
San Telmo
Vostok
Bellingshausen
Mirny
Lazarev
Bransfield
Palmer
Davis
Weddell
Morrell
Astrolabe
Dumont d'Urville
United States Exploring Expedition
USS Vincennes
Wilkes
USS Porpoise
Ringgold
Ross expedition
HMS Erebus (J. C. Ross
Abernethy)
HMS Terror (Crozier)
Cooper
Challenger expedition
HMS Challenger
Nares
Murray
Jason
C. A. Larsen
"Heroic Age"
Belgian Antarctic Expedition
Belgica
de Gerlache
Lecointe
Amundsen
Cook
Arctowski
Racoviță
Dobrowolski
Southern Cross
Southern Cross
Borchgrevink
Discovery
Discovery
Discovery Hut
Gauss
Gauss
Drygalski
Swedish Antarctic Expedition
Antarctic
O. Nordenskjöld
C. A. Larsen
Scottish Antarctic Expedition
Bruce
Scotia
Orcadas Base
Nimrod Expedition
Nimrod
French Antarctic Expeditions
Pourquoi-Pas
Charcot
Japanese Antarctic Expedition
Shirase
Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Fram
Amundsen
Framheim
Polheim
Terra Nova
Terra Nova
Scott
Wilson
E. R. Evans
Crean
Lashly
Filchner
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
SY Aurora
Mawson
Far Eastern Party
Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition
Endurance
Shackleton
Wild
James Caird
Ross Sea party
Mackintosh
Shackleton–Rowett Expedition
Quest
IPY · IGYModern research
Christensen
Byrd
BANZARE
BGLE
Rymill
New Swabia
Ritscher
Operation Tabarin
Marr
Operation Highjump
Captain Arturo Prat Base
British Antarctic Survey
Operation Windmill
Ketchum
Ronne Expedition
F. Ronne
E. Ronne
Schlossbach
Operation Deep Freeze
McMurdo Station
Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition
Hillary
V. Fuchs
Soviet Antarctic Expeditions
Somov
Klenova
Mirny
Tryoshnikov
Tolstikov
Antarctic Treaty System
Transglobe Expedition
Fiennes
Burton
Lake Vostok
Kapitsa
Farthest SouthSouth Pole
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Adventure
Furneaux
Weddell
HMS Erebus
J. C. Ross
HMS Terror
Crozier
Southern Cross
Borchgrevink
Discovery
Barne
Nimrod
Shackleton
Wild
Marshall
Adams
South magnetic pole
Mawson
David
Mackay
Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Fram
Amundsen
Bjaaland
Helmer
Hassel
Wisting
Polheim
Terra Nova
Scott
E. Evans
Oates
Wilson
Bowers
Cherry-Garrard
Byrd
Balchen
McKinley
Dufek
Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station
Hillary
V. Fuchs
Pole of Cold
Vostok Station
Pole of inaccessibility
Pole of Inaccessibility Station
Tolstikov
Crary
A. Fuchs
Messner
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Art galleries and museums
Te Papa (New Zealand)
Art research institutes
KulturNav (Norway)
Photographers' Identities
RKD Artists (Netherlands)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
National Archives (US)
RERO (Switzerland)
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 22 September 2022, at 23:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
