Suffrage - Wikipedia
Suffrage
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Not to be confused with Universal suffrage.
"Right to vote", "Suffragist", and "The Franchise" redirect here.
For the group, see Right to Vote.
For the organisation, see National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies.
For other uses, see The Franchise (disambiguation).
Right to vote in public and political elections
Suffrage universel dédié à Ledru-Rollin, Frédéric Sorrieu, 1850
Suffrage, political franchise, or simply franchise, is the right to vote in public, political elections and referendums (although the term is sometimes used for any right to vote). In some languages, and occasionally in English, the right to vote is called active suffrage, as distinct from passive suffrage, which is the right to stand for election.
The combination of active and passive suffrage is sometimes called full suffrage.
In most democracies, eligible voters can vote in elections of representatives.
Voting on issues by referendum may also be available.
For example, in Switzerland, this is permitted at all levels of government.
In the United States, some states such as California, Washington, and Wisconsin have exercised their shared sovereignty to offer citizens the opportunity to write, propose, and vote on referendums; other states and the federal government have not.
Referendums in the United Kingdom are rare.
Suffrage is granted to everybody mentally capable, in most countries defined by voting age, and being citizen of the country.
In some countries additional restrictions exist.
In the Great Britain and United States a felon may not vote.
As of 2022[update], Florida felons with court debts may not vote.
In some countries being under guardianship may restrict the right to vote.
Resident non-citizens can vote in some countries, which may be restricted to citizens of closely linked countries (e.g., Commonwealth citizens and European Union citizens) or to certain offices or questions.
Historically the right to vote was more restricted, for example by gender, race, or wealth.
Contents
Etymology
The word suffrage comes from Latin suffragium, which initially meant "a voting-tablet", "a ballot", "a vote", or "the right to vote". Suffragium in the second century and later came to mean "political patronage, influence, interest, or support", and sometimes "popular acclaim" or "applause". By the fourth century the word was used for "an intercession", asking a patron for their influence with the Almighty.
Suffragium was used in the fifth and sixth centuries with connection to buying influence or profiteering from appointing to office, and eventually the word referred to the bribe itself.
William Smith rejects the connection of suffragium to sub "under" + fragor "crash, din, shouts (as of approval)", related to frangere "to break"; Eduard Wunder writes that the word may be related to suffrago, signifying an ankle bone or knuckle bone.
In the 17th century the English suffrage regained the earlier meaning of the Latin suffragium, "a vote" or "the right to vote".
Types
Universal suffrage
Main article: Universal suffrage
The Peterloo Massacre of 1819
Universal suffrage consists of the right to vote without restriction due to gender, race, religion, social status, education level, or wealth.
It typically does not extend the right to vote to all residents of a region as distinctions are still frequently made in regard to citizenship, age, and occasionally mental capacity or criminal convictions.
The short-lived Corsican Republic (1755–1769) was the first country to grant limited universal suffrage to all citizens over the age of 25.
In 1819 60–80,000 men and women from 30 miles around Manchester assembled in the city's St.
Peter's Square to protest their lack of any representation in the Houses of Parliament.
Historian Robert Poole has called the Peterloo Massacre one of the defining moments of its age. (The eponymous Peterloo film featured a scene of women suffragists planning their contribution to the protest.) At that time Manchester had a population of around 140,000 and the population totals of Greater Manchester were around 490,000.
This was followed by other experiments in the Paris Commune of 1871 and the island republic of Franceville (1889). From 1840 to 1852, the Kingdom of Hawai'i granted universal suffrage without mention of sex.
In 1893, when the Kingdom of Hawai'i was overthrown in a coup, New Zealand was the only independent country to practice universal (active) suffrage, and the Freedom in the World index lists New Zealand as the only free country in the world in 1893.
Women's suffrage
German election poster from 1919: Equal rights – equal duties!
Main article: Women's suffrage
Women's suffrage is, by definition, the right of women to vote.
This was the goal of the suffragists, who believed in using legal means, as well as the suffragettes, who used extremist measures.
Short-lived suffrage equity was drafted into provisions of the State of New Jersey's first, 1776 Constitution, which extended the Right to Vote to unwed female landholders and black land owners.
"IV. That all inhabitants of this Colony, of full age, who are worth fifty pounds proclamation money, clear estate in the same, and have resided within the county in which they claim a vote for twelve months immediately preceding the election, shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in Council and Assembly; and also for all other public officers, that shall be elected by the people of the county at large." New Jersey 1776
However, the document did not specify an Amendment procedure, and the provision was subsequently replaced in 1844 by the adoption of the succeeding constitution, which reverted to "all white male" suffrage restrictions.
Although the Kingdom of Hawai'i granted female suffrage in 1840, the right was rescinded in 1852. Limited voting rights were gained by some women in Sweden, Britain, and some western U.S. states in the 1860s.
In 1893, the British colony of New Zealand became the first self-governing nation to extend the right to vote to all adult women.
In 1894, the women of South Australia achieved the right to both vote and stand for Parliament.
The autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in the Russian Empire was the first nation to allow all women to both vote and run for parliament.
Anti-women's suffrage propaganda
A British postcard against women's suffrage postcard from c.1908. It shows unflattering caricatures of suffragettes in front of parliament and the caption: 'This is the house that man built' with a poem.
From the People's History Museum, Manchester.
Those against the women's suffrage movement made public organizations to put down the political movement, with the main argument being that a woman's place was in the home, not polls.
Political cartoons and public outrage over women's rights increased as the opposition to suffrage worked to organize legitimate groups campaigning against women's voting rights.
The Massachusetts Association Opposed to the Further Extension of Suffrage to Women was one organization that came out of the 1880s to put down the voting efforts.
Many anti-suffrage propaganda poked fun at the idea of women in politics.
Political cartoons displayed the most sentiment by portraying the issue of women's suffrage to be swapped with men's lives.
Some mocked the popular suffrage hairstyle of full-upward combed hair.
Others depicted young girls turning into suffragettes after a failure in life, such as not being married.
Equal suffrage
See also: Weighted voting
Equal suffrage is sometimes confused with Universal suffrage, although the meaning of the former is the removal of graded votes, wherein a voter could possess a number of votes in accordance with income, wealth or social status.
Census suffrage
Also known as "censitary suffrage", it is the opposite of equal suffrage, meaning that the votes cast by those eligible to vote are not equal, but weighed differently according to the person's income or rank in society (e.g., people who don't own property or whose income is lower than a given amount are barred from voting; or people with higher education have more votes than those with lower education; stockholders who have more shares in a given company have more votes than those with fewer shares). In many countries, census suffrage restricted who could vote and be elected: in the United States, until the Jacksonian reforms of the 1830's, only men who owned land of a specified acreage or monetary value could vote or participate in elections.
Similarly, in Brazil, the Constitution of 1824 established that, in order to vote, citizens would need to have an annual income of 200,000 Milreis and, to be voted, their minimum annual income would need to be 400,000 Milreis.
Compulsory suffrage
Main article: Compulsory suffrage
Where compulsory suffrage exists, those who are eligible to vote are required by law to do so.
Thirty-two countries currently practise this form of suffrage.
Business vote
See also: Plural voting and Functional constituency (Hong Kong)
In local government in England and some of its ex-colonies, businesses formerly had, and in some places still have, a vote in the urban area in which they paid rates.
This is an extension of the historical property-based franchise from natural persons to other legal persons.
In the United Kingdom, the Corporation of the City of London has retained and even expanded business vote, following the passing of the City of London (Ward Elections) Act 2002. This has given business interests within the City of London, which is a major financial centre with few residents, the opportunity to apply the accumulated wealth of the corporation to the development of an effective lobby for UK policies.
This includes having the City Remembrancer, financed by the City's Cash, as a parliamentary agent, provided with a special seat in the House of Commons located in the under-gallery facing the Speaker's chair.
In a leaked document from 2012, an official report concerning the City's Cash revealed that the aim of major occasions such as set-piece sumptious banquets featuring national politicians was "to increase the emphasis on complementing hospitality with business meetings consistent with the City corporation's role in supporting the City as a financial centre".
The first issue taken up by the Northern Ireland civil rights movement was the business vote, abolished in 1968 (a year before it was abolished in Great Britain outside the City of London).
In the Republic of Ireland, commercial ratepayers[nb 1] can vote in local plebiscites, for changing the name of the locality or street,[nb 2] or delimiting a business improvement district.
From 1930 to 1935, 5 of 35 members of Dublin City Council were "commercial members".
In cities in most Australian states, voting is optional for businesses but compulsory for individuals.
Basis of exclusion from suffrage
Gender
Main article: Women's suffrage
Women's Suffrage Headquarters on Euclid Avenue in Cleveland, Ohio in 1912
In ancient Athens, often cited as the birthplace of democracy, only adult, male citizens who owned land were permitted to vote.
Through subsequent centuries, Europe was generally ruled by monarchs, though various forms of parliament arose at different times.
The high rank ascribed to abbesses within the Catholic Church permitted some women the right to sit and vote at national assemblies – as with various high-ranking abbesses in Medieval Germany, who were ranked among the independent princes of the empire.
Their Protestant successors enjoyed the same privilege almost into modern times.
Marie Guyart, a French nun who worked with the First Nations peoples of Canada during the seventeenth century, wrote in 1654 regarding the suffrage practices of Iroquois women, "These female chieftains are women of standing amongst the savages, and they have a deciding vote in the councils.
They make decisions there like the men, and it is they who even delegated the first ambassadors to discuss peace." The Iroquois, like many First Nations peoples in North America, had a matrilineal kinship system.
Property and descent were passed through the female line.
Women elders voted on hereditary male chiefs and could depose them.
The emergence of modern democracy generally began with male citizens obtaining the right to vote in advance of female citizens, except in the Kingdom of Hawai'i, where universal suffrage without mention of age or sex was introduced in 1840; however, a constitutional amendment in 1852 rescinded female voting and put property qualifications on male voting.
Voting rights for women were introduced into international law by the United Nations' Human Rights Commission, whose elected chair was Eleanor Roosevelt.
In 1948 the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; Article 21 stated: "(1) Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives. (3) The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures."
The United Nations General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Political Rights of Women, which went into force in 1954, enshrining the equal rights of women to vote, hold office, and access public services as set out by national laws.
One of the most recent jurisdictions to acknowledge women's full right to vote was Bhutan in 2008 (its first national elections). Most recently, in 2011 King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia let women vote in the 2015 local elections (and from then on) and be appointed to the Consultative Assembly.
Religion
In the aftermath of the Reformation it was common in European countries for people of disfavored religious denominations to be denied civil and political rights, often including the right to vote, to stand for election or to sit in parliament.
In Great Britain and Ireland, Roman Catholics were denied the right to vote from 1728 to 1793, and the right to sit in parliament until 1829. The anti-Catholic policy was justified on the grounds that the loyalty of Catholics supposedly lay with the Pope rather than the national monarch.
In England and Ireland, several Acts practically disenfranchised non-Anglicans or non-Protestants by imposing an oath before admission to vote or to stand for office.
The 1672 and 1678 Test Acts forbade non-Anglicans to hold public offices, and the 1727 Disenfranchising Act took away Catholics' voting rights in Ireland, which were restored only in 1788. Jews could not even be naturalized.
An attempt was made to change this situation, but the Jewish Naturalization Act 1753 provoked such reactions that it was repealed the following year.
Nonconformists (Methodists and Presbyterians) were only allowed to run for election to the British House of Commons starting in 1828, Catholics in 1829 (following the Catholic Relief Act 1829, which extended the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1791), and Jews in 1858 (with the Emancipation of the Jews in England). Benjamin Disraeli could only begin his political career in 1837 because he had been converted to Anglicanism at the age of 12.
In several states in the U.S. after the Declaration of Independence, Jews, Quakers or Catholics were denied voting rights and/or forbidden to run for office.
The Delaware Constitution of 1776 stated that "Every person who shall be chosen a member of either house, or appointed to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat, or entering upon the execution of his office, shall (…) also make and subscribe the following declaration, to wit: I, A B. do profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ His only Son, and in the Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for evermore; and I do acknowledge the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration." This was repealed by article I, section 2 of the 1792 Constitution: "No religious test shall be required as a qualification to any office, or public trust, under this State". The 1778 Constitution of the State of South Carolina stated that "No person shall be eligible to sit in the house of representatives unless he be of the Protestant religion", the 1777 Constitution of the State of Georgia (art.
VI) that "The representatives shall be chosen out of the residents in each county (…) and they shall be of the Protestent (sic) religion". In Maryland, voting rights and eligibility were extended to Jews in 1828.
In Canada, several religious groups (Mennonites, Hutterites, Doukhobors) were disenfranchised by the wartime Elections Act of 1917, mainly because they opposed military service.
This disenfranchisement ended with the closure of the First World War, but was renewed for Doukhobors from 1934 (via the Dominion Elections Act) to 1955.
The first Constitution of modern Romania in 1866 provided in article 7 that only Christians could become Romanian citizens.
Jews native to Romania were declared stateless persons.
In 1879, under pressure from the Berlin Peace Conference, this article was amended, granting non-Christians the right to become Romanian citizens, but naturalization was granted on a case-by-case basis and was subject to Parliamentary approval.
An application took over ten years to process.
Only in 1923 was a new constitution adopted, whose article 133 extended Romanian citizenship to all Jewish residents and equality of rights to all Romanian citizens.
Wealth, tax class, social class
Demonstration for universal right to vote, Prague, Austria-Hungary, 1905
Until the nineteenth century, many Western proto-democracies had property qualifications in their electoral laws; e.g. only landowners could vote (because the only tax for such countries was the property tax), or the voting rights were weighted according to the amount of taxes paid (as in the Prussian three-class franchise). Most countries abolished the property qualification for national elections in the late nineteenth century, but retained it for local government elections for several decades.
Today these laws have largely been abolished, although the homeless may not be able to register because they lack regular addresses.
In the United Kingdom, until the House of Lords Act 1999, peers who were members of the House of Lords were excluded from voting for the House of Commons as they were not commoners.
Although there is nothing to prevent the monarch from voting, it is considered improper for the monarch to do so.
Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, many nations made voters pay to elect officials, keeping impoverished people from being fully enfranchised.
These laws were in effect in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Knowledge
Sometimes the right to vote has been limited to people who had achieved a certain level of education or passed a certain test.
In some US states, "literacy tests" were previously implemented to exclude those who were illiterate.
Black voters in the South were often deemed by election officials to have failed the test even when they did not.
Under the 1961 constitution of Rhodesia, voting on the "A" roll, which elected up to 50 of the 65 members of parliament, was restricted based on education requirements, which in practice led to an overwhelming white vote.
Voting on the "B" roll had universal suffrage, but only appointed 15 members of parliament.[clarification needed]
In the 20th century, many countries other than the US placed voting restrictions on illiterate people, including: Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Ecuador, and Peru.
Race
Various countries, usually countries with a dominant race within a wider population, have historically denied the vote to people of particular races, or to all but the dominant race.
This has been achieved in a number of ways:
Official – laws and regulations passed specifically disenfranchising people of particular races (for example, the Antebellum United States, Boer republics, pre-apartheid and apartheid South Africa, or many colonial political systems, who provided suffrage only for white settlers and some privileged non-white groups). Canada and Australia denied suffrage for their indigenous populations until the 1960s.
Indirect – nothing in law specifically prevents anyone from voting on account of their race, but other laws or regulations are used to exclude people of a particular race.
In southern states of the United States of America before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, poll taxes, literacy and other tests were used to disenfranchise African-Americans.
Property qualifications have tended to disenfranchise a minority race, particularly if tribally owned land is not allowed to be taken into consideration.
In some cases this was an unintended (but usually welcome) consequence.[citation needed] Many African colonies after World War II until decolonization had tough education and property qualifications which practically gave meaningful representation only for rich European minorities.
Unofficial – nothing in law prevents anyone from voting on account of their race, but people of particular races are intimidated or otherwise prevented from exercising this right.
This was a common tactic employed by white Southerners against Freedmen during the Reconstruction Era and the following period before more formal methods of disenfranchisement became entrenched.
Unofficial discrimination could even manifest in ways which, while allowing the act of voting itself, effectively deprive it of any value – for example, in Israel, the country's Arab minority has maintained a party-system separate from that of the Jewish majority.
In the run-up for the country's 2015 elections, the electoral threshold was raised from 2% to 3.25%, thus forcing the dominant Arab parties – Hadash, the United Arab List, Balad and Ta'al – either to run under one list or risk losing their parliamentary representation.
Age
Youth rights
Activities
Bailey v.
Drexel Furniture Co.
Child Labor Deterrence Act
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Fair Labor Standards Act
Hammer v.
Dagenhart
History of youth rights in the United States
Morse v.
Frederick
Newsboys' strike of 1899
Prez
Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms
Wild in the Streets
Theory/concepts
Adultcentrism
Adultism
Ageism
Criminalization
Democracy
Ephebiphobia
Fear of children
Fear of youth
Intergenerational equity
Future generations
Paternalism
Social class
Suffrage
Taking Children Seriously
Universal suffrage
Unschooling
Youth activism
Youth detention center
Youth empowerment
Youth exclusion
Youth suffrage
Youth voice
Issues
Adolescent sexuality
Age of candidacy
Age of consent
Age of consent reform
Age of majority
Age of marriage
Behavior modification facility
Child labour
Children in the military
Child marriage
Compulsory education
Conscription
Corporal punishment
at home
at school
in law
Curfew
Child abuse
Emancipation of minors
Gambling age
Homeschooling
Human rights and youth sport
In loco parentis
Juvenile delinquency
Juvenile court
Juvenile law
Legal drinking age (U.S. history)
Legal working age
Minimum driving age
Marriageable age
Minor (law)
Minors and abortion
Restavec
School leaving age
Smoking age (U.S. history)
Status offense
Underage drinking in the US
Voting age
Youth-adult partnership
Youth participation
Youth politics
Youth unemployment
Youth voting
Organizations
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Akt (charity)
Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions
Canadian Youth for Choice
Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission
Common Cents
Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth
DoSomething
Future Coalition
Global Youth Action Network
High School Democrats of America
Indian Youth Climate Network
International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International
Mermaids (charity)
National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign
National Youth Rights Association
One World Youth Project
Queer Youth Network
Students for a Democratic Society
Freechild Project
Three O'Clock Lobby
UK Youth Parliament
Youth International Party
Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor
The Youth Cafe
Young Communist League of Canada
Young Democrats of America
Young India Foundation
People
Fletcher
Hanson
Henry
Holt
Koroknay-Palicz
Duff
Males
Postman
Yaco
Related
Ages of consent in Asia
Ages of consent in Europe
Ages of consent in North America
Ages of consent in Oceania
Ages of consent in South America
Ages of consent in the United States
Animal rights
Anti-racism
Direct democracy
Egalitarianism
Feminism
French petition against age of consent laws
Legal status of tattooing in European countries
Legal status of tattooing in the United States
Libertarianism
Students rights
Youth Olympic Games
Youth sports
Youth wing
Youth rights Society portal
Main articles: Voting age and Age of candidacy
All modern democracies require voters to meet age qualifications to vote.
Worldwide voting ages are not consistent, differing between countries and even within countries, though the range usually varies between 16 and 21 years.
Demeny voting has been proposed as a form of proxy voting by parents on behalf of their children who are below the age of suffrage.
The movement to lower the voting age is one aspect of the Youth rights movement.
Criminality
Main article: Disfranchisement § Resulting from criminal conviction
Some countries restrict the voting rights of convicted criminals.
Some countries, and some U.S. states, also deny the right to vote to those convicted of serious crimes even after they are released from prison.
In some cases (e.g. in many U.S. states) the denial of the right to vote is automatic upon a felony conviction; in other cases (e.g.
France and Germany) deprivation of the vote is meted out separately, and often limited to perpetrators of specific crimes such as those against the electoral system or corruption of public officials.
In the Republic of Ireland, prisoners are allowed the right to vote, following the Hirst v UK (No2) ruling, which was granted in 2006. Canada allowed only prisoners serving a term of less than 2 years the right to vote, but this was found to be unconstitutional in 2002 by the Supreme Court of Canada in Sauvé v.
Canada (Chief Electoral Officer), and all prisoners have been allowed to vote as of the 2004 Canadian federal election.
Residency
Under certain electoral systems elections are held within subnational jurisdictions, thus preventing persons from voting who would otherwise be eligible on the basis that they do not reside within such a jurisdiction, or because they live in an area that cannot participate.
In the United States, license plates in Washington, D.C. read "TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION," in reference to the district not holding a seat in either the House of Representatives or Senate, however residents can vote in presidential elections based on the Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution adopted in 1961. Residents of Puerto Rico enjoy neither.
Sometimes citizens become ineligible to vote because they are no longer resident in their country of citizenship.
For example, Australian citizens who have been outside Australia for more than one and fewer than six years may excuse themselves from the requirement to vote in Australian elections while they remain outside Australia (voting in Australia is compulsory for resident citizens).
Danish citizens that reside permanently outside Denmark lose their right to vote.
In some cases, a certain period of residence in a locality may required for the right to vote in that location.
For example, in the United Kingdom up to 2001, each 15 February a new electoral register came into effect, based on registration as of the previous 10 October, with the effect of limiting voting to those resident five to seventeen months earlier depending on the timing of the election.
Nationality
Main article: Right of foreigners to vote
In most countries, suffrage is limited to citizens and, in many cases, permanent residents of that country.
However, some members of supra-national organisations such as the Commonwealth of Nations and the European Union have granted voting rights to citizens of all countries within that organisation.
Until the mid-twentieth century, many Commonwealth countries gave the vote to all British citizens within the country, regardless of whether they were normally resident there.
In most cases this was because there was no distinction between British and local citizenship.
Several countries qualified this with restrictions preventing non-white British citizens such as Indians and British Africans from voting.
Under European Union law, citizens of European Union countries can vote in each other's local and European Parliament elections on the same basis as citizens of the country in question, but usually not in national elections.
Naturalization
In some countries, naturalized citizens do not have the right to vote or to be a candidate, either permanently or for a determined period.
Article 5 of the 1831 Belgian Constitution made a difference between ordinary naturalization, and grande naturalisation.
Only (former) foreigners who had been granted grande naturalisation were entitled to vote, be a candidate for parliamentary elections, or be appointed minister.
However, ordinary naturalized citizens could vote for municipal elections.
Ordinary naturalized citizens and citizens who had acquired Belgian nationality through marriage could vote, but not run as candidates for parliamentary elections in 1976. The concepts of ordinary and grande naturalization were suppressed from the Constitution in 1991.
In France, the 1889 Nationality Law barred those who had acquired the French nationality by naturalization or marriage from voting, and from eligibility and access to several public jobs.
In 1938 the delay was reduced to five years.
These instances of discrimination, as well as others against naturalized citizens, were gradually abolished in 1973 (9 January 1973 law) and 1983.
In Morocco, a former French protectorate, and in Guinea, a former French colony, naturalized citizens are prohibited from voting for five years following their naturalization.
In the Federated States of Micronesia, one must be a Micronesian citizen for at least 15 years to run for parliament.
In Nicaragua, Peru and the Philippines, only citizens by birth are eligible for being elected to the national legislature; naturalized citizens enjoy only voting rights.
In Uruguay, naturalized citizens have the right of eligibility to the parliament after five years.
In the United States, the President and Vice President must be natural-born citizens.
All other governmental offices may be held by any citizen, although citizens may only run for Congress after an extended period of citizenship (seven years for the House of Representatives and nine for the Senate).
Function
In France, an 1872 law, rescinded by a 1945 decree, prohibited all army personnel from voting.
In Ireland, police (the Garda Síochána and, before 1925, the Dublin Metropolitan Police) were barred from voting in national elections, though not local elections, from 1923 to 1960.
The 1876 Constitution of Texas (article VI, section 1) stated that "The following classes of persons shall not be allowed to vote in this State, to wit: (…) Fifth—All soldiers, marines and seamen, employed in the service of the army or navy of the United States."
In many countries with a presidential system of government a person is forbidden to be a legislator and an official of the executive branch at the same time.
Such provisions are found, for example, in Article I of the U.S. Constitution.
History around the world
See also: Universal suffrage § Dates by country, Timeline of women's suffrage, Timeline of women's suffrage in the United States, and Voting age
Countries with universal suffrage granted to women, 2017
In 1840, the Kingdom of Hawai'i adopted full suffrage for all subjects without mention of sex, but the constitution of 1852 specified voting by male subjects over the age of 20. In 1902 the Commonwealth Franchise Act enabled women to vote federally in Australia and in the state of New South Wales.
This legislation also allowed women to run for government, making Australia the first in the world to allow this.
In 1906 Finland became the next nation in the world to give all adult citizens full suffrage, in other words the right to vote and to run for office.
New Zealand granted all adult citizens the right to vote (in 1893), but women did not get the right to run for the New Zealand legislature until 1919.
Australia
See also: Suffrage in Australia and Voting rights of Australian Aboriginals
This legislation also allows women to run for government, making Australia the first democratic state in the world to allow this.
Brazil
The Chamber of Deputies' representatives are chosen via electoral colleges.
Women and slaves do not have the right to vote.
From then on, presidents were elected by members of the congress, chosen by regular vote.
People considered illiterate are not obliged to vote, nor are people younger than 18 and older than 70 years of age.
People under the obligation rule shall file a document to justify their absence should they not vote.
Canada
See also: The Famous Five (Canada)
Voting rights are stripped from all "enemy aliens" (those born in enemy countries who arrived in Canada after 1902; see also Ukrainian Canadian internment). Military Voters Act gives the vote to all soldiers, even non-citizens, (with the exception of Indian and Metis veterans) and to women serving as nurses or clerks for the armed forces, but the votes are not for specific candidates but simply for or against the government.
All adult Canadians except the Chief and Deputy Electoral Officers can now vote in Canada.
European Union
The European Union has given the right to vote in municipal elections to the citizen of another EU country by the Council Directive 94/80/EG from 19 December 1994.
Finland
Provisions on the right to otherwise participate in municipal government are laid down by an Act."
France
In 1850 (31 May): The number of people eligible to vote is reduced by 30% by excluding criminals and the homeless.
Napoleon III calls a referendum in 1851 (21 December), all men aged 21 and over are allowed to vote.
Male universal suffrage is established thereafter.
As of 21 April 1944 the franchise is extended to women over 21.
On 5 July 1974 the minimum age to vote is reduced to 18 years old.
Germany
Kingdom of Hawai'i
In 1840, the king of Hawai'i issued a constitution that granted universal suffrage without mention of sex or age, but later amendments added restrictions, as the influence of Caucasian settlers increased:
There was an increase in the minimum value of income or owned property.
Hawai'i lost its independence in 1893.
Hong Kong
Minimum age to vote was reduced from 21 to 18 years in 1995. The Basic Law, the constitution of the territory since 1997, stipulates that all permanent residents (a status conferred by birth or by seven years of residence) have the right to vote.
The right of permanent residents who have right of abode in other countries to stand in election is, however, restricted to 12 functional constituencies by the Legislative Council Ordinance of 1997.
The right to vote and the right to stand in elections are not equal.
Fewer than 250,000 of the electorate are eligible to run in the 30 functional constituencies, of which 23 are elected by fewer than 80,000 of the electorate, and in the 2008 Legislative Council election 14 members were elected unopposed from these functional constituencies.
The size of the electorates of some constituencies is fewer than 200. Only persons who can demonstrate a connection to the sector are eligible to run in a functional constituency.
The Legislative Council (Amendment) Bill 2012, if passed, amends the Legislative Council Ordinance to restrict the right to stand in Legislative Council by-elections in geographical constituencies and the District Council (Second) functional constituency.
In addition to those persons who are mentally disabled, bankrupt, or imprisoned, members who resign their seats will not have the right to stand for six months' time from their resignation.
The bill is currently passing through the committee stage.
Hungary
While this law introduced voting rights for women they could not exercise this right for some years due to the revolution of 1919.
India
Since the very first Indian general election held in 1951–52, universal suffrage for all adult citizens aged 21 or older was established under Article 326 of the Constitution of India.
The minimum voting age was reduced to 18 years by the 61st Amendment, effective 28 March 1989.
Ireland
Main article: History of the franchise in Ireland
Isle of Man
The vote is given to men over the age of 21 who own property worth at least £8 a year or rent property worth at least £12 a year.
Candidates must be male, with real estate of an annual value of £100, or of £50 along with a personal estate producing an annual income of £100.
The property qualification for candidates is modified to allow the alternative of personal property producing a year income of £150.
The property qualification for candidates is removed.
The time between elections is reduced from 7 to 5 years.
The entire electorate (with the exception of clergy and holders of office of profit) becomes eligible to stand for election.
Italy
The Supreme Court states that "the rules derogating from the passive electoral law must be strictly interpreted".
Japan
Main article: Suffrage in Japan
New Zealand
Main article: History of voting in New Zealand
The vote was limited to male British subjects aged 21 or over who owned or rented sufficient property and were not imprisoned for a serious offence.
Communally owned land was excluded from the property qualification, thus disenfranchising most Māori (indigenous) men.
There was no property qualification; thus Māori men gained universal suffrage before other New Zealanders.
The number of seats did not reflect the size of the Māori population, but Māori men who met the property requirement for general electorates were able to vote in them or in the Māori electorates but not both.
Norway
Poland
Eight women were elected to the Sejm in 1919.
Singapore
See also: Voting rights in Singapore
South Africa
The franchise qualifications are the same as those previously existing for elections of the legislatures of the colonies that comprised the Union.
In the Transvaal and the Orange Free State the franchise is limited to white men.
In Natal the franchise is limited to men meeting property and literacy qualifications; it was theoretically colour-blind but in practise nearly all non-white men were excluded.
The traditional "Cape Qualified Franchise" of the Cape Province is limited to men meeting property and literacy qualifications and is colour-blind; nonetheless 85% of voters are white.
The rights of non-white voters in the Cape Province are protected by an entrenched clause in the South Africa Act requiring a two-thirds vote in a joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament.
Four Senators are to be indirectly elected by chiefs and local authorities to represent black South Africans throughout the country.
The act is passed with the necessary two-thirds majority in a joint sitting.
It purports to remove coloured voters in the Cape Province from the common voters' roll and instead allow them to elect four "Coloured Representative Members" to the House of Assembly.
Parliament passes the High Court of Parliament Act, 1952, purporting to allow it to reverse this decision, but the Appellate Division annuls it as well.
Every Coloured citizen over the age of 21 can vote for its members, in first-past-the-post elections in single-member constituencies.
Every Indian South African citizen over the age of 18 can vote for its members, in first-past-the-post elections in single-member constituencies.
Two new Houses of Parliament are created, the House of Representatives to represent coloured citizens and the House of Delegates to represent Indian citizens.
Every coloured and Indian citizen over the age of 18 can vote in elections for the relevant house.
As with the House of Assembly, the members are elected by first-past-the-post voting in single-member constituencies.
The CPRC and SAIC are abolished.
A new National Assembly is created, and every South African citizen over the age of 18 has the right to vote for the assembly.
The right to vote is also extended to long term residents.
It is estimated the 500 000 foreign nationals voted in the 1994 national and provincial elections.
Elections of the assembly are based on party-list proportional representation.
The right to vote is enshrined in the Bill of Rights.
Sweden
The members of the First Chamber were elected indirectly by the county councils and the municipal assemblies in the larger towns and cities.
Turkey
Main article: Women in Turkish politics
United Kingdom
See also: Elections in the United Kingdom § History, Parliamentary franchise in the United Kingdom 1885–1918, and Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom
The Chartists' National Convention at the British Coffee House in February 1839
From 1265, a few percent of the adult male population in the Kingdom of England (of which Wales was a full and equal member from 1542) were able to vote in parliamentary elections that occurred at irregular intervals to the Parliament of England.
The franchise for the Parliament of Scotland developed separately.
King Henry VI of England established in 1432 that only owners of property worth at least forty shillings, a significant sum, were entitled to vote in an English county constituency.
The franchise was restricted to males by custom rather than statute.
Changes were made to the details of the system, but there was no major reform until the Reform Act 1832.[nb 3] A series of Reform Acts and Representation of the People Acts followed.
In 1918, all men over 21 and some women over 30 won the right to vote, and in 1928 all women over 21 won the right to vote resulting in universal suffrage.
The Laws in Wales Acts 1535 – Legislation provides for Welsh representatives in the House of Commons
The Acts of Union 1707 – Scotland allocated 45 seats in the House of Commons
Acts of Union 1800 – Ireland allocated 100 seats in the House of Commons
Reform Act 1832 – extended voting rights to adult males who rented propertied land of a certain value, so allowing 1 in 7 males in the UK voting rights.
Reform Act 1867 – extended the franchise to men in urban areas who met a property qualification, so increasing male suffrage.
Reform Act 1884 – addressed imbalances between the boroughs and the countryside; this brought the voting population to 5,500,000, although 40% of males were still disenfranchised because of the property qualification.
Between 1885 and 1918 moves were made by the women's suffrage movement to ensure votes for women.
However, the duration of the First World War stopped this reform movement.
Representation of the People Act 1918 – the consequences of World War I persuaded the government to expand the right to vote, not only for the many men who fought in the war who were disenfranchised, but also for the women who worked in factories, agriculture and elsewhere as part of the war effort, often substituting for enlisted men and including dangerous work such as in munitions factories.
All men aged 21 and over were given the right to vote.
Property restrictions for voting were lifted for men.
The local government franchise was extended to include all women over 21, on the same terms as men.
Parliamentary Votes were given to 40% of women, with property restrictions and limited to those over 30 years old.
This increased the electorate from 7.7 million to 21.4 million with women making up 8.5 million of the electorate.
Seven percent of the electorate had more than one vote, either because they owned business property or because they were university graduates.
The first election with this system was the 1918 general election.
Representation of the People Act 1928 – equal suffrage for women and men, with voting possible at 21 with no property restrictions.
Representation of the People Act 1948 – removed plural voting in parliamentary elections for university graduates and business owners.
Representation of the People Act 1969 – extension of suffrage to those 18 and older, and abolition of plural voting in local government elections.
United States
Main article: Voting rights in the United States
The Constitution did not originally define who was eligible to vote, allowing each state to decide this status.
In the early history of the U.S., most states allowed only white male adult property owners to vote (about 6% of the population). By 1856 property ownership requirements were eliminated in all states, giving suffrage to most white men.
However, tax-paying requirements remained in five states until 1860 and in two states until the 20th century.
After the Civil War, five amendments to the Constitution were expressly addressed to the "right to vote"; these amendments limit the basis upon which the right to vote in any U.S. state or other jurisdiction may be abridged or denied.[nb 4]
Full removal of racial disenfranchisement of citizens was not secured until the Voting Rights Act of 1965 gained passage through Congress following the Civil Rights Movement.
For state elections, it was not until the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6–3 in Harper v.
Virginia Board of Elections (1966) that all state poll taxes were declared unconstitutional as violating the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
This removed a burden on the poor, including some poor whites who had been disenfranchised.
Majority-Muslim countries
Main article: Timeline of first women's suffrage in majority-Muslim countries
See also
Constituency
Democracy
Direct democracy
List of suffragists and suffragettes
Voting system
Youth suffrage
Anti-suffragism
Women's suffrage
Notes
Strictly speaking, all ratepayers; however, domestic rates were abolished after the 1977 election.
For example South Dublin County Council produced lists of addresses of residences and ratepayers within Palmerstown for the 2014 plebiscite on changing the district's spelling.
Until this Act specified 'male persons', a few women had been able to vote in parliamentary elections through property ownership, although this was rare.
The 14th Amendment (1868) altered the way each state is represented in the House of Representatives.
It counted all residents for apportionment including former slaves, overriding the three-fifths compromise of the original Constitution; it also reduced a state's apportionment if it wrongfully denied the right to vote to males over age 21. However, this sanction was not enforced in practice.
References
"suffrage". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.
"Definition of "suffrage" – Collins English Dictionary". Retrieved 28 July 2015.
"suffrage – definition of suffrage in English from the Oxford dictionary". Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
"Deprivation of the Right to Vote". ACE Electoral Knowledge Network.
Aceproject.org.
Gianoulis, Tina (2015). "Women's Suffrage Movement" (PDF). glbtq.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2019.
"Who is eligible to vote at a UK general election?". The Electoral Commission.
Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2016
"Can I vote?". European Parliament Information Office in the United Kingdom
"Why Can Commonwealth Citizens Vote in the U.K.? An Expat Asks". The Wall Street Journal. 27 April 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
G. E. M. de Ste.
Croix (March 1954), "Suffragium: From Vote to Patronage", The British Journal of Sociology, The London School of Economics and Political Science, 5 (1): 33–48, doi:10.2307/588044, JSTOR 588044
"LacusCurtius • Voting in Ancient Rome – Suffragium (Smith's Dictionary, 1875)". Penelope.uchicago.edu.
Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"Suffrage". Merriam-webster.com. 31 August 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
Poole, Robert (April 2006). "'By the Law or the Sword': Peterloo Revisited". History. 2 (302): 254–276. doi:10.1111/j.1468-229X.2006.00366.x.
JSTOR 24427836.
A Vision of Britain through time. "Greater Manchester Met.C: Total Population". Retrieved 6 April 2007.
Nohlen, Dieter, e al. (2001). Elections in Asia and the Pacific: South East Asia, East Asia, and the South Pacific. p. 14. Oxford University Press, 2001
A. Kulinski, K. Pawlowski.
The Atlantic Community – The Titanic of the XXI Century. p. 96. WSB-NLU. 2010
"Definition of SUFFRAGE". 
"The New Jersey Constitution of 1776". Retrieved 17 December 2006.
"Votes for Women". Electoral Commission of New Zealand.
Archived from the original on 19 August 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2020.
"Opposition to Suffrage". History of U.S. Woman's Suffrage.
Retrieved 4 April 2019.
"12 Cruel Anti-Suffragette Cartoons". mentalfloss.com. 21 June 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2019.
"Definition: suffrage". Websters Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2011.
Alexander Keyssar, "'The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States'" (2nd ed. 2009) p 5 - 
Constitution of the Empire of Brazil 
"CIA:The World Factbook". Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 22 May 2012.
Johal, Sukhdev; Moran, Michael; Williams, Karel (2012). "The future has been postponed: The Great Financial Crisis and British politics". British Politics. 7 (1): 69–81. doi:10.1057/bp.2011.30. ISSN 1746-918X. S2CID 153648412.
Leaver, Adam. "Banking's groundhog day". 
"Written Answers to Questions – City of London Remembrancer". Hansard.
UK Parliament. 3 March 2014. 3 March 2014 : Column 593W. Retrieved 28 October 2014.
Mathiason, Nick; Newman, Melanie (9 July 2012). "City of London Corporation: a lesson in lobbying". The Guardian.
Arthur, Paul (17 June 2014). "Northern Ireland 1968–72".  In Aughey, Arthur; Morrow, Duncan (eds.). Northern Ireland Politics.
Taylor & Francis. p. 24. ISBN 9781317890836. Retrieved 27 November 2015.
Callanan, Mark; Keogan, Justin F. (2003). Local Government in Ireland: Inside Out.
Institute of Public Administration. p. 332. ISBN 9781902448930. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"Local Government (Financial Provisions) Act, 1978". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"Local Government (Financial Provisions) Act, 1978 – Debates". Bills index.
Oireachtas. 14 December 1977. Retrieved 8 January 2018.;
"S.I. No. 31/1956 – Local Government (Changing of Place Names) Regulations, 1956". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"Plebiscite Palmerston Addresses". South Dublin County Council. 2014. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"Plebiscite Palmerston Rated Occupiers". South Dublin County Council. 2014. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"S.I. No. 166/2007 – Local Government (Business Improvement Districts Ratepayer Plebiscite) Regulations 2007". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 8 January 2018.; "Q.50 – Councillor Mannix Flynn" (PDF). Questions Lodged Pursuant to Standing Order No.16 for Reply at the Monthly Meeting of Dublin City Council to be Held on Monday, 4th September 2017. pp. 11–13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 December 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
"Local Government (Dublin) Act, 1930 §§31(1), 32(2)–(3), 34, 35". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 2 February 2017.; "Local Government (Dublin) Act, 1935, Section 2". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 2 February 2017.
Hasham, Nicole; McKenny, Leesha (16 August 2014). "City of Sydney business vote plan may falter, backers concede". The Sydney Morning Herald.
Retrieved 27 November 2015.
Weissmann, Jordan (August 2014). "Australia businesses get to vote: Sydney conservatives want it to be required by law". Slate.
Retrieved 27 November 2015.
"Abbess". Original Catholic Encyclopedia. 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2012.
Women Mystics Confront the Modern World (Marie-Florine Bruneau: State University of New York: 1998: p. 106)
Ridge, Mian (25 March 2008). "Bhutan makes it official: it's a democracy". Christian Science Monitor.
Retrieved 2 September 2011.
Williamson, Chilton (1960), American Suffrage.
From property to democracy, Princeton University Press
Constitution of Delaware, 1776, The Avalon Project at Yale Law School, archived from the original on 30 November 2007, retrieved 7 December 2007
State Constitution (Religious Sections) – Delaware, The Constitutional Principle: Separation of Church and State, retrieved 7 December 2007
An Act for establishing the constitution of the State of South Carolina, 19 March 1778, The Avalon Project at Yale Law School, archived from the original on 13 December 2007, retrieved 5 December 2007
Constitution of Georgia, The Avalon Project at Yale Law School, 5 February 1777, archived from the original on 13 December 2007, retrieved 7 December 2007
An Act for the relief of Jews in Maryland, passed 26 February 1825, vol. 3183, Archives of Maryland, 26 February 1825, p. 1670, retrieved 5 December 2007
A History of the Vote in Canada, Chapter 3 Modernization, 1920–1981, Elections Canada, retrieved 6 December 2007
Chronology – From the History Museum of the Romanian Jews; Hasefer Publishing House, The Romanian Jewish Community, retrieved 6 December 2007
"UK Parliamentary Website Election FAQs". Archived from the original on 16 August 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2018.
a b de Ferranti, David (2004). Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History? (PDF). Washington DC, USA: The World Bank. pp. 109–122.
a b Transcript of Voting Rights Act (1965) U.S. National Archives.
"Civil Rights Movement – Literacy Tests & Voter Applications". 
Wood, J. R. T. (June 2005). So far and no further! Rhodesia's bid for independence during the retreat from empire 1959–1965. Victoria, British Columbia: Trafford Publishing. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-4120-4952-8.
The Constitution: The 24th Amendment Time Magazine.
Retrieved 24 October 2011.
"Australian Electoral Commission, "Voting Overseas – Frequently Asked Questions", 20 November 2007". Aec.gov.au. 10 January 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"Lov om valg til Folketinget – Valgret og valgbarhed", 10 April 2014". Retrieved 24 October 2015.
Delcour, M.C., Traité théorique et pratique du droit électoral appliqué aux élections communales, Louvain, Ickx & Geets, 1842, p. 16
Lambert, Pierre-Yves (1999), La participation politique des allochtones en Belgique – Historique et situation bruxelloise, Academia-Bruylant (coll.
Sybidi Papers), Louvain-la-Neuve, retrieved 6 December 2007
"Patrick Weil, Nationalité française (débat sur la)", dans Jean-François Sirinelli (dir.), Dictionnaire historique de la vie politique française au XXe siècle, Paris, PUF, 1995, pp. 719–721
Nadia Bernoussi, L'évolution du processus électoral au Maroc, 22 December 2005 Archived 25 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine
"art. 3, al. 3, Loi Organique portant code électoral guinéen". Ife.org.mx.
Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"Federated States of Micronesia". Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Nicaragua". Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Peru". Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Philippines". Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Uruguay". Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Retrieved 12 December 2007.
Plénitude de la République et extension du suffrage universel (in French), Assemblée nationale (National Assembly of France), archived from the original on 19 December 2007, retrieved 5 December 2007
"Electoral Act, 1923, Section 5". Irish Statute Book.
Retrieved 4 December 2015.
"Electoral Act, 1960". Irish Statute Book. pp. sec.3 and Schedule.
Retrieved 4 December 2015.
"Private Members' Business. – Garda Síochána Franchise—Motion". Dáil Éireann debates.
Oireachtas. 2 November 1955. Retrieved 8 December 2015.
Blaney, Neil (6 December 1960). "Electoral Bill, 1960 – Second Stages". Dáil Éireann debates.
Oireachtas.
Retrieved 4 December 2015. One of the important proposals is contained in Section 3 and in the Schedule which provides for the repeal of the prohibition on the registration of Gardaí as voters at Dáil elections.
In future, if this provision is enacted, Gardaí can vote at Dáil and Presidential elections and at referendums.
Constitution of the State of Texas (1876), Tarlton Law Library, The University of Texas School of Law, archived from the original on 29 January 2008, retrieved 8 December 2007
"Universal suffrage granted to women". Our World in Data.
Retrieved 6 March 2020.
a b "Women and the Right to Vote in Australia". Australian Electoral Commission. 28 January 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"Electoral Milestones for Women". Australian Electoral Commission. 8 March 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"Women win the vote : Digital Resources on Manitoba History". manitobia.ca.
Archived from the original on 27 August 2011. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Canada, Elections. "A History of the Vote in Canada". Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"The Famous Five – Timeline". Abheritage.ca. 8 December 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
Indian Act of Canada S.C. 1938 chap 46 sec 14(2)(i)/Dominion Elections Act S.C.1948 chap 46
a b "Canada – Women's Vote – Women Suffrage". Faculty.marianopolis.edu. 27 January 1916. Retrieved 21 June 2013.
"CBC Digital Archives". Archives.cbc.ca.
Retrieved 21 June 2013.
a b Canada, Elections. "A History of the Vote in Canada". Retrieved 16 March 2017.
a b c Noel Dyck; Tonio Sadik (15 April 2016). "Aboriginal people, political organization and activism". The Canadian Encyclopedia.
Retrieved 21 August 2019.{{cite encyclopedia}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Canada, Elections. "The Evolution of the Federal Franchise". Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"The Evolution of the Federal Franchise". Elections Canada. 9 December 2020.
"CBC Digital Archives". Archives.cbc.ca.
Retrieved 21 June 2013.
Sauvé v.
Canada (Chief Electoral Officer)
"Frank v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2019 SCC 1". Lexum.
January 2001. Retrieved 27 January 2019.
"Council Directive 94/80/EG". EUR-Lex.
"The Constitution of Finland" (PDF). 11 June 1999. Retrieved 10 December 2007.
"Geschichte des Wahlrechts". (in German). Retrieved 20 March 2021.
"Verfassungen und Gesetze des Rheinbundes und des Deutschen Bundes (1806-1866)". 
"documentArchiv.de - Gesetz, betreffend die Wahlen der Abgeordneten zum Volkshause ["Frankfurter Reichswahlgesetz"] (12.04.1849)". 
"Wahlgesetz für den konstituierenden Reichstag des Norddeutschen Bundes (1866". 
"Wahlgesetz für den Reichstag des Norddeutschen Bundes – Wikisource". de.wikisource.org (in German). Retrieved 20 March 2021.
"Deutsches Reichsgesetzblatt 1918 Nr. 167 – Wikisource". de.wikisource.org (in German). Retrieved 18 March 2022.
"Plenarprotokoll Deutscher Bundestag 60. Sitzung" (PDF). Deutscher Bundestag (in German). Retrieved 18 March 2022.
Wahlrechtsausschlüsse für Betreute in allen Angelegenheiten und wegen Schuldunfähigkeit untergebrachte Straftäter verfassungswidrig, exclusion from suffrage is unconstitutional, 2019-01-29.
Buonomo, Giampiero (2000). "Nel passaggio Usl-Asl solo tre dirigenti restano ineleggibili negli enti locali". Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online.
Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2016.
"選挙のあゆみ". 
a b c "川崎市：日本の選挙権拡大の歴史". 
a b "わが国の選挙権の拡大". gakusyu.shizuoka-c.ed.jp.
Retrieved 20 March 2021.
"選挙の歴史を学ぼう｜選挙フレンズ｜京都市選挙管理委員会事務局". www2.city.kyoto.lg.jp.
Retrieved 20 March 2021.
"Stemmerettens historie i Norge" (in Norwegian). Espend Søbye. 19 March 2021.
"Stemmerettens historie" (in Norwegian). Laila Ø. Bakken, NRK. 12 June 2007.
Ruin, Olof (1990). Tage Erlander: serving the welfare state, 1946–1969. Pitt series in policy and institutional studies, 99-0818751-1. Pittsburgh, Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 93. ISBN 9780822936312. SELIBR 5791923. riksdag bicameral.
History of the Riksdag Official Riksdag Website, Retrieved 19 May 2018
"Origins and growth of Parliament". The National Archives.
Retrieved 18 May 2015.
"Getting the vote". The National Archives.
Retrieved 18 May 2015.
"Ancient voting rights", The History of the Parliamentary Franchise, House of Commons Library, 1 March 2013, p. 6, retrieved 16 March 2016
Heater, Derek (2006). Citizenship in Britain: A History.
Edinburgh University Press. p. 107. ISBN 9780748626724.
"The History of the Parliamentary Franchise". House of Commons Library. 1 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
a b c d "Keydates". 
"Expansion of Rights and Liberties – The Right of Suffrage". Online Exhibit: The Charters of Freedom.
National Archives.
Archived from the original on 6 July 2016. Retrieved 21 April 2015.
Janda, Kenneth; Berry, Jeffrey M.; Goldman, Jerry (2008). The challenge of democracy : government in America (9. ed., update ed.). Houghton Mifflin. p. 207. ISBN 9780618990948; Murrin, John M.; Johnson, Paul E.; McPherson, James M.; Fahs, Alice; Gerstle, Gary (2012). Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People (6th ed.). Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. p. 296. ISBN 9780495904991.
Stanley L. Engerman, University of Rochester and NBER; Kenneth L. Sokoloff, University of California, Los Angeles and NBER (February 2005). "The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the New World" (PDF): 16, 35. By 1840, only three states retained a property qualification, North Carolina (for some state-wide offices only), Rhode Island, and Virginia.
In 1856 North Carolina was the last state to end the practice.
Tax-paying qualifications were also gone in all but a few states by the Civil War, but they survived into the 20th century in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
"U.S. Voting Rights". Infoplease.
Retrieved 21 April 2015.
Scher, Richard K. (2015). The Politics of Disenfranchisement: Why is it So Hard to Vote in America?. Routledge. p. viii–ix.
ISBN 9781317455363.
"Civil Rights in America: Racial Voting Rights" (PDF). A National Historic Landmarks Theme Study. 2009. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Bibliography
See also: List of suffragists and suffragettes § Women's suffrage publications
Atkinson, Neill.
Adventures in Democracy: A History of the Vote in New Zealand (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2003).
Edwards, Louise P. and Mina Roces, eds.
Women's Suffrage in Asia: Gender, Nationalism, and Democracy (Routledge, 2004).
Haas, Michael.
Racial Harmony Is Achievable: Lessons from the Kingdom of Hawai'i (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), pp. 70–72.
Keyssar, Alexander.
The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States (New York: Basic Books, 2000). ISBN 0-465-02968-X.
Lichtman, Allan J.  The Embattled Vote in America: From the Founding to the Present (Harvard UP. 2018)
Towns, Ann. "Global Patterns and Debates in the Granting of Women’s Suffrage." in The Palgrave Handbook of Women’s Political Rights (Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2019) pp. 3–19.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: Reports on Voting (2005) ISBN 978-0-8377-3103-2.
Willis, Justin, Gabrielle Lynch, and Nic Cheeseman. "Voting, Nationhood, and Citizenship in late-colonial Africa." Historical Journal 61.4 (2018): 1113–1135. online
"Smallest State in the World", The New York Times, 19 June 1896, p. 6
A History of the Vote in Canada, Chief Electoral Officer of Canada, 2007.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Suffrage.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Suffrage.
Scholia has a topic profile for Suffrage.
Suffrage in Canada
Women's suffrage in Germany—19 January 1919—first suffrage (active and passive) for women in Germany
"Suffrage" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
"Who Gets to Vote? Teaching About the Struggle for Voting Rights in the United States" by Ursula Wolfe-Rocca, The Zinn Education Project, 2020.
SuffrageBasic topics
Universal suffrage
Women
Men
Black
Youth
Resident foreigners
Expatriates in country of origin
Voting age
Demeny voting
Suffragette
Compulsory voting
Disfranchisement
Women's liberation movement
By country
Austria
Australia
aboriginal
women
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Hong Kong
India
Japan
Kuwait
Liechtenstein
Mexico
New Zealand
Spain (Civil War, Francoist)
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
women
Cayman Islands
Scotland
Wales
laws
United States
women
African Americans
Native Americans
felons
foreigners
District of Columbia
Puerto Rico
states
Constitutional amendments: 15th, 19th,  23rd, 24th, 26th
Events
International Woman Suffrage Alliance conferences
Hong Kong 1 July marches
UK
WSPU march (1906)
Mud March (1907)
Women's Sunday (1908)
Black Friday (1910)
Battle of Downing Street (1910)
Women's Coronation Procession (1911)
Great Pilgrimage (1913)
Open Christmas Letter (1914)
US
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
Declaration of Sentiments (1848)
Rochester Convention (1848)
Ohio Women's Convention (1850)
National Women's Rights Convention (1850–1869)
Trial of Susan B. Anthony (1872–1873)
Suffrage Hikes (1912–1914)
Woman Suffrage Procession (1913)
Suffrage Torch
Suffrage Special (1916)
Silent Sentinels (1917–1919)
Night of Terror
Prison Special
"Give Us the Ballot" (1957)
Freedom Summer (1964)
Selma to Montgomery marches (1965)
Related
Age of candidacy
National Voting Rights Museum (US)
Umbrella Movement
Women(memorials)
List of suffragists and suffragettes
Timeline of women's suffrage
US
in majority-Muslim countries
Historiography of the Suffragettes
Women's suffrage organizations and publications
Women's rights activists
Leser v.
Garnett
Belmont–Paul Monument
Emmeline Pankhurst statue
Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Memorial
Elizabeth Cady Stanton statue
Suffragette Memorial
Portrait Monument
Women's Rights Pioneers Monument
Forward statue
Kate Sheppard National Memorial
Millicent Fawcett statue
Great Petition (2008 sculpture)
Centenary of Women's Suffrage Commemorative Fountain
Resilience
Eagle House
Pankhurst Centre
Paulsdale
Suffragette Handkerchief
Holloway brooch
Hunger Strike Medal
Justice Bell
Suffrage jewellery
Suffragette penny
Suffragette Oak
Women's Rights National Historical Park
International Women's Day
Susan B. Anthony Day
Women's Equality Day
Popularculture
"The Women's Marseillaise"
"The March of the Women" (1910 song)
The Mother of Us All (1947 opera)
"Sister Suffragette" (1964 song)
Suffrage plays
Women's suffrage in film
Votes for Women (1912 film)
Shoulder to Shoulder (1974 series)
Not for Ourselves Alone (1999 documentary)
Iron Jawed Angels (2004 film)
Up the Women (2013 sitcom)
Selma (2014 film)
Suffragette (2015 film)
Sylvia (2018 musical)
Suffs (2022 musical)
Susan B. Anthony dollar
New Zealand ten-dollar note
Human rights
Humans
Children
Intersex people
Women
Fundamental conceptsand philosophies
Natural law
Positive law
Sovereignty
Universal jurisdiction
Distinctions
Claim rights and liberty rights
Individual and group rights
Natural rights and legal rights
Negative and positive rights
Aspects
Corporal punishment
Organizations
List of human rights organisations
National human rights institutions
By continent
Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America
Related
History of human rights
List of human rights articles by country
List of human rights awards
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights
DiscriminationForms
Institutional
Structural
Attributes
Age
Caste
Class
Dialect
Disability
Genetic
Hair texture
Height
Language
Looks
Mental disorder
Race / Ethnicity
Nordicism
Skin color
Rank
Sex
Sexual orientation
Species
Size
Viewpoint
Social
Acephobia
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-communism
The Holocaust
McCarthyism
Red Scare
Anti-homelessness
Anti-drug addicts
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Antisemitism
Aporophobia
Audism
Biphobia
Clannism
Cronyism
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Fatphobia
Gayphobia
Gerontophobia
Heterosexism
HIV/AIDS stigma
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Perpetual foreigner
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Supremacism
Black
White
Transphobia
Non-binary
Transmisogyny
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia
Religious
Ahmadiyya
Atheism
Baháʼí Faith
Buddhism
Catholicism
Christianity
post–Cold War era
Falun Gong
Hinduism
Persecution
Untouchability
Islam
Persecution
Jehovah's Witnesses
Judaism
Persecution
LDS or Mormon
Neopaganism
Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Protestantism
Rastafari
Shi'ism
Sufism
Zoroastrianism
Ethnic/National
African
Albanian
Arab
Armenian
Asian
France
United States
South Africa
Azerbaijani
Black people
African Americans
China
South Africa
Bengali
Catalan
Chechen
Chinese
Croat
Filipino
Finnish
Georgian
Greek
Haitian
Hazara
Hispanic
Hungarian
Igbo
Indian
Indigenous people
Australia
Canada
United States
Iranian
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Japanese
Jewish
Korean
Kurdish
Malay
Mexican
Middle Eastern
Mongolian
Pakistani
Palestinians
Pashtun
Polish
Quebec
Romani
Romanian
Russian
Serb
Slavic
Somali
Tatar
Thai
Turkish
Ukrainian
Uyghur
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Manifestations
Blood libel
Bullying
Cancel culture
Compulsory sterilization
Corrective rape
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Defamation
Democide
Disability hate crime
Dog whistle
Economic
Education
Employment
Eliminationism
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic conflict
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital modification and mutilation
Genocide
examples
Glass ceiling
Hate crime
LGBT
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
Intersectionality
Lavender scare
Lynching
Mortgage
Murder music
Native American mascot controversy
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Political repression
Purge
Religious persecution
Religious terrorism
Religious violence
Religious war
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt
Discriminatorypolicies
Age of candidacy
Blood purity
Blood quantum
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities
Catholic
Jewish
Ethnocracy
Ethnopluralism
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Law for Protection of the Nation
MSM blood donation restrictions
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Segregation
age
racial
religious
sexual
Social exclusion
Sodomy law
State atheism
State religion
Ugly law
Voter suppression
Countermeasures
Affirmative action
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Diversity training
Empowerment
Fat acceptance movement
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Hate speech laws by country
Human rights
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Reappropriation
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Related topics
Allophilia
Amatonormativity
Anti-cultural, anti-national, and anti-ethnic terms
Bias
Christian privilege
Civil liberties
Dehumanization
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Heteronormativity
Internalized oppression
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Medical model of disability
autism
Multiculturalism
Net bias
Neurodiversity
Oikophobia
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Polyculturalism
Power distance
Prejudice
Prisoner abuse
Racial bias in criminal news in the United States
Racism by country
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social model of disability
Social stigma
Speciesism
Stereotype
threat
The talk
White privilege
Category
Commons
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Korea
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 6 September 2022, at 17:44 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
