Wheel - Wikipedia
Wheel
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Circular component rotating on an axle
For other uses, see Wheel (disambiguation) and Wheels (disambiguation).
An early wheel made of a solid piece of wood
A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axle bearing.
The wheel is one of the key components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines.
Wheels, in conjunction with axles, allow heavy objects to be moved easily facilitating movement or transportation while supporting a load, or performing labor in machines.
Wheels are also used for other purposes, such as a ship's wheel, steering wheel, potter's wheel, and flywheel.
Common examples are found in transport applications.
A wheel reduces friction by facilitating motion by rolling together with the use of axles.
In order for wheels to rotate, a moment needs to be applied to the wheel about its axis, either by way of gravity or by the application of another external force or torque.
Using the wheel, Sumerians invented a device that spins clay as a potter shapes it into the desired object.
Contents
Terminology
The English word wheel comes from the Old English word hwēol, from Proto-Germanic *hwehwlaz, from Proto-Indo-European *kwékwlos, an extended form of the root *kwel- "to revolve, move around".
Cognates within Indo-European include Icelandic hjól "wheel, tyre", Greek κύκλος kúklos, and Sanskrit chakra, the last two both meaning "circle" or "wheel".
History
The place and time of the invention of the wheel remains unclear, because the oldest hints do not guarantee the existence of real wheeled transport, or are dated with too much scatter.
Mesopotamian civilization is credited with the invention of the wheel.
However, unlike other breakthrough inventions, the wheel cannot be attributed to a single nor several inventors.
Evidence of early usage of wheeled carts has been found across the Middle East, in Europe, Eastern Europe, India and China.
It is not known whether Chinese and Europeans invented the wheel independently or not.
The invention of the solid wooden disk wheel falls into the late Neolithic, and may be seen in conjunction with other technological advances that gave rise to the early Bronze Age.
This implies the passage of several wheelless millennia even after the invention of agriculture and of pottery, during the Aceramic Neolithic.
This Ljubljana Marshes Wheel with axle is the oldest wooden wheel yet discovered dating to Copper Age (c. 3,130 BCE)
The Halaf culture of 6500–5100 BCE is sometimes credited with the earliest depiction of a wheeled vehicle, but this is doubtful as there is no evidence of Halafians using either wheeled vehicles or even pottery wheels.
Precursors of pottery wheels, known as "tournettes" or "slow wheels", were known in the Middle East by the 5th millennium BCE. One of the earliest examples was discovered at Tepe Pardis, Iran, and dated to 5200–4700 BCE. These were made of stone or clay and secured to the ground with a peg in the center, but required significant effort to turn.
True potter's wheels, which are freely-spinning and have a wheel and axle mechanism, were developed in Mesopotamia (Iraq) by 4200–4000 BCE. The oldest surviving example, which was found in Ur (modern day Iraq), dates to approximately 3100 BCE. Wheels of uncertain dates have also been found in the Indus Valley civilization, a 4th millennium BCE civilization covering areas of present-day India and Pakistan.
The oldest indirect evidence of wheeled movement was found in the form of miniature clay wheels north of the Black Sea before 4000 BCE. From the middle of the 4th millennium BCE onward, the evidence is condensed throughout Europe in the form of toy cars, depictions, or ruts.
In Mesopotamia, depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk, in the Sumerian civilization are dated to c. 3500–3350 BCE. In the second half of the 4th millennium BCE, evidence of wheeled vehicles appeared near-simultaneously in the Northern (Maykop culture) and South Caucasus and Eastern Europe (Cucuteni-Trypillian culture).
A depiction of an onager-drawn cart on the Sumerian "War" panel of the Standard of Ur (c. 2500 BCE)
Depictions of a wheeled vehicle appeared between 3631 and 3380 BCE in the Bronocice clay pot excavated in a Funnelbeaker culture settlement in southern Poland.
In nearby Olszanica, a 2.2 m wide door was constructed for wagon entry; this barn was 40 m long with three doors, dated to 5000 B.C.E—7000 years old, and belonged to the neolithic Linear Pottery culture.
Surviving evidence of a wheel-axle combination, from Stare Gmajne near Ljubljana in Slovenia (Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel), is dated within two standard deviations to 3340–3030 BCE, the axle to 3360–3045 BCE. Two types of early Neolithic European wheel and axle are known; a circumalpine type of wagon construction (the wheel and axle rotate together, as in Ljubljana Marshes Wheel), and that of the Baden culture in Hungary (axle does not rotate). They both are dated to c. 3200–3000 BCE. Some historians believe that there was a diffusion of the wheeled vehicle from the Near East to Europe around the mid-4th millennium BCE.
Solid wheels on a heavy temple car, contrasted with the lighter wire-spoked wheels of the black roadster bicycle in the foreground
Early wheels were simple wooden disks with a hole for the axle.
Some of the earliest wheels were made from horizontal slices of tree trunks.
Because of the uneven structure of wood, a wheel made from a horizontal slice of a tree trunk will tend to be inferior to one made from rounded pieces of longitudinal boards.
The spoked wheel was invented more recently and allowed the construction of lighter and swifter vehicles.
The earliest known examples of wooden spoked wheels are in the context of the Sintashta culture, dating to c. 2000 BCE (Krivoye Lake). Soon after this, horse cultures of the Caucasus region used horse-drawn spoked-wheel war chariots for the greater part of three centuries.
They moved deep into the Greek peninsula where they joined with the existing Mediterranean peoples to give rise, eventually, to classical Greece after the breaking of Minoan dominance and consolidations led by pre-classical Sparta and Athens.
Celtic chariots introduced an iron rim around the wheel in the 1st millennium BCE.
In China, wheel tracks dating to around 2200 BCE have been found at Pingliangtai, a site of the Longshan Culture.
Similar tracks were also found at Yanshi, a city of the Erlitou culture, dating to around 1700 BCE. The earliest evidence of spoked wheels in China comes from Qinghai, in the form of two wheel hubs from a site dated between 2000 and 1500 BCE.
In Britain, a large wooden wheel, measuring about 1 m (3.3 ft) in diameter, was uncovered at the Must Farm site in East Anglia in 2016. The specimen, dating from 1,100 to 800 BCE, represents the most complete and earliest of its type found in Britain.
The wheel's hub is also present.
A horse's spine found nearby suggests the wheel may have been part of a horse-drawn cart.
The wheel was found in a settlement built on stilts over wetland, indicating that the settlement had some sort of link to dry land.
A figurine featuring the New World's independently invented wheel.
Among the places where wheeled toys were found, Mesoamerica is the only one where the wheel was never put to practical use before the 16th century.
Although large-scale use of wheels did not occur in the Americas prior to European contact, numerous small wheeled artifacts, identified as children's toys, have been found in Mexican archeological sites, some dating to approximately 1500 BCE. Some argue that the primary obstacle to large-scale development of the wheel in the Americas was the absence of domesticated large animals that could be used to pull wheeled carriages.
The closest relative of cattle present in Americas in pre-Columbian times, the American bison, is difficult to domesticate and was never domesticated by Native Americans; several horse species existed until about 12,000 years ago, but ultimately became extinct.
The only large animal that was domesticated in the Western hemisphere, the llama, a pack animal, was not physically suited to use as a draft animal to pull wheeled vehicles, and use of the llama did not spread far beyond the Andes by the time of the arrival of Europeans.
On the other hand, Mesoamericans never developed the wheelbarrow, the potter's wheel, nor any other practical object with a wheel or wheels.
Although present in a number of toys, very similar to those found throughout the world and still made for children today ("pull toys"), the wheel was never put into practical use in Mesoamerica before the 16th century.
Possibly the closest the Mayas came to the utilitarian wheel is the spindle whorl, and some scholars believe that these toys were originally made with spindle whorls and spindle sticks as "wheels" and "axes".
Aboriginal Australians traditionally used circular discs rolled along the ground for use as target practice.
Nubians from after about 400 BCE used wheels for spinning pottery and as water wheels.
It is thought that Nubian waterwheels may have been ox-driven.
It is also known that Nubians used horse-drawn chariots imported from Egypt.
Starting from the 18th century in West Africa, wheeled vehicles were mostly used for ceremonial purposes in places like Dahomey.
The wheel was barely used for transportation, with the exception of Ethiopia in Sub-Saharan Africa well into the 19th century.
Three spoked wheels on an antique tricycleThe spoked wheel was in continued use without major modification until the 1870s, when wire-spoked wheels and pneumatic tires were invented.
Pneumatic tires can greatly reduce rolling resistance and improve comfort.  Wire spokes are under tension, not compression, making it possible for the wheel to be both stiff and light.
Early radially-spoked wire wheels gave rise to tangentially-spoked wire wheels, which were widely used on cars into the late 20th century.
Cast alloy wheels are now more commonly used; forged alloy wheels are used when weight is critical.
The invention of the wheel has also been important for technology in general, important applications including the water wheel, the cogwheel (see also antikythera mechanism), the spinning wheel, and the astrolabe or torquetum.
More modern descendants of the wheel include the propeller, the jet engine, the flywheel (gyroscope) and the turbine.
Mechanics and function
This section is about the application to transport.
For the simple machine, see Wheel and axle.
A wheeled vehicle requires much less work to move than simply dragging the same weight.
The low resistance to motion is explained by the fact that the frictional work done is no longer at the surface that the vehicle is traversing, but in the bearings.
In the simplest and oldest case the bearing is just a round hole through which the axle passes (a "plain bearing").  Even with a plain bearing, the frictional work is greatly reduced because:
The normal force at the sliding interface is same as with simple dragging.
The sliding distance is reduced for a given distance of travel.
The coefficient of friction at the interface is usually lower.
Example:
If a 100 kg object is dragged for 10 m along a surface with the coefficient of friction μ = 0.5, the normal force is 981 N and the work done (required energy) is (work=force x distance) 981 × 0.5 × 10 = 4905 joules.
Now give the object 4 wheels.
The normal force between the 4 wheels and axles is the same (in total) 981 N. Assume, for wood, μ = 0.25, and say the wheel diameter is 1000 mm and axle diameter is 50 mm.
So while the object still moves 10 m the sliding frictional surfaces only slide over each other a distance of 0.5 m.
The work done is 981 × 0.25 × 0.5 = 123 joules; the work done has reduced to 1/40 of that of dragging.
Additional energy is lost from the wheel-to-road interface.
This is termed rolling resistance which is predominantly a deformation loss.
It depends on the nature of the ground, of the material of the wheel, its inflation in the case of a tire, the net torque exerted by the eventual engine, and many other factors.
A wheel can also offer advantages in traversing irregular surfaces if the wheel radius is sufficiently large compared to the irregularities.
The wheel alone is not a machine, but when attached to an axle in conjunction with bearing, it forms the wheel and axle, one of the simple machines.
A driven wheel is an example of a wheel and axle.
Wheels pre-date driven wheels by about 6000 years, themselves an evolution of using round logs as rollers to move a heavy load—a practice going back in pre-history so far that it has not been dated.
Construction
This section is about the structure of a wheel.
For the making of wire-spoked wheels, see Wheelbuilding.
For the making of non-wire spoked wheels, see Wheel construction.
Rim
Main article: Rim (wheel)
An aluminum alloy wheel
The rim is the "outer edge of a wheel, holding the tire". It makes up the outer circular design of the wheel on which the inside edge of the tire is mounted on vehicles such as automobiles.
For example, on a bicycle wheel the rim is a large hoop attached to the outer ends of the spokes of the wheel that holds the tire and tube.
In the 1st millennium BCE an iron rim was introduced around the wooden wheels of chariots.
Hub
The hub is the center of the wheel, and typically houses a bearing, and is where the spokes meet.
A hubless wheel (also known as a rim-rider or centerless wheel) is a type of wheel with no center hub.
More specifically, the hub is actually almost as big as the wheel itself.
The axle is hollow, following the wheel at very close tolerances.
Spokes
Main article: spoke
A spoked wheel on display at The National Museum of Iran, in Tehran.
The wheel is dated to the late 2nd millennium BCE and was excavated at Choqa Zanbil.
A spoke is one of some number of rods radiating from the center of a wheel (the hub where the axle connects), connecting the hub with the round traction surface.
The term originally referred to portions of a log which had been split lengthwise into four or six sections.
The radial members of a wagon wheel were made by carving a spoke (from a log) into their finished shape.
A spokeshave is a tool originally developed for this purpose.
Eventually, the term spoke was more commonly applied to the finished product of the wheelwright's work, than to the materials used.
Wire
Main article: wire wheel
The rims of wire wheels (or "wire spoked wheels") are connected to their hubs by wire spokes.
Although these wires are generally stiffer than a typical wire rope, they function mechanically the same as tensioned flexible wires, keeping the rim true while supporting applied loads.
Wire wheels are used on most bicycles and still used on many motorcycles.
They were invented by aeronautical engineer George Cayley and first used in bicycles by James Starley.
A process of assembling wire wheels is described as wheelbuilding.
Tire/Tyre
Main articles: tire, motorcycle tire, and bicycle tire
A wheel with car tire made by BMW company
A tire (in American English and Canadian English) or tyre (in some Commonwealth Nations such as UK, India, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand) is a ring-shaped covering that fits around a wheel rim to protect it and enable better vehicle performance by providing a flexible cushion that absorbs shock while keeping the wheel in close contact with the ground.
The word itself may be derived from the word "tie", which refers to the outer steel ring part of a wooden cart wheel that ties the wood segments together (see Etymology above).
The fundamental materials of modern tires are synthetic rubber, natural rubber, fabric, and wire, along with other compound chemicals.
They consist of a tread and a body.
The tread provides traction while the body ensures support.
Before rubber was invented, the first versions of tires were simply bands of metal that fitted around wooden wheels to prevent wear and tear.
Today, the vast majority of tires are pneumatic inflatable structures, comprising a doughnut-shaped body of cords and wires encased in rubber and generally filled with compressed air to form an inflatable cushion.
Pneumatic tires are used on many types of vehicles, such as cars, bicycles, motorcycles, trucks, earthmovers, and aircraft.
Protruding or covering attachments
Extreme off-road conditions have resulted in the invention of several types of wheel cover, which may be constructed as removable attachments or as permanent covers.
Wheels like this are no longer necessarily round, or have panels that make the ground-contact area flat.
Examples include:
Snow chains - Specially designed chain assemblies that wrap around the tire to provide increased grip, designed for deep snow.
Dreadnaught wheel - A type of permanently attached hinged panels for general extreme off-road use.
These are not connected directly to the wheels, but to each other.
Pedrail wheel - A system of rails that holds panels that hold the vehicle.
These do not necessarily have to be built as a circle (wheel) and are thus also a form of Continuous track.
A version of the above examples (name unknown to the writer) was commonly used on heavy artillery during World War I. Specific examples: Cannone da 149/35 A and the Big Bertha.
These were panels that were connected to each other by multiple hinges and could be installed over a contemporary wheel.
Continuous track - A system of linked and hinged chains/panels that cover multiple wheels in a way that allows the vehicles mass to be distributed across the space between wheels that are positioned in front of / behind other wheels.
"Tire totes" - A bag designed to cover a tire to improve traction in deep snow.
Truck and bus wheels may block (stop rotating) under certain circumstances, such as brake system failure.
To help detect this, they sometimes feature "wheel rotation indicators": colored strips of plastic attached to the rim and protruding out from it, such that they can be seen by the driver in the side-view mirrors.
These devices were invented and patented in 1998 by a Canadian truck shop owner.
Alternatives
While wheels are very widely used for ground transport, there are alternatives, some of which are suitable for terrain where wheels are ineffective.
Alternative methods for ground transport without wheels include:
Maglev
Sled, ski or travois
Hovercraft and ekranoplans
Walking pedestrian, Litter (vehicle) or a walking machine
Horse riding
Caterpillar tracks (operated by wheels)
Pedrail wheels, using aspects of both wheel and caterpillar track
Spheres, as used by Dyson vacuum cleaners and hamster balls
Screw-propelled vehicle
Symbolism
The wheel of time in Jainism.
The wheel has also become a strong cultural and spiritual metaphor for a cycle or regular repetition (see chakra, reincarnation, Yin and Yang among others). As such and because of the difficult terrain, wheeled vehicles were forbidden in old Tibet.
The wheel in ancient China is seen as a symbol of health and strength and utilized by some villages as a tool to predict future health and success.
The diameter of the wheel is indicator of one's future health.
The Kalachakra or wheel of time is also a subject in some forms of Buddhism, along with the dharmachakra.
The winged wheel is a symbol of progress, seen in many contexts including the coat of arms of Panama, the logo of the Ohio State Highway Patrol and the State Railway of Thailand.
The wheel is also the prominent figure on the flag of India.
The wheel in this case represents law (dharma). It also appears in the flag of the Romani people, hinting to their nomadic history and their Indian origins.
The introduction of spoked (chariot) wheels in the Middle Bronze Age appears to have carried somewhat of a prestige.
The sun cross appears to have a significance in Bronze Age religion, replacing the earlier concept of a solar barge with the more 'modern' and technologically advanced solar chariot.
The wheel was also a solar symbol for the Ancient Egyptians.
In modern usage, the 'invention of the wheel' can be considered as a symbol of one of the first technologies of early civilization, alongside farming and metalwork, and thus be used as a benchmark to grade the level of societal progress.[citation needed]
Some Neopagans such as Wiccans have adopted the Wheel of the Year into their religious practices.
See also
Types: Alloy wheel, Artillery wheel, Ball transfer unit, Bicycle wheel, Caster, Cogwheel, Dreadnaught wheel, Driving wheel, Flywheel, Hubless wheel, Inline skate wheel, Mansell wheel, Mecanum wheel, Motorcycle wheel, Omni wheel, Pedrail wheel, Pressed Steel wheel, Skateboard wheel, Square wheel, Stairclimber wheel, Steering wheel (Ship's wheel), Train wheel, Tweel, Wagon wheel, Wire wheel
Components: Axle, Bogie/Truck, Differential, Drive shaft, Drivetrain, Rim, Snow chains, Spoke, Tire, Wheelset
Related technologies and concepts: Archimedes screw, Barrel, Breaking wheel, Color wheel, Compact disc, Ferris wheel, Pottery wheel, Propeller, Reinventing the wheel, Spindle whorl, Trackball, Wagon-wheel effect, Water wheel, Wheelbarrow, Wheelie, Wheel of Fortune, Wheelwright, Windlass, Windmill
Alternatives: Air cushion, Continuous track, Counter-rotating screws, Leg mechanism, Magnetic levitation, Wing-in-ground-effect
History: The Horse, The Wheel and Language, Rotating locomotion in living systems, Terrestrial locomotion in animals: Rolling, Robot locomotion
Theory: Rolling resistance, Rotational energy, Torque, Wheel and axle (simple machine), Wheel sizing
References
"wheel". Online Etymology Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 3 July 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2007.
"American Heritage Dictionary Entry: wheel". Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.
Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 26 November 2012.
Holm, Hans J. J. G.: The Earliest Wheel Finds, their Archaeology and Indo-European Terminology in Time and Space, and Early Migrations around the Caucasus.
Series Minor 43. ARCHAEOLINGUA ALAPÍTVÁNY, Budapest, 2019. ISBN 978-615-5766-30-5.
Transportation.
BPI. p. 4. ISBN 9788184972436.
Mitchell Lewis Ditkoff (May 2008). Awake at the Wheel: Getting Your Great Ideas Rolling (in an Uphill World). Morgan James Publishing. p. 15. ISBN 9781600377709.
Y C Chiu (2010). An Introduction to the History of Project Management: From the Earliest Times to A.D. 1900. Eburon. p. 24. ISBN 9789059724372.
"When was the wheel invented?". New Scientist.
Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 21 August 2021.
"The Invention of the Wheel". 
V. Gordon Childe (1928). New Light on the Most Ancient East. p. 110.
D.T. Potts (2012). A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East. p. 285.
Moorey, Peter Roger Stuart (1999) . Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence.
Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns. p. 146. ISBN 978-1-57506-042-2. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017.
John Marshall (1996). Mohenjo-Daro and the Indus Civilization: Being an Official Account of Archaeological Excavations at Mohenjo-Daro Carried Out by the Government of India Between the Years 1922 and 1927, Volume 1. Asian Education Services. p. 554. ISBN 9788120611795.
Hans J.J.G. Holm: The Earliest Wheel Finds, Their Archeology and Indo-European Terminology in Time and Space, and Early Migrations around the Caucasus.
Archaeolingua Alapítvány, Budapest, 2019, ISBN 978-963-9911-34-5
Attema, P. A. J.; Los-Weijns, Ma; Pers, N. D. Maring-Van der (December 2006). "Bronocice, Flintbek, Uruk, Jebel Aruda and Arslantepe: The Earliest Evidence of Wheeled Vehicles in Europe and the Near East". Palaeohistoria.
University of Groningen. 47/48: 10–28 (11). ISBN 9789077922187. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 1 May 2019.
Anthony, David A. (2007). The horse, the wheel, and language: how Bronze-Age riders from the Eurasian steppes shaped the modern world.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-691-05887-0.
"35. Olszanica Longhouse 6: Why has it got wide doors?". 26 October 2018. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011.
Velušček, A.; Čufar, K. and Zupančič, M. (2009) "Prazgodovinsko leseno kolo z osjo s kolišča Stare gmajne na Ljubljanskem barju", pp. 197–222 in A. Velušček (ed.). Koliščarska naselbina Stare gmajne in njen as.
Ljubljansko barje v 2. polovici 4. tisočletja pr.
Kr.
Opera Instituti Archaeologici Sloveniae 16. Ljubljana.
Fowler, Chris; Harding, Jan and Hofmann, Daniela (eds.) (2015). The Oxford Handbook of Neolithic Europe.
Archived 29 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine OUP Oxford.
ISBN 0-19-166688-2. p. 109.
Attema, P. A. J.; Los-Weijns, Ma; Maring-Van der Pers, N. D. (December 2006). "Bronocice, Flintbek, Uruk, Jebel Aruda and Arslantepe: The Earliest Evidence of Wheeled Vehicles in Europe and the Near East". Palaeohistoria.
University of Groningen. 47/48: 10-28 (19-20). ISBN 9789077922187. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 1 May 2019.
"Central China discovers earliest wheel ruts". Xinhua.
Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
Barbieri-Low, Anthony (February 2000) "Wheeled Vehicles in the Chinese Bronze Age (c. 2000–741 B.C.E)", p. 11-12. Sino-Platonic Papers
"Bronze Age wheel at 'British Pompeii' Must Farm an 'unprecedented find'". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Ekholm, Gordon F (April 1946). "Wheeled Toys in Mexico". American Antiquity. 11 (4): 222–28. doi:10.2307/275722. JSTOR 275722. S2CID 163472346.
Diamond, Jared (1999). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
New York: Norton. p. 237. ISBN 978-0-393-31755-8. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2019.
Singer, Ben (May 2005). A brief history of the horse in America.
Canadian Geographic Magazine.
Archived from the original on 19 August 2014.
Thomas Ryder (1986). The Carriage Journal: Vol 23 No 4 Spring 1986. Carriage Assoc. of America. p. 209.
a b c Chasin Calvo, Sherri. "The Technology of the Incas and Aztecs". Encyclopedia.com.
Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 21 August 2021. There were no wheeled carts, or even wheelbarrows.
Although wheeled toys and decorations have been found at Mesoamerican sites, the wheel was never put to practical use.
a b c d Smith, Herman. "Real smart folks, but no wheel". Dig It.
Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 21 August 2021.
koorihistory.com (1 December 2019). ""Aboriginal people never even invented the wheel."". Koori History - Aboriginal History of South Eastern Australia.
Retrieved 5 August 2022.
"Crafts – Uncovering Treasures of Ancient Nubia". NYTimes.com. 27 February 1994. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 18 September 2017.
"What the Nubians Ate". Discover Magazine.
Archived from the original on 1 March 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2009.
Fage, J.D.; Oliver, Roland Anthony (1975). The Cambridge History of Africa.
Cambridge University Press. p. 278. ISBN 978-0-521-21592-3. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2020.
a b Law, Robin C. (1980). "Wheeled Transportation in Pre-Colonial West Africa". Africa. 50 (3): 249–62. doi:10.2307/1159117. JSTOR 1159117. S2CID 148903113.
Chaves, Isaías; Engerman, Stanley L.; Robinson, James A. (2012). Reinventing the Wheel: The Economic Benefits of Wheeled Transportation in Early Colonial British West Africa (PDF). Weatherhead Center for International Affairs. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. One of the great technological puzzles of Sub-Saharan African economic history is that wheeled transportation was barely used prior to the colonial period.
Instead, head porterage was the main method of transportation.
bookrags.com Archived 27 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine – Wheel and axle
Jewel, Elizabeth (2006). The Pocket Oxford Dictionary and Thesaurus.
Oxford University Press. p. 722. ISBN 978-0-19-530715-3. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2012.
Examples of snow chains
Examples of "tire totes"
Another example of "tire totes"
"Here Is What Those Strips Hanging Off Of Truck Wheels Are For". Jalopnik.
Retrieved 7 January 2022.
John Newman (1991). "Blurb/description".  In Geshe Lhundub Sopa (ed.). The Wheel of Time: Kalachakra in Context.
Shambhala.
ISBN 978-1-55939-779-7. Retrieved 9 December 2021.
John C. Huntington, Dina Bangdel, The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art, p. 524.
Hall, Adelaide S. (2005). A Glossary of Important Symbols in Their Hebrew: Pagan and Christian Forms. p. 56. ISBN 978-1-59605-593-3. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2015.
Williams, Liz (29 July 2013). "Paganism, part 3: the Wheel of the Year". The Guardian.
Retrieved 9 December 2021.
External links
University of Kiel. "3400 BC: The oldest evidence for the use of the wheel and wagon originates from Northern Germany". Online: April 11th, 2022. Retrieved: April 14th, 2022.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wheels and Automobile wheels.
Look up wheel in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
PowertrainPart of the Automobile seriesAutomotive engine
Diesel engine
Electric
Fuel cell
Hybrid (Plug-in hybrid)
Internal combustion engine
Petrol engine
Steam engine
Transmission
Automatic transmission
Chain drive
Direct-drive
Clutch
Constant-velocity joint
Continuously variable transmission
Coupling
Differential
Direct-shift gearbox
Drive shaft
Dual-clutch transmission
Drive wheel
Automated manual transmission
Electrorheological clutch
Epicyclic gearing
Fluid coupling
Friction drive
Gearshift
Giubo
Hotchkiss drive
Limited-slip differential
Locking differential
Manual transmission
Manumatic
Parking pawl
Park-by-wire
Preselector gearbox
Semi-automatic transmission
Shift-by-wire
Torque converter
Transaxle
Transmission control unit
Universal joint
Wheels and tires
Wheel hub assembly
Wheel
Rim
Alloy wheel
Hubcap
Tire
Off-road
Racing slick
Radial
Rain
Run-flat
Snow
Spare
Tubeless
Hybrid
Electric motor
Hybrid vehicle drivetrain
Electric generator
Alternator
Portal
Category
Chassis control systemPart of the Automobile seriesSuspension
Anti-roll bar (sway bar)
Axle
Axle track
Beam axle
Camber angle
Car handling
Coil spring
De Dion tube
Double wishbone
Hydrolastic (Hydragas)
Hydropneumatic
Independent suspension
Leaf spring
Live axle
MacPherson strut
Multi-link suspension
Panhard rod
Shock absorber
Swing axle
Toe angle
Torsion bar
Trailing arm
Unsprung mass
Watt's linkage
Wheel alignment
Wheelbase
Steering
Ackermann steering geometry
Caster angle
Kingpin
Oversteer
Power steering
Rack and pinion
Torque steering
Understeer
Brakes
Automatic braking
Anti-lock braking system
Active rollover protection
Brake bleeding
Brake fade
Brake fluid
Brake lining
Combined braking system
Disc brake
Drum brake
Electric park brake
Electronic brakeforce distribution
Electronic stability control
Engine braking
Hydraulic brake
Hydraulic fluid
Inboard brake
Parking brake
Regenerative brake
Vacuum servo
RoadwheelsTires (Tyres)
Alloy wheel
Custom wheel
Drive wheel
Hubcap
Outline of tires
Rostyle wheel
Spinner
Whitewall tire
Wire wheels
Portal
Category
Prehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism
Locomotive designCab positioning Short hood / Long hood
Cab forward
Sharknose
Steeplecab
Cab unit
Hood unit
Cowl unit
Boxcab
Dual Control Stand
Wheel arrangement
AAR wheel arrangement
UIC classification
Swiss classification
Whyte notation
Valve gear types
Allan
Baker
Bagnall–Price
Baguley
Bulleid
Caprotti
Gab
Gooch
Gresley
Hackworth
Joy
Kuhn slide
Lentz
Southern
Stephenson
Walschaerts
Bogie types
AAR type A switcher truck
Arnoux system
Articulated bogie
Bissel truck
Blomberg B
Cleminson system
Grovers bogie
Jacobs bogie
Krauss-Helmholtz bogie
Mason Bogie
Pony truck
Radial steering truck
Scheffel bogie
Schwartzkopff-Eckhardt II bogie
Other running gear elements
Adams axle
Axlebox
Beugniot lever
Carrying wheel
Coupled wheel
Driving wheel
Equalising beam
Gölsdorf axle
Journal box
Klien-Lindner axle
Leading wheel
Luttermöller axle
Radial axle
Railway tire
Road–rail vehicle
Trailing wheel
Train wheel
Wheelset
Exhaust system types
Giesl
Kylchap
Kylpor
Lemaître
Lempor
Lemprex
Common exhaust system elements
Blastpipe
Smokebox
Chimney
Authority control: National libraries 
Germany
Japan
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 3 October 2022, at 18:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
