Land - Wikipedia
Land
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Earth's dry surface
"Dry land" redirects here.
For the song, see Dry Land.
For the 2010 film, see The Dry Land.
For land on astronomical objects, see Planetary surface.
For other uses, see Land (disambiguation).
It has been suggested that Land cover be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since September 2022.
Land between bodies of water at Point Reyes National Seashore, California
Land, also called ground or dry land, is the solid, terrestrial surface of Earth that is not submerged in the ocean or another body of water.
It makes up 29% of Earth's surface and includes the continents and a variety of small islands.
The zone where land meets sea or lakes is known as the coast.
Land is an important part of Earth's climate system and plays important roles in the carbon cycle, nitrogen cycle, and water cycle.
Though modern terrestrial plants and animals evolved from aquatic creatures, Earth's first cellular life likely originated on land.
Several scientific disciplines study land, including geology and geography.
One-third of land is covered in trees, 15% in crops, and a tenth in permanent snow and glaciers.
Earth's land surface is almost entirely covered by regolith, a surface layer of rock, soil and minerals that forms the outer part of Earth's crust.: 222 
The terrain varies greatly and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, glaciers, and other landforms.
In physical geology, land is divided into two major categories: relatively flat interiors called cratons, and mountain belts, which are formed over millions of years through plate tectonics.: 57  A major part of Earth's water cycle, streams shape the landscape, carve rocks, transport sediments, and replenish groundwater.
At high elevations or latitudes, snow is compacted and recrystallized over hundreds or thousands of years to form glaciers, which can be so heavy that they warp the Earth's crust.
About 30% of land has a dry climate, due to losing more water through evaporation than it gains from precipitation.
Since warm air rises, this generates winds, though the Earth's rotation and uneven sun distribution also play a part.
The zone where land meets sea or lakes is known as the coast.
Various natural boundaries can mark this separation, whether cliffs, solid rock landforms, marshes, or swamps.
Since coastlines often change with the tide, the coast's baseline is the legal demarcation used to determine exclusive economic zones; often, the low-water line is used as the baseline.
Life on land depends on fresh water from rivers, streams, lakes, and glaciers, which constitute only 3% of the water on Earth.
Prehistoric humans are thought to have settled near rivers; more recently, Neolithic civilizations were also concentrated near rivers for hydration and agriculture.
The vast majority of human activity throughout history has occurred in land areas that support agriculture, habitat, and various natural resources.
Today, 95% of the world's population lives on 10% of the land, although three-quarters of ice-free land is altered by humans.
Land use refers to the human allocation of land for various purposes, including farming, ranching, and recreation (e.g. national parks); one-third of land is used for agriculture.
In recent decades, scientists and policymakers have emphasizes the need to manage land and its biosphere more sustainably, notably by restoring degraded soil, preserving biodiversity, protecting endangered species, and addressing climate change.
Contents
Definition[edit]
Land is commonly defined as "the solid, dry surface of the Earth". However, governments and modern scholars have adopted a more integrative view, and also use the term land to refer to not only the physical cover (rock, sand, soil, ice), but also rivers, wetlands, shallow lakes, natural resources, non-marine fauna and flora (biosphere), the near-surface air and climate above dry land, groundwater reserves, and the physical results of human activity on land, such as architecture and agriculture.
Land cover refers to the material physically present on the land surface, for example woody crops, herbaceous crops, barren land, shrub-covered areas.
Artificial surfaces (including cities) account for about a third of one per cent of all land.
Land use refers to human allocation of land for various purposes, including farming, ranching, and recreation (e.g. national parks); worldwide, there are an estimated 16.7 million km2 (6.4 million sq mi) of cropland, and 33.5 million km2 (12.9 million sq mi) of pastureland.
In economics, land refers to a factor of production.
It can be leased in exchange for rent, and its various resources (trees, oil, metals) can be used as raw material.
A continuous area of land surrounded by an ocean is called a landmass.
Although it may be most often written as one word to distinguish it from the usage "land mass"—the measure of land area—it is also used as two words.
Landmasses include supercontinents, continents, and islands.
There are four major continuous landmasses on Earth: Afro-Eurasia, the Americas, Antarctica, and Australia.
Land capable of being ploughed and used to grow crops, is called arable land.
Etymology[edit]
The word land is derived from the Old English land 'ground, soil', also 'definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries'. It evolved from the Proto-Germanic *landą and from the Proto-Indo-European *lendʰ- 'land, open land, heath'. The word has many cognates in other languages, such as Old Norse: land, Old Frisian: land, Gothic: land, German: Land, Old Irish: land, Middle Welsh: llan 'an open space', Welsh: llan 'enclosure, church', Breton: lann 'heath', Church Slavonic: ledina 'wasteland, heath', and Czech: lada 'fallow land'. Etymological evidence within Gothic usage suggests that the original meaning of land was 'a definite portion of the earth's surface owned by an individual or home of a nation.' The meaning was extended to 'solid surface of the earth'. The original meaning is now associated with country.
A country or region may be referred to as the motherland, fatherland, or homeland of its people.
Many countries and other places have names incorporating the suffix, -land (e.g.
England, Iceland, Greenland, Finland, Swaziland, and New Zealand). The Indo-Iranian suffix -stan, ultimately descended from Proto-Indo-Iranian *sthāna-, is analogous to the suffix -land, and is present in many country and location names, such as Uzbekistan, Pakistan, and Afghanistan.
The suffix is also used more generally, as in Persian rigestân (ریگستان) "place of sand, desert", golestân (گلستان) "place of flowers, garden", gurestân (گورستان) "graveyard, cemetery", Hindustân (هندوستان) "land of the Indo people".
Delineation[edit]
Continents[edit]
Main article: Continent
Animated map showing the world's continents according to different models.
Land is separated by bodies of water.
Apart from small islands, land is made up of four landmasses, from largest to smallest: Afro-Eurasia, America, Antarctica and Australia, which are then grouped into continents.
Up to seven geographical regions are commonly regarded as continents.
Ordered from largest in area to smallest, these seven regions are: Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Antarctica, Europe, and Australia.
There are between five and seven continents, depending on how they are grouped.
Some group North America and South America together as America; Europe and Asia can also be grouped as Eurasia, or combined with Africa into Afro-Eurasia.
Others do not count Antarctica as a continent.
Most of the island countries and territories of the Pacific Ocean are frequently grouped with Australia to form a geographical region called Oceania.
Borders[edit]
Main article: Border
South Korean policemen standing guard at the North Korea-South Korea border.
View from South Korea.
Borders are geographical boundaries, imposed either by geographic features (oceans, mountain ranges, rivers) or by political entities (governments, states, or subnational entities). Political borders can be established through warfare, colonization, or mutual agreements between the political entities that reside in those areas; the creation of these agreements is called boundary delimitation.
Some borders—including most states' internal administrative borders, or inter-state borders within the Schengen Area—are open and completely unguarded.
Most political borders are partially or fully controlled, and may be crossed legally only at designated border checkpoints; adjacent border zones may also be controlled.
Buffer zones may be setup on borders between belligerent entities to lower the risk of escalation.
Geology[edit]
Formation[edit]
See also: History of Earth Artist's conception of Hadean Eon Earth
The earliest material found in the Solar System is dated to 4.5672±0.0006 bya (billion years ago); therefore, the Earth itself must have been formed by accretion around this time.
The formation and evolution of the Solar System bodies occurred in tandem with the Sun.
In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disc, out of which the planets then grow (in tandem with the star). A nebula contains gas, ice grains and dust (including primordial nuclides). In nebular theory, planetesimals commence forming as particulate matter accrues by cohesive clumping and then by gravity.
The assembly of the primordial Earth proceeded for 10–20 myr.
By 4.54±0.04 bya, the primordial Earth had formed.
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing that included water vapour.
The origin of the world's oceans was condensation augmented by water and ice delivered by asteroids, proto-planets, and comets.
In this model, atmospheric "greenhouse gases" kept the oceans from freezing while the newly forming Sun was only at 70% luminosity.
By 3.5 bya, the Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.
The atmosphere and oceans of the Earth continuously shape the land by eroding and transporting solids on the surface.
The crust, which currently forms the Earth's land, was created when the molten outer layer of the planet Earth cooled to form a solid mass as the accumulated water vapour began to act in the atmosphere.
Once land became capable of supporting life, biodiversity evolved over hundreds of million years, expanding continually except when punctuated by mass extinctions.
The two models that explain land mass propose either a steady growth to the present-day forms or, more likely, a rapid growth early in Earth history followed by a long-term steady continental area.
Continents are formed by plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from the Earth's interior.
On time scales lasting hundreds of millions of years, the supercontinents have formed and broken apart three times.
Roughly 750 mya (million years ago), one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart.
The continents later recombined to form Pannotia, 600–540 mya, then finally Pangaea, which also broke apart 180 mya.
Terrain[edit]
Main article: Terrain
Relief map of Sierra Nevada, Spain.
Elevated areas are colored in red, and low areas in green.
Terrain can refer to an area of land, or to its landforms (for example, mountains). The study of a terrain's shape and landforms is called topography, while the scientific study of the origins and evolution of these landforms is called geomorphology.
Cartography refers to the practice of mapmaking.
Terrain affects surface water flow and distribution.
Over a large area, it can affect weather and climate patterns.
The terrain of a region largely determines its suitability for human settlement: flatter alluvial plains tend to have better farming soils than steeper, rockier uplands.
Altitude, elevation, and relief[edit]
Elevation is defined as the vertical distance between an object and sea level, while altitude is defined as the vertical distance from an object to Earth's surface.
The elevation of Earth's land surface varies from the low point of −418 m (−1,371 ft) at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848 m (29,029 ft) at the top of Mount Everest.
The mean height of land above sea level is about 797 m (2,615 ft), with 98.9% of dry land situated above sea level.
Relief refers to the difference in elevation within a landscape; for example, flat terrain would have "low relief", while terrain with a large elevation difference between the highest and lowest points would be deemed "high relief". Most land has relatively low relief.
The change in elevation between two points of the terrain is called a slope or gradient.
A topographic map is a form of terrain cartography which depicts terrain in terms of its elevation, slope, and the orientation of its landforms.
It has prominent contour lines, which connect points of similar elevation, while perpendicular slope lines point in the direction of the steepest slope.
Hypsometric tints are colors placed between contour lines to indicate elevation relative to sea level.
Hikers and rock climbers must be careful to not ascend land too rapidly or else they may get altitude sickness.
Highlands and lowlands[edit]
A contrast between highlands, or uplands, and lowlands is drawn in several earth science fields.
In river ecology, "upland" rivers are fast-moving and colder than "lowland" rivers, encouraging different species of fish and other aquatic wildlife to live in these habitats.
In addition, the term moorland refers to upland shrubland biomes with acidic soils, while heathlands are lowland shrublands with acidic soils.
Layers[edit]
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
Below it, the lithosphere encompasses both Earth's crust and the uppermost layer of the mantle.
The lithosphere "floats" on top of the mantle below it via isostasy.
Land cover[edit]
Main articles: Land cover and Land cover mapping
Land cover as classified by the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) into 17 classes
Land cover is the physical material at the surface of the earth.
Among many things, it includes of grass, asphalt, trees, bare ground, water.
Earth cover is the expression used by ecologist Frederick Edward Clements that has its closest modern equivalent being vegetation.: 52  The expression continues to be used by the United States Bureau of Land Management.
There are two primary methods for capturing information on land cover: field survey and analysis of remotely sensed imagery.
Land change models can be built from these types of data to assess changes in land cover over time.
One of the major land cover issues (as with all natural resource inventories) is that every survey defines similarly named categories in different ways.
For instance, there are many definitions of "forest"—sometimes within the same organisation—that may or may not incorporate various forest features (e.g., stand height, canopy cover, strip width, the inclusion of grasses, and rates of growth for timber production). Areas without trees may be classified as forest cover "if the intention is to re-plant" (UK and Ireland), while areas with many trees may not be labelled as forest "if the trees are not growing fast enough" (Norway and Finland).
Land cover change detection using remote sensing and geospatial data provides baseline information for assessing the climate change impacts on habitats and biodiversity, as well as natural resources, in the target areas.
Land cover change detection and mapping is a key component of interdisciplinary land change science, which uses it to determine the consequences of land change on climate.
Soil[edit]
Main article: Soil
A, B, and C represent the soil profile, a notation firstly coined by Vasily Dokuchaev (1846–1903), the father of pedology.
Here, A is the topsoil; B is a regolith; C is a saprolite (a less-weathered regolith); the bottom-most layer represents the bedrock.
Soil, also known as earth, dirt, or pedolith, is a mixture of organic matter, minerals, gases, liquids, and organisms that together support life.
Soil consists of a solid phase of minerals and organic matter (the soil matrix), as well as a porous phase that holds gases (the soil atmosphere) and water (the soil solution). Accordingly, soil is a three-state system of solids, liquids, and gases.
Soil is a product of several factors: the influence of climate, relief (elevation, orientation, and slope of terrain), organisms, and the soil's parent materials (original minerals) interacting over time.
It continually undergoes development by way of numerous physical, chemical and biological processes, which include weathering with associated erosion.
Given its complexity and strong internal connectedness, soil ecologists regard soil as an ecosystem.
Soil acts as an engineering medium, a habitat for soil organisms, a recycling system for nutrients and organic wastes, a regulator of water quality, a modifier of atmospheric composition, and a medium for plant growth, making it a critically important provider of ecosystem services.
Since soil has a tremendous range of available niches and habitats, it contains a prominent part of the Earth's genetic diversity.
A gram of soil can contain billions of organisms, belonging to thousands of species, mostly microbial and largely still unexplored.
Soil is a major component of the Earth's ecosystem.
The world's ecosystems are impacted in far-reaching ways by the processes carried out in the soil, with effects ranging from ozone depletion and global warming to rainforest destruction and water pollution.
With respect to Earth's carbon cycle, soil acts as an important carbon reservoir, and it is potentially one of the most reactive to human disturbance and climate change.
As the planet warms, it has been predicted that soils will add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere due to increased biological activity at higher temperatures, a positive feedback (amplification). This prediction has, however, been questioned on consideration of more recent knowledge on soil carbon turnover.
Continental crust[edit]
Main articles: Continental crust and Continental shelf
See also: Abundance of elements in Earth's crust
The thickness of Earth's crust (km)
Continental crust is the layer of igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks that forms the geological continents and the areas of shallow seabed close to their shores, known as continental shelves.
This layer is sometimes called sial because its bulk composition is richer in aluminium silicates (Al-Si) and has a lower density compared to the oceanic crust, called sima which is richer in magnesium silicate (Mg-Si) minerals.
Changes in seismic wave velocities have shown that at a certain depth (the Conrad discontinuity), there is a reasonably sharp contrast between the more felsic upper continental crust and the lower continental crust, which is more mafic in character.
The composition of land is not uniform across the Earth, varying between locations and between strata within the same location.
The most prominent components of upper continental crust include silicon dioxide, aluminium oxide, and magnesium.
The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite.
Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors.
Sedimentary rock is formed from the accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together.
Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the crust.
The third form of rock material found on Earth is metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both.
The most abundant silicate minerals on Earth's surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine.
Common carbonate minerals include calcite (found in limestone) and dolomite.
The rock that makes up land is thicker than oceanic crust, and it is far more varied in terms of composition.
About 31% of this continental crust is submerged in shallow water, forming continental shelves.
Geomorphology[edit]
Erosion and tectonics, volcanic eruptions, flooding, weathering, glaciation, the growth of coral reefs, and meteorite impacts are among the processes that constantly reshape Earth's surface over geological time.
Erosion and weathering[edit]
Erosion transports one part of land to another via natural processes, such as wind, water, ice, and gravity.
In contrast, weathering wears away rock and other solid land without transporting the land somewhere else.
Plate tectonics[edit]
Plate tectonics refers to the theory that Earth's crust is divided into "plates" that move along the mantle via continental drift.
The place where two plates meet is called a plate boundary.
Earthquakes and volcanic activity are common at these boundaries.
Volcanic activity[edit]
Volcanic activity refers to any rupture in Earth's surface where magma escapes, therefore becoming lava.
Landforms[edit]
Coasts[edit]
The area where land meets the ocean or another large body of water like a lake is called a coast or, alternatively, a "coastline". The Earth has around 620,000 kilometres (390,000 mi) of coastline.
When land is in contact with bodies of water, the land is likely weathered and eroded.
The precise weathering of a coastline may be impacted by the tides, caused by changes in gravitational forces on larger bodies of water.
Coasts are important zones in natural ecosystems, often home to a wide range of biodiversity.
On land, they harbour important ecosystems such as freshwater or estuarine wetlands, which are important for bird populations and other terrestrial animals.
In wave-protected areas they harbor saltmarshes, mangroves or seagrasses, all of which can provide nursery habitat for finfish, shellfish, and other aquatic species.
Rocky shores are usually found along exposed coasts and provide habitat for a wide range of sessile animals (e.g. mussels, starfish, barnacles) and various kinds of seaweeds.
Along tropical coasts with clear, nutrient-poor water, coral reefs can often be found between depths of 1–50 meters (3.3–164.0 feet).
According to a United Nations atlas, 44% of all people live within 150 km (93 mi) of the sea.
Because of their importance in society and high concentration of population, the coast is important for major parts of the global food and economic system, and they provide many ecosystem services to humankind.
For example, important human activities happen in port cities.
Coastal fisheries (commercial, recreational, and subsistence) and aquaculture are major economic activities and create jobs, livelihoods, and protein for the majority of coastal human populations.
Other coastal spaces like beaches and seaside resorts generate large revenues through tourism.
Marine coastal ecosystems can also provide protection against sea level rise and tsunamis.
In many countries, mangroves are the primary source of wood for fuel (e.g. charcoal) and building material.
Coastal ecosystems like mangroves and seagrasses have a much higher capacity for carbon sequestration than many terrestrial ecosystems, and as such can play a critical role in the near future to help mitigate climate change effects by uptake of atmospheric anthropogenic carbon dioxide.
Mountains[edit]
Any elevated part of Earth's crust can be called a mountain.
They are formed from orogeny events, where a plate at a convergent plate boundary pushes one plate above the other.
Plateaus[edit]
Main article: Plateau
Kukenan Tepuy in Gran Sabana National Park, Venezuela
A plateau, also called a high plain or a tableland, is an area of a highland consisting of flat terrain that is raised sharply above the surrounding area on at least one side.
Often one or more sides have deep hills or escarpments.
Plateaus can be formed by a number of processes, including upwelling of volcanic magma, extrusion of lava, and erosion by water and glaciers.
Plateaus are classified according to their surrounding environment as intermontane, piedmont, or continental.
A few plateaus may have a small flat top while others have wide ones.
Ecology[edit]
Biomes[edit]
Main article: Biome
A biome is an area "characterized by its vegetation, soil, climate, and wildlife." There are five major types of biomes: grasslands, forests, deserts, tundras, as well as aquatic biomes (marine and freshwater). Biomes may contain a variety of ecosystems, which refer to the interaction between organisms within an environment.
A habitat is an even narrower term, referring to the environment where a given species lives.
Biomes may span more than one continent, and contain a variety of ecosystems and habitats.
Desert[edit]
Main article: Desert
White Desert National Park in Egypt
A desert is a barren area of landscape where little precipitation occurs and, consequently, living conditions are hostile for plant and animal life.
The lack of vegetation exposes the unprotected surface of the ground to denudation.
About one-third of the land surface of the Earth is arid or semi-arid.
This includes much of the polar regions, where little precipitation occurs, and which are sometimes called polar deserts or "cold deserts". Deserts can be classified by the amount of precipitation that falls, by the temperature that prevails, by the causes of desertification, or by their geographical location.
Tundra[edit]
Main article: Tundra
Tundra at Adventfjorden, Svalbard
Tundra is a biome where tree growth is hindered by frigid temperatures and short growing seasons.
The term tundra comes through Russian тундра (tundra) from the Kildin Sámi word тӯндар (tūndâr) meaning "uplands", "treeless mountain tract". There are three regions and associated types of tundra: Arctic tundra, alpine tundra, and Antarctic tundra.
Forest[edit]
Main article: Forest
A forest in Ryssbergen, Sweden
A forest is an area of land dominated by trees.
Hundreds of definitions of forest are used throughout the world, incorporating factors such as tree density, tree height, land use, legal standing, and ecological function.
The United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines a forest as, "Land spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 meters and a canopy cover of more than 10 per cent, or trees able to reach these thresholds in situ.
It does not include land that is predominantly under agricultural or urban use." Using this definition, Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 (FRA 2020) found that forests covered 4.06 billion hectares (10.0 billion acres; 40.6 million square kilometres; 15.7 million square miles), or approximately 31 per cent of the world's land area in 2020.
Grasslands[edit]
Main article: Grassland
Grasslands are areas where the vegetation is dominated by grasses (Poaceae). However, sedge (Cyperaceae) and rush (Juncaceae) can also be found along with variable proportions of legumes, like clover, and other herbs.
Grasslands occur naturally on all continents except Antarctica and are found in most ecoregions of the Earth.
Furthermore, grasslands are one of the largest biomes on earth and dominate the landscape worldwide.
There are different types of grasslands: natural grasslands, semi-natural grasslands, and agricultural grasslands.
They cover 31–69% of the Earth's land area.
Flora[edit]
Embryophytes, the land plants, include bryophytes, lycophytes, ferns, gymnosperms, and flowering plants.
They are adapted for life on land, unlike aquatic plants, although many are semi-aquatic.
All embryophytes except bryophytes and polysporangiophytes are vascular plants.
Fauna[edit]
Unlike plants, terrestrial animals are not a monophylytic group -- that is, a group including all terrestrial animals does not encompass all lineages from a common ancestor.
This is because there are organisms, such as the whale, that evolved from terrestrial mammals back to an aquatic lifestyle.
Many megafauna of the past, such as the dinosaurs, have become extinct due to extinction events, e.g. the Quaternary extinction event.
Climate[edit]
See also: Land surface effects on climate
The land of Earth interacts with and influences climate heavily since the land's surface heats up and cools down faster than air or water.
Latitude, elevation, topography, reflectivity, and land use all have varying effects.
The latitude of the land will influence how much solar radiation reaches the surface.
High latitudes receive less solar radiation than low latitudes.
The land's topography is important in creating and transforming airflow and precipitation on Earth.
Large landforms, such as mountain ranges, divert wind energy and make air parcels less dense and therefore able to hold less heat.
As air rises, this cooling effect causes condensation and precipitation.
The reflectivity of the earth is called planetary albedo, and the type of land cover that receives energy from the Sun affects the amount of energy that is reflected or transferred to Earth.
Vegetation has a relatively low albedo meaning that vegetated surfaces are good absorbers of the sun's energy.
Forests have an albedo of 10–15% while grasslands have an albedo of 15–20%. In comparison, sandy deserts have an albedo of 25–40%.
Land use by humans also plays a role in the regional and global climate.
Densely populated cities are warmer and create urban heat islands that have effects on the precipitation, cloud cover, and temperature of the region.
Humans and land[edit]
This section needs expansion.
You can help by adding to it.  (September 2022)
History of exploration[edit]
Main articles: Exploration and History of cartography
Overview map of the peopling of the world by early humans during the Upper Paleolithic, following to the Southern Dispersal paradigm.
Two major eras of exploration occurred in human history: one of convergence, and one of divergence.
The first, covering most of Homo sapiens history, saw humans moving out of Africa, settling in new lands, and developing distinct cultures in relative isolation.
Early explorers settled in Europe and Asia; 14,000 years ago, some crossed the Ice Age land bridge from Siberia to Alaska, and moved southbound to settle in the Americas.
For the most part, these cultures were ignorant of each other's existence.
The second period of exploration, occurring over the last 10,000 years, saw increased cross-cultural exchange through trade and exploration, and marked a new era of cultural intermingling, and more recently, convergence.
Early writings about exploration date back to the 4th millennium B.C. in ancient Egypt.
One of the earliest and most impactful thinkers of exploration was Ptolemy in 2nd century AD, Between the 5th century and 15th century AD, most exploration was done by Chinese and Arab explorers.
This was followed by the European Age of Discovery after European scholars rediscovered the works of early Latin and Greek geographers.
While the Age of Discovery was partly driven by European land routes becoming unsafe, and a desire for conquest, the 17th century saw exploration driven by nobler motives, including scientific discovery and the expansion of knowledge about the world.
Travel[edit]
Main article: Travel
A train traveling across the Voronezh Oblast, Russia
Humans have commonly traveled for business, pleasure, discovery, and adventure, all made easier in recent human history as a result of technologies like cars, trains, planes, and ships.
Land navigation is an aspect of travel and refers to progressing through unfamiliar terrain using navigational tools like maps with references to terrain, a compass, or satellite navigation.
Navigation on land is often facilitated by reference to landmarks – enduring and recognizable natural or artificial features that stand out from their nearby environment that are often visible from long distances.
Natural landmarks can be characteristic features, such as mountains or plateaus, with examples including Table Mountain in South Africa, Mount Ararat in Turkey, the Grand Canyon in the United States, Uluru in Australia, and Mount Fuji in Japan.
Landmarks and landforms may serve to attract tourism, whether domestic (within the traveller's own country) or international, and can generate important economic activity.
Tourism based on a desire to experience aspects of land includes ecological tourism, or ecotourism, responsible travel to fragile, pristine, and usually protected areas that strives to be low-impact and (often) small-scale.
It helps educate the traveller; provides funds for conservation; directly benefits the economic development and political empowerment of local communities, and fosters respect for different cultures and for human rights.
Take only memories and leave only footprints is a very common slogan in protected areas.
Migration is the movement of people from one place to another with intentions of settling, permanently or temporarily, in a new country (external migration), or a new region of their country (internal migration). Migration is often associated with better human capital at both individual and household levels, and with better access to migration networks, facilitating a possible second move.
Age is also important for both work and non-work migration.
People may migrate as individuals, in family units or in large groups.
Trade[edit]
Main articles: Trade and Timeline of international trade
Trade has occurred since the prehistoric era.
Peter Watson dates the history of long-distance commerce from c. 150,000 years ago.
Many trade routes throughout history have existed predominantly on land such as the Silk Road which linked East Asia with Europe and the Amber Road which was used to transfer amber from Northern Europe to the Mediterranean Sea.
The Dark Ages led trade to collapse in the West, but it continued to flourish among the kingdoms of Africa, the Middle East, India, China, and Southeast Asia.
During the Middle Ages, Central Asia was the economic centre of the world, and luxury goods were commonly traded in Europe.
Physical money (either barter or precious metals) was dangerous to carry over a long distance.
To address this, a burgeoning banking industry enabled the shift to movable wealth or capital, making it far easier and safer to trade across long distances.
After the Age of Sail, international trade mostly occurred along sea routes, notably to prevent intermediary countries from being able to control trade routes and the flow of goods.
Land use[edit]
Main article: Land use
Land use involves the management and modification of the natural environment or wilderness into built environment such as settlements and of semi-natural habitats such as arable fields, pastures, and managed woods.
Land use by humans has a long history, first emerging more than 10,000 years ago.
It has been defined as "the purposes and activities through which people interact with land and terrestrial ecosystems" and as "the total of arrangements, activities, and inputs that people undertake in a certain land type." Land use and land management practices have a major impact on natural resources including water, soil, nutrients, plants, and animals.
Human tribes since prehistory have segregated land into territories to control the use of land.
Today, the total arable land is 10.7% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland.
Agriculture[edit]
Agriculture includes the farming of crops and animal husbandry.
A third of Earth's land surface is used for agriculture, with estimated 16.7 million km2 (6.4 million sq mi) of cropland and 33.5 million km2 (12.9 million sq mi) of pastureland.
Urban development[edit]
Urban planning is the design of all infrastructure in urban areas including housing, transportation, and wastewater systems.
It also includes zoning, or the area of urban planning that is focused on dividing the land into zones, e.g. residential, commercial, and industrial zones.
Culture[edit]
Main article: Earth in culture
Imago Mundi Babylonian map, the oldest known world map, 6th century BC, Babylonia
Creation myths in many religions recall a story involving the creation of the world by a supernatural deity or deities, including accounts wherein the land is separated from the oceans and the air.
The Earth itself has often been personified as a deity, in particular a goddess.
In many cultures, the mother goddess is also portrayed as a fertility deity.
To the Aztecs, Earth was called Tonantzin—"our mother"; to the Incas, Earth was called Pachamama—"mother earth". The Chinese Earth goddess Hou Tu is similar to Gaia, the Greek goddess personifying the Earth.
Bhuma Devi is the goddess of Earth in Hinduism, influenced by Graha.
In Norse mythology, the Earth giantess Jörð was the mother of Thor and the daughter of Annar.
Ancient Egyptian mythology is different from that of other cultures because Earth (Geb) is male and the sky (Nut) is female.
In early Egyptian and Mesopotamian thought, the world was portrayed as a flat disk floating in the ocean.
The Egyptian universe was pictured as a rectangular box with a north–south orientation and a slightly concave surface, with Egypt in the centre.
A similar model is found in the Homeric account of the 8th century BC in which "Okeanos, the personified body of water surrounding the circular surface of the Earth, is the begetter of all life and possibly of all gods." The biblical earth is also a flat disc floating on water.
The Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts reveal that the ancient Egyptians believed Nun (the ocean) was a circular body surrounding nbwt (a term meaning "dry lands" or "islands"), and therefore believed in a similar Ancient Near Eastern circular Earth cosmography surrounded by water.
The spherical form of the Earth was suggested by early Greek philosophers, a belief espoused by Pythagoras.
Contrary to popular belief, most educated people in the Middle Ages did not believe the Earth was flat: this misconception is often called the "Myth of the Flat Earth". As evidenced by thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas, the European belief in a spherical Earth was widespread by this point in time.
Prior to circumnavigation of the planet and the introduction of space flight, belief in a spherical Earth was based on observations of the secondary effects of the Earth's shape and parallels drawn with the shape of other planets.
Conflicts[edit]
See also: Territorial dispute
Many wars and other conflicts have occurred in efforts by participants to expand the land under their control, or to assert control of a specific area of land claimed to have historical or cultural significance to the participants.
For example, the Mongol Empire of the 13th and 14th centuries became the largest contiguous land empire in history through war and conquest.
Originating in present-day Mongolia in East Asia, the Mongol Empire at its height stretched from the Sea of Japan to parts of Eastern Europe, extending northward into parts of the Arctic; eastward and southward into parts of the Indian subcontinent, attempted invasions of Southeast Asia and conquered the Iranian Plateau; and westward as far as the Levant and the Carpathian Mountains.
The aggression of Nazi Germany in World War II was motivated in part by the concept of Lebensraum ("living space"), which had first became a geopolitical goal of Imperial Germany in World War I (1914–1918) originally, as the core element of the Septemberprogramm of territorial expansion.
The most extreme form of this ideology was supported by the Nazi Party (NSDAP) and Nazi Germany.
Lebensraum was one of the leading motivations Nazi Germany had in initiating World War II, and it would continue this policy until the end of World War II.
Environmental issues[edit]
Human have a profound impact on the Earth's environment, with three-quarters of ice-free land having been modified through human habitation and land use.
The major environmental issues related to land include protecting terrestrial ecosystems, preventing biodiversity loss, sustainable forest management, combatting desertification, and waste management.
The conservation movement lobbies for the protection of endangered species and the protection of natural areas.
Rising sea levels as a result of climate change are expected to result in currently-inhabited land becoming partially submerged, resulting in mass migration and ecosystem loss.
International frameworks have focused on analyzing how humans can meet their needs while using land more efficiently and preserving its natural resources, notably under the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals framework.
Pollution[edit]
Main article: Pollution
Ground[edit]
Ground pollution includes litter and soil contamination.
Some landfills, such as the Apex Regional landfill in Las Vegas, can be thousands of acres in size.
Air[edit]
Air pollution in Shanghai, China
Air pollution on land can be caused by both human activities (like travel) and natural phenomena.
There are many different types of air pollutants, such as gases (including ammonia, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxides, methane, carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons), particulates (both organic and inorganic), and biological molecules.
The main stationary air pollution sources include coal power plants, oil refineries, and incinerators.
Air pollution is a significant risk factor for many diseases, including respiratory infections, heart disease, COPD, stroke and lung cancer.
Growing evidence suggests that air pollution exposure may be associated with reduced IQ scores, impaired cognition, increased risk for psychiatric disorders such as depression and detrimental perinatal health.
Smog was a major issue in many countries during the 20th century; in London, the Great Smog of December 1952 killed nearly 12,000 people in 6 days.
America produces roughly 25% of the world's CO2. In 2007, China overtook the United States as the world's biggest producer of CO2, while still far behind based on per capita pollution (ranked 78th in the world).
Water[edit]
The polluted Bagmati river in Nepal
Water pollution on land is the contamination of non-oceanic hydrological surface and underground water features such as lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, wetlands, aquifers, reservoirs, and groundwater as a result of human activities.: 6  It may be caused by toxic substances (e.g., oil, metals, plastics, pesticides, persistent organic pollutants, industrial waste products), stressful conditions (e.g., changes of pH, hypoxia or anoxia, increased temperatures, excessive turbidity, unpleasant taste or odor, and changes of salinity), or pathogenic organisms.
For example, releasing inadequately treated wastewater into natural waters can lead to the degradation of aquatic ecosystems.
Excessive emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide can cause acid rain, leading to soil degradation.
Groundwater pollution occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into aquifers; these aquifers may spread the contaminants over a large area, and lead to the contamination of wells, seeps and springs, harming human and wildlife health.
Water pollution reduces the ability of the body of water to provide the ecosystem services (such as drinking water) that it would otherwise provide, and can lead to water-borne diseases for people using polluted water for drinking, bathing, washing or irrigation.
Control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans as well as legislation.
Technological solutions can include improving sanitation, sewage treatment, industrial wastewater treatment, agricultural wastewater treatment, erosion control, sediment control and control of urban runoff (including stormwater management).
Biodiversity loss[edit]
Main articles: Biodiversity loss and Habitat destruction
Red List Index of biodiversity (2019)
Terrestrial biodiversity loss refers to the worldwide extinction of various land-based species, as well as the local reduction or loss of species in certain habitats.
Biodiversity loss can sometimes be reversed through ecological restoration or ecological resilience; however, it may also be permanent (e.g. through land loss). The planet's ecosystem is quite sensitive: occasionally, minor changes from a healthy equilibrium can have dramatic influence on a food web or food chain, up to and including the coextinction of that entire food chain.
Biodiversity loss leads to reduced ecosystem services, and can eventually threaten food security.
Earth is currently undergoing its sixth mass extinction (the Holocene extinction) as a result of human activities which push beyond the planetary boundaries.
So far, this extinction has proven irreversible.
World leaders and supranational organizations are increasingly focused on addressing biodiversity loss.
For example, the UN Convention on Biological Diversity is a treaty meant to biodiversity loss and proactively conserving wild areas.
The fifteenth UN SDG goal ("Life on land") proposes 12 targets to be reached by 2030 and 14 indicators to measure progress, with annual updates delivered by the UN Secretary-General.
In the 2022 update, the Secretary notes that deforestation targets have not been met, that the Red List Index has worsened by 10% over the past 3 decades, and that only a third of countries are on track to reach or exceed their national biodiversity targets.
Land degradation[edit]
Main article: Land degradation
World map of soil degradation
Human-induced processes have led to biophysical degradation of wide swaths of land; these processes include human actions that can indirectly affect phenomena such as floods and bushfires.
Land degradation is considered an important topic of the 21st century due to its implications for agricultural productivity, the environment, and food security.
It is estimated that up to 4% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded.
According to the Special Report on Climate Change and Land of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: "About a quarter of the Earth's ice-free land area is subject to human-induced degradation (medium confidence). Soil erosion from agricultural fields is estimated to be currently 10 to 20 times (no-tillage) to more than 100 times (conventional tillage) higher than the soil formation rate (medium confidence)".
The United Nations estimates that about 30% of land is degraded worldwide, and about 3.2 billion people reside in these degrading areas.
About 12 million hectares of productive land – roughly equal to the size of Greece – is degraded every year.
This happens because people exploit the land without protecting it.
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 15 has a target to restore degraded land and soil and achieve a land degradation-neutral world by 2030 through sustainable agriculture.
Desertification[edit]
Main article: Desertification
U.S. Department of Agriculture map from 1998 showing global desertification vulnerability
Desertification is a type of land degradation in drylands in which fertile areas become increasingly arid as a result of natural processes or human activities, resulting in loss of biological productivity.
This spread of arid areas can be caused by a variety of factors, such as climate change, overgrazing, and overexploitation of soil as a result of human activity.
Throughout geological history, deserts have occurred naturally.
In recent times, the potential influences of human activity, improper land management, deforestation and climate change on desertification is the subject of many scientific investigations.
See also[edit]
Solid earth
References[edit]
a b Allaby, Michael; Park, Chris (2013). A Dictionary of Environment and Conservation. p. 239. ISBN 978-0-19-964166-6.
"Land". Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
Retrieved October 9, 2022.
Pielke, Roger A.; Mahmood, Rezaul; McAlpine, Clive (November 1, 2016). "Land's complex role in climate change". Physics Today. 69 (11): 40–46. Bibcode:2016PhT....69k..40P. doi:10.1063/PT.3.3364. ISSN 0031-9228.
Garwood, Russell J.; Edgecombe, Gregory D. (September 2011). "Early Terrestrial Animals, Evolution, and Uncertainty". Evolution: Education and Outreach. 4 (3): 489–501. doi:10.1007/s12052-011-0357-y.
ISSN 1936-6434. S2CID 24652693.
Mosher, Dave (February 15, 2012). "Life on Earth Began on Land, Not in Sea?". Science.
Retrieved September 25, 2022.
a b "Land Cover". FAOSTAT. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Retrieved September 18, 2022.
a b c Tarbuck, Edward J.; Lutgens, Frederick K. (2017). Earth: An Introduction to Physical Geology.
Pearson.
ISBN 978-0-13-407425-2.
Schofield, Clive (August 29, 2014). "Defining the 'boundary' between land and sea: territorial sea baselines in the South China Sea". The South China Sea Disputes and Law of the Sea: 21–54. doi:10.4337/9781783477272.00010. ISBN 9781783477272.
Yirka, Bob (December 26, 2011). "Couple finds evidence indicating earliest humans lived by rivers and streams". phys.org.
Retrieved September 18, 2022.
Balter, Michael (May 2005). "The Seeds of Civilization". Smithsonian Magazine.
Retrieved September 25, 2022.
World Bank (2009). World Development Report 2009 : Reshaping Economic Geography (Report). World Bank.
a b Ellis, Erle C; Ramankutty, Navin (October 1, 2008). "Putting people in the map: anthropogenic biomes of the world". Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 6 (8): 439–447. doi:10.1890/070062. ISSN 1540-9295.
Merrill, Dave; Leatherby, Lauren (July 31, 2018). "Here's How America Uses Its Land". Bloomberg.
Retrieved August 5, 2018.
a b "Agricultural land (% of land area) | Data". data.worldbank.org.
Retrieved September 25, 2022.
United Nations (2017). "Chapter 1 - Meaning of Land" (PDF). Global Land Outlook (Report). United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
a b Hooke, Roger LeB.; Martín-Duque, José F.; Pedraza, Javier (December 2012). "Land transformation by humans: A review" (PDF). GSA Today. 22 (12): 4–10. doi:10.1130/GSAT151A.1.
"Undrestanding Land in Business and Economics". Investopedia.
Retrieved September 18, 2022.
"arable, adj. and n.". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2013.
Harper, Douglas. "land". Online Etymology Dictionary.
Retrieved July 18, 2021.
Macdonell, Arthur Anthony (1929). A practical Sanskrit dictionary with transliteration, accentuation, and etymological analysis throughout.
London: Oxford University Press – via University of Chicago.
a b McColl, R.W., ed. (2005). "continents". Encyclopedia of World Geography.
Vol. 1. Facts on File, Inc. p. 215. ISBN 978-0-8160-7229-3. Retrieved August 25, 2022. And since Africa and Asia are connected at the Suez Peninsula, Europe, Africa, and Asia are sometimes combined as Afro-Eurasia or Eurafrasia.
The International Olympic Committee's official flag, containing [...] the single continent of America (North and South America being connected as the Isthmus of Panama).
"Continent". National Geographic.
Retrieved September 9, 2022.
Nield, Ted. "Continental Divide". Geological Society.
Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2012.
"How many continents are there?". National Geographic Society.
Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2017. By convention there are seven continents: Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Europe, Australia, and Antarctica.
Some geographers list only six continents, combining Europe and Asia into Eurasia.
In parts of the world, students learn that there are just five continents: Eurasia, Australia (Oceania), Africa, Antarctica, and the Americas.
Frank, Andre G. (1998). ReORIENT: Global Economy in the Asian Age.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-21474-3.
Murray, Warwick E. (2016). "Changing Rural Worlds – A Global View".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 231. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
Slater, Terry (2016). "The Rise and Spread of Capitalism".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
Sidaway, James; Grundy-Warr, Carl (2016). "The Place of the Nation-State".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 449. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
Fehlen, Fernand (2017). "Mental Barriers Replacing Nation-State Borders".  In Andrén, Mats; Lindkvist, Thomas; Söhrman, Ingmar; Vajta, Katharina (eds.). Cultural Borders of Europe: Narratives, Concepts and Practices in the Present and the Past.
Berghahn Books. p. 122. ISBN 978-1-78533-591-4.
Bowring, S.; Housh, T. (September 15, 1995). "The Earth's early evolution". Science. 269 (5230): 1535–1540. Bibcode:1995Sci...269.1535B. doi:10.1126/science.7667634. PMID 7667634.
Yin, Qingzhu; Jacobsen, S. B.; Yamashita, K.; Blichert-Toft, J.; Télouk, P.; Albarède, F. (August 29, 2002). "A short timescale for terrestrial planet formation from Hf-W chronometry of meteorites". Nature. 418 (6901): 949–952. Bibcode:2002Natur.418..949Y. doi:10.1038/nature00995. PMID 12198540. S2CID 4391342.
Dalrymple (1991); Newman (2007); Dalrymple (2001); Stassen (2005)
Morbidelli, A.;  et al. (2000). "Source regions and time scales for the delivery of water to Earth". Meteoritics & Planetary Science. 35 (6): 1309–1320. Bibcode:2000M&PS...35.1309M. doi:10.1111/j.1945-5100.2000.tb01518.x.
Guinan, E.F.; Ribas, I. (2002). "Our Changing Sun: The Role of Solar Nuclear Evolution and Magnetic Activity on Earth's Atmosphere and Climate".  In Benjamin Montesinos, Alvaro Gimenez and Edward F. Guinan (ed.). ASP Conference Proceedings: The Evolving Sun and its Influence on Planetary Environments.
San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific.
Bibcode:2002ASPC..269...85G. ISBN 1-58381-109-5.
University of Rochester (March 4, 2010). "Oldest measurement of Earth's magnetic field reveals battle between Sun and Earth for our atmosphere". Physorg.news.
Archived from the original on April 27, 2011.
NOAA. Ocean Literacy Archived November 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
Chambers, John E. (2004). "Planetary accretion in the inner Solar System". Earth and Planetary Science Letters. 223 (3–4): 241–252. Bibcode:2004E&PSL.223..241C. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2004.04.031.
Sahney, S.; Benton, M. J.; Ferry, P. A. (2010). "Links between global taxonomic diversity, ecological diversity and the expansion of vertebrates on land". Biology Letters. 6 (4): 544–547. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2009.1024. PMC 2936204. PMID 20106856.
Rogers, John James William; Santosh, M. (2004). Continents and Supercontinents.
Oxford University Press US. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-19-516589-0.
Hurley, P.M.; Rand, J.R. (June 1969). "Pre-drift continental nuclei". Science. 164 (3885): 1229–1242. Bibcode:1969Sci...164.1229H. doi:10.1126/science.164.3885.1229. PMID 17772560.
De Smet, J.; Van Den Berg, A.P.; Vlaar, N.J. (2000). "Early formation and long-term stability of continents resulting from decompression melting in a convecting mantle" (PDF). Tectonophysics. 322 (1–2): 19. Bibcode:2000Tectp.322...19D. doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(00)00055-X. hdl:1874/1653. Archived from the original on March 31, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2019.
Armstrong, R.L. (1968). "A model for the evolution of strontium and lead isotopes in a dynamic earth". Reviews of Geophysics. 6 (2): 175–199. Bibcode:1968RvGSP...6..175A. doi:10.1029/RG006i002p00175.
Kleine, Thorsten; Palme, Herbert; Mezger, Klaus; Halliday, Alex N. (November 24, 2005). "Hf-W Chronometry of Lunar Metals and the Age and Early Differentiation of the Moon". Science. 310 (5754): 1671–1674. Bibcode:2005Sci...310.1671K. doi:10.1126/science.1118842. PMID 16308422. S2CID 34172110. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2019.
Hong, D.; Zhang, Jisheng; Wang, Tao; Wang, Shiguang; Xie, Xilin (2004). "Continental crustal growth and the supercontinental cycle: evidence from the Central Asian Orogenic Belt". Journal of Asian Earth Sciences. 23 (5): 799. Bibcode:2004JAESc..23..799H. doi:10.1016/S1367-9120(03)00134-2.
Armstrong, R.L. (1991). "The persistent myth of crustal growth". Australian Journal of Earth Sciences. 38 (5): 613–630. Bibcode:1991AuJES..38..613A. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.527.9577. doi:10.1080/08120099108727995.
Murphy, J.B.; Nance, R.D. (1965). "How do supercontinents assemble?". American Scientist. 92 (4): 324–333. doi:10.1511/2004.4.324. Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved March 5, 2007.
Huggett, Richard John (2011). "What Is Geomorphology?". Fundamentals Of Geomorphology.
Routledge Fundamentals of Physical Geography Series (3rd ed.). Routledge. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-203-86008-3.
National Geophysical Data Center. "Hypsographic Curve of Earth's Surface from ETOPO1". ngdc.noaa.gov.
NOAA.
"Land area where elevation is below 5 meters (% of total land area) | Data". data.worldbank.org.
World Bank.
Retrieved September 18, 2022.
Summerfield, M.A. (1991). Global Geomorphology.
Pearson. p. 537. ISBN 9780582301566.
Mark, David M.; Smith, Barry (2004). "A science of topography: From qualitative ontology to digital representations".  In Bishop, Michael P.; Shroder, John F. (eds.). Geographic Information Science and Mountain Geomorphology.
Springer-Praxis. pp. 75–100.
Polunin, Oleg; Walters, Martin (1985). A Guide to the Vegetation of Britain and Europe.
Oxford University Press. p. 220. ISBN 0-19-217713-3.
Skinner, B. J.; Porter, S. C. (1987). "The Earth: Inside and Out". Physical Geology.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 17. ISBN 0-471-05668-5.
Makers of American Botany, Harry Baker Humphrey, Ronald Press Company, Library of Congress Card Number 61-18435
"Susitna MOA Earth Cover Classification" (PDF). BlM-Alaska Technical Report 44. Bureau of Land Management.
September 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015.
Voroney, R. Paul; Heck, Richard J. (2007). "The soil habitat".  In Paul, Eldor A. (ed.). Soil microbiology, ecology and biochemistry (3rd ed.). Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier. pp. 25–49. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-047514-1.50006-8. ISBN 978-0-12-546807-7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 27 March 2022.
Taylor, Sterling A.; Ashcroft, Gaylen L. (1972). Physical edaphology: the physics of irrigated and nonirrigated soils.
San Francisco, California: W.H. Freeman.
ISBN 978-0-7167-0818-6.
McCarthy, David F. (2014). Essentials of soil mechanics and foundations: basic geotechnics (7th ed.). London, United Kingdom: Pearson.
ISBN 9781292039398. Retrieved March 27, 2022.
Gilluly, James; Waters, Aaron Clement; Woodford, Alfred Oswald (1975). Principles of geology (4th ed.). San Francisco, California: W.H. Freeman.
ISBN 978-0-7167-0269-6.
Ponge, Jean-François (2015). "The soil as an ecosystem". Biology and Fertility of Soils. 51 (6): 645–648. doi:10.1007/s00374-015-1016-1. S2CID 18251180. Retrieved April 3, 2022.
Dominati, Estelle; Patterson, Murray; Mackay, Alec (2010). "A framework for classifying and quantifying the natural capital and ecosystem services of soils". Ecological Economics. 69 (9): 1858‒68. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.05.002. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2022.
Dykhuizen, Daniel E. (1998). "Santa Rosalia revisited: why are there so many species of bacteria?". Antonie van Leeuwenhoek. 73 (1): 25‒33. doi:10.1023/A:1000665216662. PMID 9602276. S2CID 17779069. Retrieved April 10, 2022.
Torsvik, Vigdis; Øvreås, Lise (2002). "Microbial diversity and function in soil: from genes to ecosystems". Current Opinion in Microbiology. 5 (3): 240‒45. doi:10.1016/S1369-5274(02)00324-7. PMID 12057676. Retrieved April 10, 2022.
Amelung, Wulf; Bossio, Deborah; De Vries, Wim; Kögel-Knabner, Ingrid; Lehmann, Johannes; Amundson, Ronald; Bol, Roland; Collins, Chris; Lal, Rattan; Leifeld, Jens; Minasny, Buniman; Pan, Gen-Xing; Paustian, Keith; Rumpel, Cornelia; Sanderman, Jonathan; Van Groeningen, Jan Willem; Mooney, Siân; Van Wesemael, Bas; Wander, Michelle; Chabbi, Abad (October 27, 2020). "Towards a global-scale soil climate mitigation strategy" (PDF). Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5427. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5427A. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-18887-7. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7591914. PMID 33110065. Retrieved April 3, 2022.
Pouyat, Richard; Groffman, Peter; Yesilonis, Ian; Hernandez, Luis (2002). "Soil carbon pools and fluxes in urban ecosystems". Environmental Pollution. 116 (Supplement 1): S107–S118. doi:10.1016/S0269-7491(01)00263-9. PMID 11833898. Retrieved April 3, 2022. Our analysis of pedon data from several disturbed soil profiles suggests that physical disturbances and anthropogenic inputs of various materials (direct effects) can greatly alter the amount of C stored in these human "made" soils.
Davidson, Eric A.; Janssens, Ivan A. (2006). "Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon decomposition and feedbacks to climate change" (PDF). Nature. 440 (9 March 2006): 165‒73. Bibcode:2006Natur.440..165D. doi:10.1038/nature04514. PMID 16525463. S2CID 4404915. Retrieved April 3, 2022.
Powlson, David (2005). "Will soil amplify climate change?". Nature. 433 (20 January 2005): 204‒05. Bibcode:2005Natur.433..204P. doi:10.1038/433204a.
PMID 15662396. S2CID 35007042. Retrieved April 3, 2022.
Bradford, Mark A.; Wieder, William R.; Bonan, Gordon B.; Fierer, Noah; Raymond, Peter A.; Crowther, Thomas W. (2016). "Managing uncertainty in soil carbon feedbacks to climate change" (PDF). Nature Climate Change. 6 (27 July 2016): 751–758. Bibcode:2016NatCC...6..751B. doi:10.1038/nclimate3071. hdl:20.500.11755/c1792dbf-ce96-4dc7-8851-1ca50a35e5e0. Retrieved April 3, 2022.
McGuire, Thomas (2005). "Earthquakes and Earth's Interior". Earth Science: The Physical Setting.
AMSCO School Publications Inc. pp. 182–184. ISBN 978-0-87720-196-0.
a b Rudnick, Roberta L.; Gao, S. (2014). "Composition of the Continental Crust".  In Holland, Heinrich D.; Turekian, Karl K. (eds.). Treatise on Geochemistry.
Vol. 4: The Crust (2nd ed.). Elsevier. pp. 1–51. ISBN 978-0-08-098300-4.
Staff. "Layers of the Earth". Volcano World.
Oregon State University.
Archived from the original on February 11, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2007.
Jessey, David. "Weathering and Sedimentary Rocks". California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.
Archived from the original on July 3, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2007.
de Pater, Imke; Lissauer, Jack J. (2010). Planetary Sciences (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-521-85371-2.
Wenk, Hans-Rudolf; Bulakh, Andreĭ Glebovich (2004). Minerals: their constitution and origin.
Cambridge University Press. p. 359. ISBN 978-0-521-52958-7.
Kring, David A. "Terrestrial Impact Cratering and Its Environmental Effects". Lunar and Planetary Laboratory.
Retrieved March 22, 2007.
Martin, Ronald (2011). Earth's Evolving Systems: The History of Planet Earth.
Jones & Bartlett Learning.
ISBN 978-0-7637-8001-2. OCLC 635476788.
University of the Witwatersrand (2019). "Drop of ancient seawater rewrites Earth's history: Research reveals that plate tectonics started on Earth 600 million years before what was believed earlier". ScienceDaily.
Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. Retrieved August 11, 2019.
"What are the different types of plate tectonic boundaries?". Ocean Explorer.
NOAA.
"Coast". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). 2000. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved December 11, 2008.
"Coastline definition". Merriam-Webster.
Retrieved June 13, 2015.
a b "The Five Major Types of Biomes | National Geographic Society". National Geographic.
May 20, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022.
"Biomes, Ecosystems, and Habitats | National Geographic Society". National Geographic.
May 20, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022.
a b c d "The Effect of Land Masses on Climate". PBS Learning Media.
PBS. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015.
a b Betts, Alan. "The Climate Energy Balance of the Earth". Alan Betts: Atmospheric Research.
Archived from the original on March 5, 2015.
a b c Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (October 17, 2007). Pathfinders: A Global History of Exploration. W. W. Norton & Company.
ISBN 978-0-393-24247-8 – via Google Books.
a b Royal Geographical Society (2008). Atlas of Exploration.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-534318-2.
"European exploration - The Age of Discovery | Britannica". , 2022.
Hofmann-Wellenhof, Bernhard; Legat, K.; Wieser, M.; Lichtenegger, H. (2007). Navigation: Principles of Positioning and Guidances.
Springer. pp. 5–6. ISBN 978-3-211-00828-7.
"LANDMARK | meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary". dictionary.cambridge.org.
Retrieved August 2, 2020.
"2012 Tourism Highlights" (PDF). World Tourism Organization.
June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 9, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2012.
Soifer, Jack, ed. (2008). Entrepreneuring Sustainable Tourism.
Lisboa.
ISBN 978-989-95976-0-0.
"Morgan Gamble". Pinterest.
Retrieved June 9, 2015.
Watson (2005), Introduction.
National Geographic Society (July 26, 2019). "The Silk Road". National Geographic Society.
Retrieved September 25, 2022.
Singer, Graciela Gestoso. "Graciela Gestoso Singer, "Amber in the Ancient Near East", i-Medjat No. 2 (December 2008). Papyrus Electronique des Ankou".
Ellis, Erle; Goldewijk, Kees Klein; Gaillard, Marie-José; Kaplan, Jed O.; Thornton, Alexa; Powell, Jeremy; Garcia, Santiago Munevar; Beaudoin, Ella; Zerboni, Andrea (August 30, 2019). "Archaeological assessment reveals Earth's early transformation through land use". Science. 365 (6456): 897–902. Bibcode:2019Sci...365..897S. doi:10.1126/science.aax1192. hdl:10150/634688. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 31467217. S2CID 201674203.
Ellis, Erle C.; Gauthier, Nicolas; Goldewijk, Kees Klein; Bird, Rebecca Bliege; Boivin, Nicole; Díaz, Sandra; Fuller, Dorian Q.; Gill, Jacquelyn L.; Kaplan, Jed O.; Kingston, Naomi; Locke, Harvey (April 27, 2021). "People have shaped most of terrestrial nature for at least 12,000 years". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 118 (17): e2023483118. Bibcode:2021PNAS..11823483E. doi:10.1073/pnas.2023483118. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 8092386. PMID 33875599.
Meyfroidt, P.; Roy Chowdhury, R.; de Bremond, A.; Ellis, E. C.; Erb, K. -H.; Filatova, T.; Garrett, R. D.; Grove, J. M.; Heinimann, A.; Kuemmerle, T.; Kull, C. A. (November 1, 2018). "Middle-range theories of land system change". Global Environmental Change. 53: 52–67. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.08.006. ISSN 0959-3780. S2CID 158366220.
"Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry". 
Ameztegui, Aitor; Coll, Lluis; Brotons, Lluis; Ninot, J.M. (2016). "Land-use legacies rather than climate change are driving the recent upward shift of the mountain tree line in the Pyrenees" (PDF). Global Ecology and Biogeography. 25 (3): 263–273. doi:10.1111/geb.12407. hdl:10459.1/65151.
"World Bank arable land". World Bank.
Retrieved October 19, 2015.
"World Bank permanent cropland". World Bank.
Retrieved October 19, 2015.
Safety and health in agriculture.
International Labour Organization. 1999. p. 77. ISBN 978-92-2-111517-5. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2010. defined agriculture as 'all forms of activities connected with growing, harvesting and primary processing of all types of crops, with the breeding, raising and caring for animals, and with tending gardens and nurseries'.
Werner, E.T.C. (1922). Myths & Legends of China.
New York: George G. Harrap & Co.
Ltd.
Archived from the original on September 7, 2008. Retrieved March 14, 2007.
"Bhumi, Bhūmi, Bhūmī: 41 definitions". Wisdom Library.
April 11, 2009. Earth (भूमि, bhūmi) is one of the five primary elements (pañcabhūta)
Lindow, John (2002). Norse Mythology: A Guide to Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs.
Oxford University Press. p. 205. ISBN 978-0-19-983969-8.
Pinch, Geraldine (2002). Handbook of Egyptian Mythology.
Handbooks of World Mythology.
ABC-CLIO. p. 135, 173. ISBN 1-57607-763-2.
Frankfort, Henri; Groenewegen-Frankfort, H. A.; Wilson, John A.; Jacobsen, Thorkild (1949). Before philosophy : the intellectual adventure of ancient man : an essay on speculative thought in the ancient Near East.
Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
ISBN 978-0226260082. OCLC 1904146.
Gottlieb, Anthony (2000). The Dream of Reason.
Penguin. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-393-04951-0.
Berlin, Adele (2011). "Cosmology and creation".  In Berlin, Adele; Grossman, Maxine (eds.). The Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-973004-9. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016 – via Google Books.
Pritchard, James B., ed. (March 30, 2016). Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament with Supplement.
Princeton University Press. p. 374. ISBN 9781400882762. Archived from the original on September 23, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2020 – via Google Books.
Russell, Jeffrey B. "The Myth of the Flat Earth". American Scientific Affiliation.
Archived from the original on September 3, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2007.; but see also Cosmas Indicopleustes
Jacobs, James Q. (February 1, 1998). "Archaeogeodesy, a Key to Prehistory". Archived from the original on April 23, 2007. Retrieved April 21, 2007.
Morgan.
The Mongols. p. 5.
Pow, Stephen (April 6, 2020). "The Mongol Empire's Northern Border: Re-evaluating the Surface Area of the Mongol Empire". Genius Loci – Laszlovszky 60. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2020.
Evans, Graham; Newnham, Jeffrey, eds. (1998). Penguin Dictionary of International relations.
Penguin Books. p. 301. ISBN 978-0140513974. Geopolitics (excerpt).
Smith, Woodruff D. The Ideological Origins of Nazi Imperialism.
Oxford University Press. p. 84.
Steffen, Will; Sanderson, Regina Angelina; Tyson, Peter D.; Jäger, Jill; Matson, Pamela A.; III, Berrien Moore; Oldfield, Frank; Richardson, Katherine; Schellnhuber, Hans-Joachim (January 27, 2006). Global Change and the Earth System: A Planet Under Pressure.
Springer Science+Business Media.
ISBN 978-3-540-26607-5.
Chapin, F. Stuart; Matson, Pamela A.; Vitousek, Peter (September 2, 2011). Principles of Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology.
Springer Science+Business Media.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9.
Evans, James (2016). "Social Constructions of Nature".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 253. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
a b "Goal 15 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs". sdgs.un.org.
Retrieved September 26, 2022.
Schoenmann, Joe (December 17, 2008). "Official calls for sort reform". Las Vegas Sun.
Retrieved December 20, 2008.
Howell, Rachel; Pickerill, Jenny (2016). "The Environment and Environmentalism".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 134. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
Manisalidis, Ioannis; Stavropoulou, Elisavet; Stavropoulos, Agathangelos; Bezirtzoglou, Eugenia (2020). "Environmental and Health Impacts of Air Pollution: A Review". Frontiers in Public Health. 8: 14. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.00014. ISSN 2296-2565. PMC 7044178. PMID 32154200.
"7 million premature deaths annually linked to air pollution". WHO. March 25, 2014. Retrieved March 25, 2014.
Allen, J. L.; Klocke, C.; Morris-Schaffer, K.; Conrad, K.; Sobolewski, M.; Cory-Slechta, D. A. (June 2017). "Cognitive Effects of Air Pollution Exposures and Potential Mechanistic Underpinnings". Current Environmental Health Reports. 4 (2): 180–191. doi:10.1007/s40572-017-0134-3. PMC 5499513. PMID 28435996.
Newbury, Joanne B.; Stewart, Robert; Fisher, Helen L.; Beevers, Sean; Dajnak, David; Broadbent, Matthew; Pritchard, Megan; Shiode, Narushige; Heslin, Margaret; Hammoud, Ryan; Hotopf, Matthew (2021). "Association between air pollution exposure and mental health service use among individuals with first presentations of psychotic and mood disorders: retrospective cohort study". British Journal of Psychiatry (published August 19, 2021). 219 (6): 678–685. doi:10.1192/bjp.2021.119. ISSN 0007-1250. PMC 8636613. PMID 35048872.
Ghosh, Rakesh; Causey, Kate; Burkart, Katrin; Wozniak, Sara; Cohen, Aaron; Brauer, Michael (September 28, 2021). "Ambient and household PM2.5 pollution and adverse perinatal outcomes: A meta-regression and analysis of attributable global burden for 204 countries and territories". PLOS Medicine. 18 (9): e1003718. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1003718. ISSN 1549-1676. PMC 8478226. PMID 34582444.
Bell, Michelle L.; Michelle L. Bell; Devra L. Davis; Tony Fletcher (January 2004). "A Retrospective Assessment of Mortality from the London Smog Episode of 1952: The Role of Influenza and Pollution". Environ Health Perspect. 112 (1): 6–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.6539. PMC 1241789. PMID 14698923. S2CID 13045119.
Von Sperling, Marcos (2015). "Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal". IWA Publishing. 6. doi:10.2166/9781780402086. ISBN 9781780402086.
"Water Pollution". Environmental Health Education Program.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
July 23, 2013. Retrieved September 18, 2021.
Cardinale BJ, Duffy JE, Gonzalez A, Hooper DU, Perrings C, Venail P,  et al. (June 2012). "Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity" (PDF). Nature. 486 (7401): 59–67. Bibcode:2012Natur.486...59C. doi:10.1038/nature11148. PMID 22678280. S2CID 4333166. ...at the first Earth Summit, the vast majority of the world's nations declared that human actions were dismantling the Earth's ecosystems, eliminating genes, species and biological traits at an alarming rate.
This observation led to the question of how such loss of biological diversity will alter the functioning of ecosystems and their ability to provide society with the goods and services needed to prosper.
Bradshaw CJ, Ehrlich PR, Beattie A, Ceballos G, Crist E, Diamond J,  et al. (2021). "Underestimating the Challenges of Avoiding a Ghastly Future". Frontiers in Conservation Science. 1. doi:10.3389/fcosc.2020.615419.
Ripple WJ, Wolf C, Newsome TM, Galetti M, Alamgir M, Crist E, Mahmoud MI, Laurance WF (November 13, 2017). "World Scientists' Warning to Humanity: A Second Notice". BioScience. 67 (12): 1026–1028. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix125. Moreover, we have unleashed a mass extinction event, the sixth in roughly 540 million years, wherein many current life forms could be annihilated or at least committed to extinction by the end of this century.
Cowie RH, Bouchet P, Fontaine B (April 2022). "The Sixth Mass Extinction: fact, fiction or speculation?". Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 97 (2): 640–663. doi:10.1111/brv.12816. PMID 35014169. S2CID 245889833.
Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals: Report of the Secretary-General (PDF) (Report). United Nations Economic and Social Council.
July 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022.
"Special Report on Climate Change and Land — IPCC site". Retrieved September 26, 2022.
"Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development". Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017 (Report). United Nations. 2017.
Rafferty & Pimm (2019); ScienceDirect - Desertification; Encyclopedia Britannica - Desertification; Geist (2005)
Zeng, Ning; Yoon, Jinho (September 1, 2009). "Expansion of the world's deserts due to vegetation-albedo feedback under global warming". Geophysical Research Letters. 36 (17): L17401. Bibcode:2009GeoRL..3617401Z. doi:10.1029/2009GL039699. ISSN 1944-8007. S2CID 1708267.
"Sustainable development of drylands and combating desertification". Retrieved June 21, 2016.
Liu, Ye; Xue, Yongkang (March 5, 2020). "Expansion of the Sahara Desert and shrinking of frozen land of the Arctic". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 4109. Bibcode:2020NatSR..10.4109L. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-61085-0. PMC 7057959. PMID 32139761.
An, Hui; Tang, Zhuangsheng; Keesstra, Saskia; Shangguan, Zhouping (July 1, 2019). "Impact of desertification on soil and plant nutrient stoichiometry in a desert grassland". Scientific Reports. 9 (1): 9422. Bibcode:2019NatSR...9.9422A. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-45927-0. PMC 6603008. PMID 31263198.
Han, Xueying; Jia, Guangpu; Yang, Guang; Wang, Ning; Liu, Feng; Chen, Haoyu; Guo, Xinyu; Yang, Wenbin; Liu, Jing (December 10, 2020). "Spatiotemporal dynamic evolution and driving factors of desertification in the Mu Us Sandy Land in 30 years". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 21734. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1021734H. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-78665-9. PMC 7729393. PMID 33303886.
Bibliography[edit]
"desertification | Description, Causes, & Impacts | Britannica". , 2022.
Dalrymple, G. Brent (1991). The age of the earth.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
ISBN 9780804723312. OCLC 22347190.
Dalrymple, G. Brent (2001). "The age of the Earth in the twentieth century: a problem (mostly) solved". Geological Society, London, Special Publications. 190 (1): 205–221. Bibcode:2001GSLSP.190..205D. doi:10.1144/GSL.SP.2001.190.01.14. S2CID 130092094. Archived from the original on November 11, 2007. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
Geist, Helmut (2005). The causes and progression of desertification.
Ashgate Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-7546-4323-4.
Newman, William L. (July 9, 2007). "Age of the Earth". Publications Services, USGS. Archived from the original on December 23, 2005. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
"Desertification - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics". , 2022.
Stassen, Chris (September 10, 2005). "The Age of the Earth". TalkOrigins Archive.
Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. Retrieved December 30, 2008.</ref>
Rafferty, John P.; Pimm, Stuart L. (2019). "Desertification.". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved November 6, 2019. the process by which natural or human causes reduce the biological productivity of drylands (arid and semiarid lands). ... The concept does not refer to the physical expansion of existing deserts but rather to the various processes that threaten all dryland ecosystems.
External links[edit]
Look up land in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Land.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Landforms.
PhysicalGeography.net educational website
Natural resourcesAirPollution / quality
Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor
developing nations
Law
Clean Air Act (USA)
Ozone depletion
Emissions
Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)
Energy
Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
sunlight
shade
Wind
Land
Arable
peak farmland
Degradation
Landscape
cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed
Law
property
Management
habitat conservation
Minerals
Gemstone
Ore
Metal
mining
law
sand
peak
rights
Soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
Use
planning
reserve
Life
Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries
climate change
law
management
Forests
genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products
Game
law
Marine conservation
Meadow
Plants
FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife
conservation
management
WaterTypes / location
Aquifer
storage and recovery
Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
Hydrosphere
Ice
bergs
glacial
polar
Irrigation
huerta
Marine
Rain
harvesting
Stormwater
Surface water
Sewage
Reclaimed water
Watershed
Aspects
Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources
management
policy
Related
Commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
Economics
ecological
land
Ecosystem services
Exploitation
overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day
Management
adaptive
Natural capital
accounting
good
Natural heritage
Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness
Resource
Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable
Category
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
العربيةবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяभोजपुरीБългарскиЧӑвашлаCebuanoChiShonaΕλληνικάEuskaraفارسیGaeilge贛語한국어हिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaJawaҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenLatinaमराठीBahasa MelayuMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄नेपाली日本語Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀРусскийSakizayaScotsShqipSimple Englishکوردیதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaไทยTürkçeTwiУкраїнськаTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 18:44 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
