灵魂
目录
词源
灵魂观
阴谋论
参见
参考
导航菜单
汉语
古埃及
巴哈伊信仰
古希腊
基督宗教
道教
佛教
伊斯兰教
耆那教
犹太教
萨满教
个人工具
命名空间
查看
搜索
导航
帮助
工具
打印/导出
在其他项目中
其他语言
灵魂，在从古至今的宗教、哲学和神话中，被描述为决定前生今世的无形精髓，居于人或其他物质躯体之内并对之起主宰作用，是一种超自然现象；灵魂亦可脱离这些躯体而独立存在，也有认为灵魂是永恒不灭的。
一个人肉体消失后，其灵魂是否存在，存有争议。
人生哲学、宗教信仰和神话故事相辅相成，是影响人类灵魂观的三个文化范畴。
很少人曾经历濒临死亡之际失去意识的状态，因此无法想像死亡将带给人们什么样的感觉。
学者普遍觉得，那只不过是人们因为渴望相信「死亡并非终点」而产生的情绪性念头。
「恐惧管理理论」主张：「心灵延续」的信念以及其他一些比较隐晦的想法、行为与心态，都是人们为了减轻对「自我不存在」的极度焦虑，因而产生的反应。
其支持者认为，人的心中都存在着一套秘密防御机制，专门用来抑制对死亡的恐惧。
楚辞．屈原．九章．哀郢：「羌灵魂之欲归兮，何须臾而忘反。
」其中“灵魂”指地是人死后的灵异。
楚辞．屈原．九章．抽思：「何灵魂之信直兮，人之心不与吾心同。
」其中“灵魂”指地是心灵或精神。
灵魂来自一个全能的神灵。
在人类的原始宗教中，灵魂的本质就是力量。
力量、灵魂和生命是可以彼此互换的观念。
这些力量被认为存在于人类和其他生物（包括植物）的生命之中。
以澳洲的原住民为例，他们将灵魂分为内部灵魂（Internal soul）和外部灵魂（External soul）。
内部灵魂是整个身体（即物质部份）；外部灵魂则是可以离开身体之外的部份。
外部灵魂会离开身体，并会停留在图腾（即生物的替身）上。
古埃及宗教认为人是由各种元素组成的，有些是物质的元素，有些是精神的元素。
古亚述和巴比伦的宗教中也有类似的想法。
库特姆玛碑（英语：Kuttamuwa Stele）是公元前8世纪Sam'al王室官员的葬礼碑，描述了库特姆玛（英语：Kuttamuwa）要求他的送葬者用宴会来纪念他的生命和死后生命，「为了我在这块碑上的灵魂」，因此这个石碑可以佐证当时认为灵魂和可以和身体分开，而且是很早期的佐证资料之一。
此石碑是玄武岩材质，高三英尺，宽二英尺。
是在芝加哥大学东方学院（英语：University of Chicago Oriental Institute）的Neubauer Expedition第三次发掘中发现的。
The Baháʼí Faith affirms that "the soul is a sign of God, a heavenly gem whose reality the most learned of men hath failed to grasp, and whose mystery no mind, however acute, can ever hope to unravel". Bahá'u'lláh stated that the soul not only continues to live after the physical death of the human body, but is, in fact, immortal. Heaven can be seen partly as the soul's state of nearness to God; and hell as a state of remoteness from God.
Each state follows as a natural consequence of individual efforts, or the lack thereof, to develop spiritually. Bahá'u'lláh taught that individuals have no existence prior to their life here on earth and the soul's evolution is always towards God and away from the material world.
在古希腊，古希腊哲学家柏拉图认为灵魂是单纯不能加以分解的，有生命和自发性，是精神世界的、理性的、纯粹的，因他有追求世界的欲望，而堕落到地上，被圈入于肉体中，注定要经过一个净化的阶段，灵魂是会轮回转世。
其后的新柏拉图主义都有对灵魂作出描述。
他的学生亚里士多德的着作中曾将灵魂与心理学一同讨论。
亚里士多德将《论灵魂》（或译作《灵魂论（英语：On the Soul）》）列为“第二哲学”的范畴。
对灵魂的定义，亚里士多德认为灵魂是形式，肉体只是质料，灵魂才是实体。
灵魂分为三个部分，有营养、感觉和理性的机能。
此三魂分别是生魂（vegetative/nutritive soul）、觉魂（senetive soul）、灵魂（rational soul）。
天主教神父利玛窦《天主实义》中所叙述的三魂观即源自于亚里斯多德的理论：
「西士曰：人有魂、魄，两者全而生焉；死则其魄化散归土，而魂常在不灭。
吾入中国尝闻有以魂为可灭，而等之禽兽者；其余天下名教名邦，皆省人魂不灭，而大殊于禽兽者也。
吾言此理，子试虚心听之。
世有生、觉灵三魂彼世界之魂有三品：⑴草木之生魂下品名曰生魂，即草木之魂是也。
此魂扶草木以生长，草木枯萎，魂亦消灭。
⑵禽兽之觉魂中品名曰觉魂，则禽兽之魂也，此能附禽兽长育，而又使之以耳目视听，以口鼻啖嗅，以肢体觉物情，但不能推论道理，至死而魂亦灭焉。
⑶人类之灵魂上品名曰灵魂，即人魂也。
此兼生魂，觉魂，能扶人长养及使人知觉物情，而又使之能推论事物，明辨理义。
人身虽死，而魂非死，盖永存不灭者焉。
」
主张阐发「五教」（儒、道、佛、基、回）圣人之奥旨的「儒宗神教」的鸾书文献，其三魂之说或源自《天主实义》的三魂之说。
「儒宗神教」的鬼神观里，人是万物之长，因此认为草木仅一魂，曰生魂，禽兽有二魂，一曰「生魂」能知生长走动，二曰「觉魂」能知痛苦与喜乐哀鸣之情。
人则有三魂，生魂、觉魂、灵魂。
人死之后，如系在世作恶多端之人，乃下地狱，按其罪过受种种磨炼。
中世纪最广泛的观点认为灵魂是上帝所创造的，上帝为每一个新身体创造一个灵魂。
这想法受到归正宗等克尔文派信徒支持，也为天主教所接受。
另一个观点则认为个人的灵魂承自父母。
有的现代学者认为，老子的“死而不亡者寿” 是灵魂不亡说。
他们认为文学艺术、科学技术和宗教哲学等精神财富是源于人类灵魂的，随着时代的变迁而日益丰盛，并试图以此说明肉体可能死去，而灵魂不亡。
佛教抱持无我论，不认为有「永恒不变的灵魂」，因此致力使信徒打破「灵魂永恒」观点，灭除四相。
但佛教经常面临这样一个问题：「轮回需要一个主体，否则张三来生何以变为李四，李四又何须受张三所造业力牵引？」故有一些佛教人士，认为有一个真实存在的普特伽罗，类似灵魂，尽管形躯易坏，不过普特伽罗神识常存，众生命终之后仍有思想，并且在下一辈子，神识投生之后，将会如上辈子一样，与形躯构成完整的自我，故认为即蕴我常有，而宣称释教只是否认假名我，用意是使世人培养慈悲，弃小我以成大我。
反对者认为这不符合释迦文佛的教诲，因为五蕴本来便是无常的，而且随因缘而聚或散，所以执着于认为即蕴我是实有的，乃是错误的观念，属于我执， 众生因无明而认为五蕴即为自我并由此产生出来的概念。
现在，佛教主流认为，人死后因其「神识」的变迁，新生一个众生而进入佛教中的轮回，吕澂《印度佛学源流略讲》，将其比喻为用蜡烛的火点燃另一根蜡烛，蜡烛相续正如前世今世来世，而在其中轮回的只有火，每根蜡烛上的火有关联性，但并非是同一团。
伊斯兰教灵魂观所根据的是《古兰经》。
有两个词来指代灵魂：rūḥ（翻译为精神、意识、气或“灵魂”）和nafs（翻译为自我、自我、心灵或“灵魂”），是希伯来语“nefesh”和“ruach”的同源词。
这两个术语经常互换使用，尽管“rūḥ”更常用于表示神圣的精神或“生命的气息”，而“nafs”则表示一个人的性情或特征。
在伊斯兰哲学中，不朽的 rūḥ “驱动”凡人的 nafs，其中包括生活所需的世俗欲望和感知。
《古兰经》中提到的段落：
他们问你精神是甚么？你说：「精神是我的主的机密。
」你们只获得很少的知识。
人们到了死亡的时候，真主将他们的灵魂取去；尚未到死期的人们，当他们睡眠的时候，真主也将他们的灵魂取去。
他已判决其死亡者，他扣留他们的灵魂；他未判决其死亡者，便将他们的灵魂放回，至一定期。
对于能思维的民众，此中确有许多迹象。
其观点认为灵魂是真主（阿拉）所创造的，真主为每一个新身体创造一个灵魂，灵魂是不朽且永恒的，会依是否通过真主的考验，最终会到天堂或地狱，在复活之时，灵魂和身体将会重新复合。
In Jainism, jiva is the immortal essence or soul of a living organism (human, animal, fish or plant etc.) which survives physical death. The concept of Ajiva in Jainism means "not soul", and represents matter (including body), time, space, non-motion and motion. In Jainism, a Jiva is either samsari (mundane, caught in cycle of rebirths) or mukta (liberated).
According to this belief until the time the soul is liberated from the saṃsāra (cycle of repeated birth and death), it gets attached to one of these bodies based on the karma (actions) of the individual soul.
Irrespective of which state the soul is in, it has got the same attributes and qualities.
The difference between the liberated and non-liberated souls is that the qualities and attributes are manifested completely in case of siddha (liberated soul) as they have overcome all the karmic bondages whereas in case of non-liberated souls they are partially exhibited.
Souls who rise victorious over wicked emotions while still remaining within physical bodies are referred to as arihants.
Concerning the Jain view of the soul, Virchand Gandhi said
the soul lives its own life, not for the purpose of the body, but the body lives for the purpose of the soul.
If we believe that the soul is to be controlled by the body then soul misses its power.
Template:Primary sources section
The Hebrew terms נפש‬ nefesh (literally "living being"), רוח‬ ruach (literally "wind"), נשמה‬ neshamah (literally "breath"), חיה‬ chayah (literally "life") and יחידה‬ yechidah (literally "singularity") are used to describe the soul or spirit.
In Judaism the soul is believed to be given by God to Adam as mentioned in Book of Genesis|Genesis,
Then the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being.
Judaism relates the quality of one's soul to one's performance of the commandments (mitzvot) and reaching higher levels of understanding, and thus closeness to God.
A person with such closeness is called a tzadik.
Therefore, Judaism embraces the commemoration of the day of one's death, nahala/Yahrtzeit and not the birthday as a festivity of remembrance, for only toward the end of life's struggles, tests and challenges could human souls be judged and credited for righteousness. Judaism places great importance on the study of the souls.
Kabbalah and other mystic traditions go into greater detail into the nature of the soul.
Kabbalah separates the soul into five elements, corresponding to the five worlds:
Kabbalah also proposed a concept of reincarnation, the gilgul. (See also nefesh habehamit the "animal soul".)[来源请求]
Some Jewish traditions assert that the soul is housed in the luz bone, though traditions disagree as to whether it is the Atlas (anatomy)|atlas at the top of the spine, or the sacrum at bottom of the spine.[来源请求]
Soul dualism (also called "multiple souls" or "dualistic pluralism") is a common belief in Shamanism, and is essential in the universal and central concept of "soul flight" (also called "soul journey", "out-of-body experience", "ecstasy", or "astral projection"). It is the belief that humans have two or more souls, generally termed the "body soul" (or "life soul") and the "free soul". The former is linked to bodily functions and awareness when awake, while the latter can freely wander during sleep or trance states. In some cases, there are a plethora of soul types with different functions.
Soul dualism and multiple souls are prominent in the traditional animistic beliefs of the Austronesian peoples, the Hun and po|Chinese people (Hun and po|hún and pò), the Tibetan people, most African peoples, most Indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America|Native North Americans, ancient South Asian peoples, Northern Eurasian peoples, and in Ancient Egyptians (the ka and ba).
The belief in soul dualism is found throughout most Austronesian people|Austronesian shamanistic traditions.
The reconstructed Proto-Austronesian word for the "body soul" is *nawa ("breath", "life", or "vital spirit"). It is located somewhere in the abdominal cavity, often in the liver or the heart (Proto-Austronesian *qaCay). The "free soul" is located in the head.
Its names are usually derived from Proto-Austronesian *qaNiCu ("ghost", "spirit [of the dead]"), which also apply to other non-human nature spirits.
The "free soul" is also referred to in names that literally mean "twin" or "double", from Proto-Austronesian *duSa ("two"). A virtuous person is said to be one whose souls are in harmony with each other, while an evil person is one whose souls are in conflict.
The "free soul" is said to leave the body and journey to the Spirit world (spiritualism)|spirit world during sleep, trance|trance-like states, delirium, insanity, and death.
The duality is also seen in the healing traditions of Austronesian shamans, where illnesses are regarded as a "soul loss" and thus to heal the sick, one must "return" the "free soul" (which may have been stolen by an evil spirit or got lost in the spirit world) into the body.
If the "free soul" can not be returned, the afflicted person dies or goes permanently insane.
In some ethnic groups, there can also be more than two souls.
Like among the Tagbanwa people, where a person is said to have six souls – the "free soul" (which is regarded as the "true" soul) and five secondary souls with various functions.
Several Inuit groups believe that a person has more than one type of soul.
One is associated with respiration, the other can accompany the body as a shadow. In some cases, it is connected to shamanistic beliefs among the various Inuit groups. Also Caribou Inuit groups believed in several types of souls.
The shaman heals within the spiritual dimension by returning 'lost' parts of the human soul from wherever they have gone.
The shaman also cleanses excess negative energies, which confuse or pollute the soul.
一种广泛流传的都市传奇是二十世纪初的Duncan MacDougall（英语：Duncan MacDougall (doctor)）医生让濒死的人躺在一个秤上，然后量度他们死后体重的变化，他总计做了六次观察，两次失败被剔除，一次在断气瞬间减少3/4 ounce，两次重量渐次流失，一次则得到相反的结果（第五次实验，断气瞬间减轻3/8 ounce，之后重量又突然增加）。
他又用15只狗进行相同的实验，并未观察到减轻的现像。
面对质疑，Duncan MacDougall辩解，灵魂会在断气后停留几分钟才离开，但仍无法说明第五个例子。
再者，就算测得重量减轻，也无法证明那就是灵魂。
犬只实验也相牴触，Duncan MacDougall自己也坦承，实验过少，不具代表性，无法证明什么，但对外却宣称测得灵魂的重量是21.3公克。
之后，Duncan MacDougall并未考虑如何改进其实验，转而企图利用X光在临终病人身上拍摄灵魂的照片。
在丹‧布朗的小说失落的符号（英语：The Lost Symbol）中，提及类似的实验。
2001年Lewis E.Hollander曾测试八只濒死绵羊的重量，却发现有短暂增加的情形。
而Duncan MacDougall的实验有瑕疵且结果无法被重覆，故视为伪科学。
