



Achaemenid Empire - Wikipedia










































Achaemenid Empire

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
c. 550–330 BC Iranian (Persian) empire
"Persian Empire" redirects here. For other uses, see Persian Empire (disambiguation).


Achaemenid Empire𐎧𐏁𐏂Xšāça550 BC–330 BC


Standard of Cyrus the Great[a]The Achaemenid Empire at its greatest territorial extent under the rule of Darius I (522 BC–486 BC)[2][3][4][5]StatusEmpireCapital
Babylon[6]
Pasargadae
Ecbatana
Susa
Persepolis (ceremonial)
Common languages
Old Persian (official)[a]
Aramaic (official, lingua franca)[b]
Akkadian[c][7]
Median
Greek[8]
Elamite[9]
Religion 
Zoroastrianism (official)
Babylonian religion[10]
Second Temple Judaism
Vedic Hinduism
Ancient Egyptian religion
Ancient Greek religion
Many others
GovernmentMonarchyKings[b] orKing of Kings[c] • 559–530 BC Cyrus the Great• 530–522 BC Cambyses II• 522–486 BC Darius I• 486–465 BC Xerxes I• 465–424 BC Artaxerxes I• 424–424 BC Xerxes II• 424–423 BC Sogdianus• 423–405 BC Darius II• 405–358 BC Artaxerxes II• 358–338 BC Artaxerxes III• 338–336 BC Arses• 336–330 BC Darius III
Historical eraClassical antiquity• Persian Revolt 550 BC• Conquest of Lydia 547 BC• Conquest of Babylon 539 BC• Conquest of Egypt 525 BC• Greco-Persian Wars 499–449 BC• Corinthian War 395–387 BC• Second conquest of Egypt 343 BC• Fall to Macedonia 330 BC
Area500 BC[11][12]5,500,000 km2 (2,100,000 sq mi)Population• [13] 17 million to 35 million
CurrencyDaric, siglos


 Preceded by
Succeeded by







Median Empire




Neo-Babylonian Empire




Lydia




Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt




Gandhara




Sogdia




Massagetae






Empire of Alexander the Great




Twenty-eighth Dynasty of Egypt





a. ^ Native language.
b. ^ Official language and lingua franca.[14]
c. ^ Literary language in Babylonia.

The Achaemenid or the Achaemenian Empire[15] (/əˈkiːmənɪd/; Old Persian: 𐎧𐏁𐏂, Xšāça, lit. 'The Empire'[16] or 'The Kingdom'[17]), also called the First Persian Empire,[18] was an ancient Iranian empire founded by Cyrus the Great in 550 BC. Based in Western Asia, it was contemporarily the largest empire in history, spanning a total of 5.5 million square kilometres (2.1 million square miles) from the Balkans and ancient Egypt in the west to the Indus Valley in the east.[11][12]
Around the 7th century BC, the region of Persis in the southwestern portion of the Iranian plateau was settled by the Persians;[19] from Persis, Cyrus rose and defeated the Median Empire as well as Lydia and the Neo-Babylonian Empire, marking the formal establishment of a new imperial polity under the Achaemenid dynasty.
The Achaemenid Empire is well-known for having imposed a successful model of centralized, bureaucratic administration; its multicultural policy; building infrastructure, such as road systems and a postal system; the use of an official language across its territories; and the development of civil services, including its possession of a large, professional army. Its advancements inspired the implement of similar styles of governance by various later empires.[20]
By 330 BC, the Achaemenid Empire was conquered in its entirety by Greek Macedonia under Alexander the Great, an ardent admirer of Cyrus the Great.[21][22] With Alexander's death marking the beginning of the Hellenistic period, most of the empire's former territory fell to the rule of the Ptolemaic Kingdom and the Seleucid Empire following the Partition of Triparadisus in 321 BC. Hellenistic rule remained in place until the Iranian elites of the central plateau finally reclaimed power under the Parthian Empire.[19]

Contents

1 Name
2 History

2.1 Achaemenid timeline
2.2 Origin
2.3 Formation and expansion
2.4 Greco-Persian Wars
2.5 Cultural phase
2.6 Second conquest of Egypt
2.7 Fall of the empire
2.8 Descendants in later Persian dynasties
2.9 Causes of decline


3 Government

3.1 Achaemenid coinage
3.2 Tax districts
3.3 Transportation and communication


4 Military

4.1 Military composition
4.2 Infantry
4.3 Cavalry
4.4 Navy


5 Culture

5.1 Languages
5.2 Customs
5.3 Religion
5.4 Women in the Achaemenid Empire
5.5 Art and architecture
5.6 Tombs


6 Legacy
7 Achaemenid kings and rulers

7.1 Unattested
7.2 Attested


8 Gallery
9 See also
10 Explanatory notes
11 References

11.1 Citations
11.2 Sources


12 External links


Name[edit]
The Achaemenian empire borrows its name from the ancestor of Cyrus the Great, the founder of the empire, Achaemenes. The term Achaemenid means "of the family of the Achaemenis/Achaemenes" (Old Persian: 𐏃𐎧𐎠𐎶𐎴𐎡𐏁 Haxāmaniš;[23] a bahuvrihi compound translating to "having a friend's mind").[24] Achaemenes was himself a minor seventh-century ruler of the Anshan in southwestern Iran, and a vassal of Assyria.[25][dead link]
Around 850 BC the original nomadic people who began the empire called themselves the Parsa and their constantly shifting territory Parsua, for the most part localized around Persis.[19] The name "Persia" is a Greek and Latin pronunciation of the native word referring to the country of the people originating from Persis (Old Persian: 𐎱𐎠𐎼𐎿, Pārsa).[25] The Persian term Xšāça (𐎧𐏁𐏂), literally meaning "The Kingdom",[26] was used to refer to the Empire formed by their multinational state.[27]

History[edit]
Achaemenid timeline[edit]
Astronomical year numbering


Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
Origin[edit]
Main articles: Achaemenes, Teispids, and Achaemenid family tree
 Family tree of the Achaemenid rulers.
The Persian nation contains a number of tribes as listed here. ... : the Pasargadae, Maraphii, and Maspii, upon which all the other tribes are dependent. Of these, the Pasargadae are the most distinguished; they contain the clan of the Achaemenids from which spring the Perseid kings. Other tribes are the Panthialaei, Derusiaei, Germanii, all of which are attached to the soil, the remainder—the Dai, Mardi, Dropici, Sagarti, being nomadic.— Herodotus, Histories 1.101 & 125
The Achaemenid Empire was created by nomadic Persians. The Persians were Iranian people who arrived in what is today Iran c. 1000 BC and settled a region including north-western Iran, the Zagros Mountains and Persis alongside the native Elamites.[28] The Persians were originally nomadic pastoralists in the western Iranian Plateau. The Achaemenid Empire may not have been the first Iranian empire, as the Medes, another group of Iranian people, possibly established a short-lived empire when they played a major role in overthrowing of the Assyrians.[29]
The Achaemenids were initially rulers of the Elamite city of Anshan near the modern city of Marvdasht;[30] the title "King of Anshan" was an adaptation of the earlier Elamite title "King of Susa and Anshan".[31] There are conflicting accounts of the identities of the earliest Kings of Anshan. According to the Cyrus Cylinder (the oldest extant genealogy of the Achaemenids) the kings of Anshan were Teispes, Cyrus I, Cambyses I and Cyrus II, also known as Cyrus the Great, who created the empire[30] (the later Behistun Inscription, written by Darius the Great, claims that Teispes was the son of Achaemenes and that Darius is also descended from Teispes through a different line, but no earlier texts mention Achaemenes[32]). In Herodotus' Histories, he writes that Cyrus the Great was the son of Cambyses I and Mandane of Media, the daughter of Astyages, the king of the Median Empire.[33]


Formation and expansion[edit]
Further information: Wars of Cyrus the Great, Achaemenid conquest of Egypt, Achaemenid invasion of the Indus Valley, and European Scythian campaign of Darius I
 Map of the expansion process of Achaemenid territories
Cyrus revolted against the Median Empire in 553 BC, and in 550 BC succeeded in defeating the Medes, capturing Astyages and taking the Median capital city of Ecbatana.[34][35][36] Once in control of Ecbatana, Cyrus styled himself as the successor to Astyages and assumed control of the entire empire.[37] By inheriting Astyages' empire, he also inherited the territorial conflicts the Medes had had with both Lydia and the Neo-Babylonian Empire.[38]
King Croesus of Lydia sought to take advantage of the new international situation by advancing into what had previously been Median territory in Asia Minor.[39][40] Cyrus led a counterattack which not only fought off Croesus' armies, but also led to the capture of Sardis and the fall of the Lydian Kingdom in 546 BC.[41][42][d] Cyrus placed Pactyes in charge of collecting tribute in Lydia and left, but once Cyrus had left Pactyes instigated a rebellion against Cyrus.[42][43][44] Cyrus sent the Median general Mazares to deal with the rebellion, and Pactyes was captured. Mazares, and after his death Harpagus, set about reducing all the cities which had taken part in the rebellion. The subjugation of Lydia took about four years in total.[45]
When the power in Ecbatana changed hands from the Medes to the Persians, many tributaries to the Median Empire believed their situation had changed and revolted against Cyrus.[46] This forced Cyrus to fight wars against Bactria and the nomadic Saka in Central Asia.[47] During these wars, Cyrus established several garrison towns in Central Asia, including the Cyropolis.[48]

 Cyrus the Great is said, in the Bible, to have liberated the Hebrew captives in Babylon to resettle and rebuild Jerusalem, earning him an honored place in Judaism.
Nothing is known of Persian-Babylonian relations between 547 BC and 539 BC, but it is likely that there were hostilities between the two empires for several years leading up to the war of 540–539 BC and the Fall of Babylon.[49] In October 539 BC, Cyrus won a battle against the Babylonians at Opis, then took Sippar without a fight before finally capturing the city of Babylon on 12 October, where the Babylonian king Nabonidus was taken prisoner.[50][49][51] Upon taking control of the city, Cyrus depicted himself in propaganda as restoring the divine order which had been disrupted by Nabonidus, who had promoted the cult of Sin rather than Marduk,[52][53][54] and he also portrayed himself as restoring the heritage of the Neo-Assyrian Empire by comparing himself to the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal.[55][56][54] The Hebrew Bible also unreservedly praises Cyrus for his actions in the conquest of Babylon, referring to him as Yahweh's anointed.[57][58] He is credited with freeing the people of Judah from their exile and with authorizing the reconstruction of much of Jerusalem, including the Second Temple.[57][59]

 The tomb of Cyrus the Great, founder of the Achaemenid Empire. At Pasargadae, Iran.
In 530 BC, Cyrus presumably died while on a military expedition against the Massagetae in Central Asia. He was succeeded by his eldest son Cambyses II, while his younger son Bardiya[e] received a large territory in Central Asia.[62][63] By 525 BC, Cambyses had successfully subjugated Phoenicia and Cyprus and was making preparations to invade Egypt with the newly created Persian navy.[64][65] The great Pharaoh Amasis II had died in 526 BC and had been succeeded by Psamtik III, resulting in the defection of key Egyptian allies to the Persians.[65] Psamtik positioned his army at Pelusium in the Nile Delta. He was soundly defeated by the Persians in the Battle of Pelusium before fleeing to Memphis, where the Persians defeated him and took him prisoner. After attempting a failed revolt, Psamtik III promptly committed suicide.[65][66]
Herodotus depicts Cambyses as openly antagonistic to the Egyptian people and their gods, cults, temples, and priests, in particular stressing the murder of the sacred bull Apis.[67] He says that these actions led to a madness that caused him to kill his brother Bardiya (who Herodotus says was killed in secret),[68] his own sister-wife[69] and Croesus of Lydia.[70] He then concludes that Cambyses completely lost his mind,[71] and all later classical authors repeat the themes of Cambyses' impiety and madness. However, this is based on spurious information, as the epitaph of Apis from 524 BC shows that Cambyses participated in the funeral rites of Apis styling himself as pharaoh.[72]

 Overview map of the world in 500 BC
Following the conquest of Egypt, the Libyans and the Greeks of Cyrene and Barca in present-day eastern Libya (Cyrenaica) surrendered to Cambyses and sent tribute without a fight.[65][66] Cambyses then planned invasions of Carthage, the oasis of Ammon and Ethiopia.[73] Herodotus claims that the naval invasion of Carthage was canceled because the Phoenicians, who made up a large part of Cambyses' fleet, refused to take up arms against their own people,[74] but modern historians doubt whether an invasion of Carthage was ever planned at all.[65] However, Cambyses dedicated his efforts to the other two campaigns, aiming to improve the Empire's strategic position in Africa by conquering the Kingdom of Meroë and taking strategic positions in the western oases. To this end, he established a garrison at Elephantine consisting mainly of Jewish soldiers, who remained stationed at Elephantine throughout Cambyses' reign.[65] The invasions of Ammon and Ethiopia themselves were failures. Herodotus claims that the invasion of Ethiopia was a failure due to the madness of Cambyses and the lack of supplies for his men,[75] but archaeological evidence suggests that the expedition was not a failure, and a fortress at the Second Cataract of the Nile, on the border between Egypt and Kush, remained in use throughout the Achaemenid period.[65][76]
The events surrounding Cambyses' death and Bardiya's succession are greatly debated as there are many conflicting accounts.[61] According to Herodotus, as Bardiya's assassination had been committed in secret, the majority of Persians still believed him to be alive. This allowed two Magi to rise up against Cambyses, with one of them sitting on the throne able to impersonate Bardiya because of their remarkable physical resemblance and shared name (Smerdis in Herodotus' accounts[e]).[77] Ctesias writes that when Cambyses had Bardiya killed he immediately put the magus Sphendadates in his place as satrap of Bactria due to a remarkable physical resemblance.[78] Two of Cambyses' confidants then conspired to usurp Cambyses and put Sphendadates on the throne under the guise of Bardiya.[79] According to the Behistun Inscription, written by the following king Darius the Great, a magus named Gaumata impersonated Bardiya and incited a revolution in Persia.[60] Whatever the exact circumstances of the revolt, Cambyses heard news of it in the summer of 522 BC and began to return from Egypt, but he was wounded in the thigh in Syria and died of gangrene, so Bardiya's impersonator became king.[80][f] The account of Darius is the earliest, and although the later historians all agree on the key details of the story, that a magus impersonated Bardiya and took the throne, this may have been a story created by Darius to justify his own usurpation.[82] Iranologist Pierre Briant hypothesises that Bardiya was not killed by Cambyses, but waited until his death in the summer of 522 BC to claim his legitimate right to the throne as he was then the only male descendant of the royal family. Briant says that although the hypothesis of a deception by Darius is generally accepted today, "nothing has been established with certainty at the present time, given the available evidence".[83]

 The Achaemenid Empire at its greatest extent, c. 500 BC
According to the Behistun Inscription, Gaumata ruled for seven months before being overthrown in 522 BC by Darius the Great (Darius I) (Old Persian Dāryavuš, "who holds firm the good", also known as Darayarahush). The Magi, though persecuted, continued to exist, and a year following the death of the first pseudo-Smerdis (Gaumata), saw a second pseudo-Smerdis (named Vahyazdāta) attempt a coup. The coup, though initially successful, failed.[84]
Herodotus writes[85] that the native leadership debated the best form of government for the empire.
Ever since the Macedonian king Amyntas I surrendered his country to the Persians in about 512–511, Macedonians and Persians were strangers no more as well. The subjugation of Macedonia was part of Persian military operations initiated by Darius the Great (521–486) in 513—after immense preparations—a huge Achaemenid army invaded the Balkans and tried to defeat the European Scythians roaming to the north of the Danube river.[86] Darius' army subjugated several Thracian peoples, and virtually all other regions that touch the European part of the Black Sea, such as parts of nowadays Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, and Russia, before it returned to Asia Minor.[86][87] Darius left in Europe one of his commanders named Megabazus whose task was to accomplish conquests in the Balkans.[86] The Persian troops subjugated gold-rich Thrace, the coastal Greek cities, and defeated and conquered the powerful Paeonians.[86][88][89] Finally, Megabazus sent envoys to Amyntas, demanding acceptance of Persian domination, which the Macedonians did. The Balkans provided many soldiers for the multi-ethnic Achaemenid army. Many of the Macedonian and Persian elite intermarried, such as the Persian official Bubares who married Amyntas' daughter, Gygaea. Family ties the Macedonian rulers Amyntas and Alexander enjoyed with Bubares ensured them good relations with the Persian kings Darius and Xerxes the Great. The Persian invasion led indirectly to Macedonia's rise in power and Persia had some common interests in the Balkans; with Persian aid, the Macedonians stood to gain much at the expense of some Balkan tribes such as the Paeonians and Greeks. All in all, the Macedonians were "willing and useful Persian allies. Macedonian soldiers fought against Athens and Sparta in Xerxes the Great's army.[86] The Persians referred to both Greeks and Macedonians as Yauna ("Ionians", their term for "Greeks"), and to Macedonians specifically as Yaunã Takabara or "Greeks with hats that look like shields", possibly referring to the Macedonian kausia hat.[90]

 The Persian queen Atossa, daughter of Cyrus the Great, sister-wife of Cambyses II, Darius the Great's wife, and mother of Xerxes the Great
By the 5th century BC, the Kings of Persia were either ruling over or had subordinated territories encompassing not just all of the Persian Plateau and all of the territories formerly held by the Assyrian Empire (Mesopotamia, the Levant, Cyprus and Egypt), but beyond this all of Anatolia and Armenia, as well as the Southern Caucasus and parts of the North Caucasus, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Bulgaria, Paeonia, Thrace and Macedonia to the north and west, most of the Black Sea coastal regions, parts of Central Asia as far as the Aral Sea, the Oxus and Jaxartes to the north and north-east, the Hindu Kush and the western Indus basin (corresponding to modern Afghanistan and Pakistan) to the far east, parts of northern Arabia to the south, and parts of eastern Libya (Cyrenaica) to the south-west, and parts of Oman, China, and the UAE.[91][92][93][94][95][96][97]

Greco-Persian Wars[edit]
Main article: Greco-Persian Wars
 Map showing events of the first phases of the Greco-Persian Wars
 Greek hoplite and Persian warrior depicted fighting, on an ancient kylix, 5th century BC
The Ionian Revolt in 499 BC, and associated revolts in Aeolis, Doris, Cyprus, and Caria, were military rebellions by several regions of Asia Minor against Persian rule, lasting from 499 to 493 BC. At the heart of the rebellion was the dissatisfaction of the Greek cities of Asia Minor with the tyrants appointed by Persia to rule them, along with the individual actions of two Milesian tyrants, Histiaeus and Aristagoras. In 499 BC, the then-tyrant of Miletus, Aristagoras, launched a joint expedition with the Persian satrap Artaphernes to conquer Naxos, in an attempt to bolster his position in Miletus (both financially and in terms of prestige). The mission was a debacle, and sensing his imminent removal as tyrant, Aristagoras chose to incite the whole of Ionia into rebellion against the Persian king Darius the Great.[citation needed]
The Persians continued to reduce the cities along the west coast that still held out against them, before finally imposing a peace settlement in 493 BC on Ionia that was generally considered to be both just and fair. The Ionian Revolt constituted the first major conflict between Greece and the Achaemenid Empire, and as such represents the first phase of the Greco-Persian Wars. Asia Minor had been brought back into the Persian fold, but Darius had vowed to punish Athens and Eretria for their support of the revolt.[98] Moreover, seeing that the political situation in Greece posed a continued threat to the stability of his Empire, he decided to embark on the conquest of all of Greece. The first campaign of the invasion was to bring the territories in the Balkan peninsula back within the empire.[99] The Persian grip over these territories had loosened following the Ionian Revolt. In 492 BC, the Persian general Mardonius re-subjugated Thrace and made Macedon a fully subordinate part of the empire; it had been a vassal as early as the late 6th century BC but retained a great deal of autonomy.[99] However, in 490 BC the Persian forces were defeated by the Athenians at the Battle of Marathon and Darius would die before having the chance to launch an invasion of Greece.[100]

 Achaemenid king fighting hoplites, seal and seal holder, Cimmerian Bosporus.
Xerxes I (485–465 BC, Old Persian Xšayārša "Hero Among Kings"), son of Darius I, vowed to complete the job. He organized a massive invasion aiming to conquer Greece. His army entered Greece from the north in the spring of 480 BC, meeting little or no resistance through Macedonia and Thessaly, but was delayed by a small Greek force for three days at Thermopylae. A simultaneous naval battle at Artemisium was tactically indecisive as large storms destroyed ships from both sides. The battle was stopped prematurely when the Greeks received news of the defeat at Thermopylae and retreated. The battle was a strategic victory for the Persians, giving them uncontested control of Artemisium and the Aegean Sea.[citation needed]
Following his victory at the Battle of Thermopylae, Xerxes sacked the evacuated city of Athens and prepared to meet the Greeks at the strategic Isthmus of Corinth and the Saronic Gulf. In 480 BC the Greeks won a decisive victory over the Persian fleet at the Battle of Salamis and forced Xerxes to retire to Sardis.[101] The land army which he left in Greece under Mardonius retook Athens but was eventually destroyed in 479 BC at the Battle of Plataea. The final defeat of the Persians at Mycale encouraged the Greek cities of Asia to revolt, and the Persians lost all of their territories in Europe; Macedonia once again became independent.[86]

Cultural phase[edit]
After Xerxes I was assassinated, he was succeeded by his eldest surviving son Artaxerxes I. It was during his reign that Elamite ceased to be the language of government,[citation needed] and Aramaic gained in importance. It was probably during this reign that the solar calendar was introduced as the national calendar. Under Artaxerxes I, Zoroastrianism became the de facto religion of state.[citation needed]
After Persia had been defeated at the Battle of Eurymedon (469 or 466 BC[102]), military action between Greece and Persia was halted. When Artaxerxes I took power, he introduced a new Persian strategy of weakening the Athenians by funding their enemies in Greece. This indirectly caused the Athenians to move the treasury of the Delian League from the island of Delos to the Athenian acropolis. This funding practice inevitably prompted renewed fighting in 450 BC, where the Greeks attacked at the Battle of Cyprus. After Cimon's failure to attain much in this expedition, the Peace of Callias was agreed between Athens, Argos and Persia in 449 BC.[103][104]
Artaxerxes I offered asylum to Themistocles, who was the winner of the Battle of Salamis, after Themistocles was ostracized from Athens. Also, Artaxerxes I gave him Magnesia, Myus, and Lampsacus to maintain him in bread, meat, and wine. In addition, Artaxerxes I gave him Palaescepsis to provide him with clothes, and he also gave him Percote with bedding for his house.[105]

 Achaemenid gold ornaments, Brooklyn Museum
When Artaxerxes died in 424 BC at Susa, his body was taken to the tomb already built for him in the Naqsh-e Rustam Necropolis. It was Persian tradition that kings begin constructing their own tombs while they were still alive. Artaxerxes I was immediately succeeded by his eldest and only legitimate son, Xerxes II.[106] However, after a few days on the throne, he was assassinated while drunk by Pharnacyas and Menostanes on the orders of his illegitimate brother Sogdianus, who apparently had gained the support of his regions. He reigned for six months and fifteen days before being captured by his half-brother, Ochus, who had rebelled against him. Sogdianus was executed by being suffocated in ash because Ochus had promised he would not die by the sword, by poison or by hunger.[107] Ochus then took the royal name Darius II. Darius' ability to defend his position on the throne ended the short power vacuum.[citation needed]
From 412 BC Darius II, at the insistence of Tissaphernes, gave support first to Athens, then to Sparta, but in 407 BC, Darius' son Cyrus the Younger was appointed to replace Tissaphernes and aid was given entirely to Sparta which finally defeated Athens in 404 BC. In the same year, Darius fell ill and died in Babylon. His death gave an Egyptian rebel named Amyrtaeus the opportunity to throw off Persian control over Egypt. At his death bed, Darius' Babylonian wife Parysatis pleaded with him to have her second eldest son Cyrus (the Younger) crowned, but Darius refused. Queen Parysatis favoured Cyrus more than her eldest son Artaxerxes II. Plutarch relates (probably on the authority of Ctesias) that the displaced Tissaphernes came to the new king on his coronation day to warn him that his younger brother Cyrus (the Younger) was preparing to assassinate him during the ceremony. Artaxerxes had Cyrus arrested and would have had him executed if their mother Parysatis had not intervened. Cyrus was then sent back as Satrap of Lydia, where he prepared an armed rebellion. Cyrus assembled a large army, including a contingent of Ten Thousand Greek mercenaries, and made his way deeper into Persia. The army of Cyrus was stopped by the royal Persian army of Artaxerxes II at Cunaxa in 401 BC, where Cyrus was killed. The Ten Thousand Greek Mercenaries including Xenophon were now deep in Persian territory and were at risk of attack. So they searched for others to offer their services to but eventually had to return to Greece.[101][108]
Artaxerxes II was the longest reigning of the Achaemenid kings and it was during this 45-year period of relative peace and stability that many of the monuments of the era were constructed. Artaxerxes moved the capital back to Persepolis, which he greatly extended. Also, the summer capital at Ecbatana was lavishly extended with gilded columns and roof tiles of silver and copper.[109] The extraordinary innovation of the Zoroastrian shrines can also be dated to his reign, and it was probably during this period that Zoroastrianism spread from Armenia throughout Asia Minor and the Levant. The construction of temples, though serving a religious purpose, was not a purely selfless act, as they also served as an important source of income. From the Babylonian kings, the Achaemenids had taken over the concept of a mandatory temple tax, a one-tenth tithe which all inhabitants paid to the temple nearest to their land or another source of income.[110] A share of this income called the Quppu Sha Sharri, "king's chest"—an ingenious institution originally introduced by Nabonidus—was then turned over to the ruler. In retrospect, Artaxerxes is generally regarded as an amiable man who lacked the moral fiber to be a really successful ruler. However, six centuries later Ardeshir I, founder of the Sasanian Empire, would consider himself Artaxerxes' successor, a grand testimony to the importance of Artaxerxes to the Persian psyche.[citation needed]

 Persian Empire timeline including important events and territorial evolution – 550–323 BC
Artaxerxes II became involved in a war with Persia's erstwhile allies, the Spartans, who, under Agesilaus II, invaded Asia Minor. In order to redirect the Spartans' attention to Greek affairs, Artaxerxes II subsidized their enemies: in particular the Athenians, Thebans and Corinthians. These subsidies helped to engage the Spartans in what would become known as the Corinthian War. In 387 BC, Artaxerxes II betrayed his allies and came to an arrangement with Sparta, and in the Treaty of Antalcidas he forced his erstwhile allies to come to terms. This treaty restored control of the Greek cities of Ionia and Aeolis on the Anatolian coast to the Persians while giving Sparta dominance on the Greek mainland. In 385 BC he campaigned against the Cadusians. Although successful against the Greeks, Artaxerxes II had more trouble with the Egyptians, who had successfully revolted against him at the beginning of his reign. An attempt to reconquer Egypt in 373 BC was completely unsuccessful, but in his waning years the Persians did manage to defeat a joint Egyptian–Spartan effort to conquer Phoenicia. He quashed the Revolt of the Satraps in 372–362 BC. He is reported to have had a number of wives. His main wife was Stateira, until she was poisoned by Artaxerxes II's mother Parysatis in about 400 BC. Another chief wife was a Greek woman of Phocaea named Aspasia (not the same as the concubine of Pericles). Artaxerxes II is said to have had more than 115 sons from 350 wives.[111]
In 358 BC Artaxerxes II died and was succeeded by his son Artaxerxes III. In 355 BC, Artaxerxes III forced Athens to conclude a peace which required the city's forces to leave Asia Minor and to acknowledge the independence of its rebellious allies.[112] Artaxerxes started a campaign against the rebellious Cadusians, but he managed to appease both of the Cadusian kings. One individual who successfully emerged from this campaign was Darius Codomannus, who later occupied the Persian throne as Darius III.[citation needed]
Artaxerxes III then ordered the disbanding of all the satrapal armies of Asia Minor, as he felt that they could no longer guarantee peace in the west and was concerned that these armies equipped the western satraps with the means to revolt.[113] The order was however ignored by Artabazos II of Phrygia, who asked for the help of Athens in a rebellion against the king. Athens sent assistance to Sardis. Orontes of Mysia also supported Artabazos and the combined forces managed to defeat the forces sent by Artaxerxes III in 354 BC. However, in 353 BC, they were defeated by Artaxerxes III's army and were disbanded. Orontes was pardoned by the king, while Artabazos fled to the safety of the court of Philip II of Macedon. In around 351 BC, Artaxerxes embarked on a campaign to recover Egypt, which had revolted under his father, Artaxerxes II. At the same time, a rebellion had broken out in Asia Minor, which, being supported by Thebes, threatened to become serious. Levying a vast army, Artaxerxes marched into Egypt and engaged Nectanebo II. After a year of fighting the Egyptian Pharaoh, Nectanebo inflicted a crushing defeat on the Persians with the support of mercenaries led by the Greek generals Diophantus and Lamius.[114] Artaxerxes was compelled to retreat and postpone his plans to reconquer Egypt. Soon after this defeat, there were rebellions in Phoenicia, Asia Minor and Cyprus.[citation needed]

Darius vaseThe "Darius Vase" at the Achaeological Museum of Naples. c. 340–320 BC.Detail of Darius, with a label in Greek (ΔΑΡΕΙΟΣ, top right) giving his name.
In 343 BC, Artaxerxes committed responsibility for the suppression of the Cyprian rebels to Idrieus, prince of Caria, who employed 8,000 Greek mercenaries and forty triremes, commanded by Phocion the Athenian, and Evagoras, son of the elder Evagoras, the Cypriot monarch.[115][116] Idrieus succeeded in reducing Cyprus. Artaxerxes initiated a counter-offensive against Sidon by commanding Belesys, satrap of Syria, and Mazaeus, satrap of Cilicia, to invade the city and to keep the Phoenicians in check. Both satraps suffered crushing defeats at the hands of Tennes, the Sidonese king, who was aided by 40,000 Greek mercenaries sent to him by Nectanebo II and commanded by Mentor of Rhodes. As a result, the Persian forces were driven out of Phoenicia.[116]
After this, Artaxerxes personally led an army of 330,000 men against Sidon. Artaxerxes' army comprised 300,000-foot soldiers, 30,000 cavalry, 300 triremes, and 500 transports or provision ships. After gathering this army, he sought assistance from the Greeks. Though refused aid by Athens and Sparta, he succeeded in obtaining a thousand Theban heavy-armed hoplites under Lacrates, three thousand Argives under Nicostratus, and six thousand Æolians, Ionians, and Dorians from the Greek cities of Asia Minor. This Greek support was numerically small, amounting to no more than 10,000 men, but it formed, together with the Greek mercenaries from Egypt who went over to him afterward, the force on which he placed his chief reliance, and to which the ultimate success of his expedition was mainly due. The approach of Artaxerxes sufficiently weakened the resolution of Tennes that he endeavoured to purchase his own pardon by delivering up 100 principal citizens of Sidon into the hands of the Persian king and then admitting Artaxerxes within the defences of the town. Artaxerxes had the 100 citizens transfixed with javelins, and when 500 more came out as supplicants to seek his mercy, Artaxerxes consigned them to the same fate. Sidon was then burnt to the ground, either by Artaxerxes or by the Sidonian citizens. Forty thousand people died in the conflagration.[116] Artaxerxes sold the ruins at a high price to speculators, who calculated on reimbursing themselves by the treasures which they hoped to dig out from among the ashes.[117] Tennes was later put to death by Artaxerxes.[118] Artaxerxes later sent Jews who supported the revolt to Hyrcania on the south coast of the Caspian Sea.[119][120]

Second conquest of Egypt[edit]
 Relief showing Darius I offering lettuces to the Egyptian deity Amun-Ra Kamutef, Temple of Hibis
 The 24 countries subject to the Achaemenid Empire at the time of Darius, on the Egyptian statue of Darius I.
The reduction of Sidon was followed closely by the invasion of Egypt. In 343 BC, Artaxerxes, in addition to his 330,000 Persians, had now a force of 14,000 Greeks furnished by the Greek cities of Asia Minor: 4,000 under Mentor, consisting of the troops that he had brought to the aid of Tennes from Egypt; 3,000 sent by Argos; and 1,000 from Thebes. He divided these troops into three bodies, and placed at the head of each a Persian and a Greek. The Greek commanders were Lacrates of Thebes, Mentor of Rhodes and Nicostratus of Argos while the Persians were led by Rhossaces, Aristazanes, and Bagoas, the chief of the eunuchs. Nectanebo II resisted with an army of 100,000 of whom 20,000 were Greek mercenaries. Nectanebo II occupied the Nile and its various branches with his large navy.[citation needed]
The character of the country, intersected by numerous canals and full of strongly fortified towns, was in his favour and Nectanebo II might have been expected to offer a prolonged, if not even a successful, resistance. However, he lacked good generals, and, over-confident in his own powers of command, he was out-maneuvered by the Greek mercenary generals, and his forces were eventually defeated by the combined Persian armies. After his defeat, Nectanebo hastily fled to Memphis, leaving the fortified towns to be defended by their garrisons. These garrisons consisted of partly Greek and partly Egyptian troops; between whom jealousies and suspicions were easily sown by the Persian leaders. As a result, the Persians were able to rapidly reduce numerous towns across Lower Egypt and were advancing upon Memphis when Nectanebo decided to quit the country and flee southwards to Ethiopia.[116] The Persian army completely routed the Egyptians and occupied the Lower Delta of the Nile. Following Nectanebo fleeing to Ethiopia, all of Egypt submitted to Artaxerxes. The Jews in Egypt were sent either to Babylon or to the south coast of the Caspian Sea, the same location that the Jews of Phoenicia had earlier been sent.[citation needed]
After this victory over the Egyptians, Artaxerxes had the city walls destroyed, started a reign of terror, and set about looting all the temples. Persia gained a significant amount of wealth from this looting. Artaxerxes also raised high taxes and attempted to weaken Egypt enough that it could never revolt against Persia. For the 10 years that Persia controlled Egypt, believers in the native religion were persecuted and sacred books were stolen.[121] Before he returned to Persia, he appointed Pherendares as satrap of Egypt. With the wealth gained from his reconquering Egypt, Artaxerxes was able to amply reward his mercenaries. He then returned to his capital having successfully completed his invasion of Egypt.[citation needed]
After his success in Egypt, Artaxerxes returned to Persia and spent the next few years effectively quelling insurrections in various parts of the Empire so that a few years after his conquest of Egypt, the Persian Empire was firmly under his control. Egypt remained a part of the Persian Empire until Alexander the Great's conquest of Egypt.[citation needed]
After the conquest of Egypt, there were no more revolts or rebellions against Artaxerxes. Mentor and Bagoas, the two generals who had most distinguished themselves in the Egyptian campaign, were advanced to posts of the highest importance. Mentor, who was governor of the entire Asiatic seaboard, was successful in reducing to subjection many of the chiefs who during the recent troubles had rebelled against Persian rule. In the course of a few years, Mentor and his forces were able to bring the whole Asian Mediterranean coast into complete submission and dependence.[citation needed]
Bagoas went back to the Persian capital with Artaxerxes, where he took a leading role in the internal administration of the Empire and maintained tranquillity throughout the rest of the Empire. During the last six years of the reign of Artaxerxes III, the Persian Empire was governed by a vigorous and successful government.[116]
The Persian forces in Ionia and Lycia regained control of the Aegean and the Mediterranean Sea and took over much of Athens' former island empire. In response, Isocrates of Athens started giving speeches calling for a 'crusade against the barbarians' but there was not enough strength left in any of the Greek city-states to answer his call.[122]
Although there were no rebellions in the Persian Empire itself, the growing power and territory of Philip II of Macedon in Macedon (against which Demosthenes was in vain warning the Athenians) attracted the attention of Artaxerxes. In response, he ordered that Persian influence was to be used to check and constrain the rising power and influence of the Macedonian kingdom. In 340 BC, a Persian force was dispatched to assist the Thracian prince, Cersobleptes, to maintain his independence. Sufficient effective aid was given to the city of Perinthus that the numerous and well-appointed army with which Philip had commenced his siege of the city was compelled to give up the attempt.[116] By the last year of Artaxerxes' rule, Philip II already had plans in place for an invasion of the Persian Empire, which would crown his career, but the Greeks would not unite with him.[123]
In 338 BC Artaxerxes was poisoned by Bagoas with the assistance of a physician.[124]

Fall of the empire[edit]
 The Battle of Issus, between Alexander the Great on horseback to the left, and Darius III in the chariot to the right, represented in a Pompeii mosaic dated 1st century BC – Naples National Archaeological Museum
 Alexander's first victory over Darius, the Persian king depicted in medieval European style in the 15th century romance The History of Alexander's Battles
Artaxerxes III was succeeded by Artaxerxes IV Arses, who before he could act was also poisoned by Bagoas. Bagoas is further said to have killed not only all Arses' children, but many of the other princes of the land. Bagoas then placed Darius III, a nephew of Artaxerxes IV, on the throne. Darius III, previously Satrap of Armenia, personally forced Bagoas to swallow poison. In 334 BC, when Darius was just succeeding in subduing Egypt again, Alexander and his battle-hardened troops invaded Asia Minor.[citation needed]
Alexander the Great (Alexander III of Macedon) defeated the Persian armies at Granicus (334 BC), followed by Issus (333 BC), and lastly at Gaugamela (331 BC). Afterwards, he marched on Susa and Persepolis which surrendered in early 330 BC. From Persepolis, Alexander headed north to Pasargadae, where he visited the tomb of Cyrus, the burial of the man whom he had heard of from the Cyropedia.[citation needed]
In the ensuing chaos created by Alexander's invasion of Persia, Cyrus's tomb was broken into and most of its luxuries were looted. When Alexander reached the tomb, he was horrified by the manner in which it had been treated, and questioned the Magi, putting them on trial.[125][126] By some accounts, Alexander's decision to put the Magi on trial was more an attempt to undermine their influence and display his own power than a show of concern for Cyrus's tomb.[127] Regardless, Alexander the Great ordered Aristobulus to improve the tomb's condition and restore its interior, showing respect for Cyrus.[125] From there he headed to Ecbatana, where Darius III had sought refuge.[128]
Darius III was taken prisoner by Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman. As Alexander approached, Bessus had his men murder Darius III and then declared himself Darius' successor, as Artaxerxes V, before retreating into Central Asia leaving Darius' body in the road to delay Alexander, who brought it to Persepolis for an honourable funeral. Bessus would then create a coalition of his forces, in order to create an army to defend against Alexander. Before Bessus could fully unite with his confederates at the eastern part of the empire,[129] Alexander, fearing the danger of Bessus gaining control, found him, put him on trial in a Persian court under his control, and ordered his execution in a "cruel and barbarous manner."[130]
Alexander generally kept the original Achaemenid administrative structure, leading some scholars to dub him as "the last of the Achaemenids".[131] Upon Alexander's death in 323 BC, his empire was divided among his generals, the Diadochi, resulting in a number of smaller states. The largest of these, which held sway over the Iranian plateau, was the Seleucid Empire, ruled by Alexander's general Seleucus I Nicator. Native Iranian rule would be restored by the Parthians of northeastern Iran over the course of the 2nd century BC.[132]

Descendants in later Persian dynasties[edit]
"Frataraka" Governors of the Seleucid Empire
 Frataraka dynasty ruler Vadfradad I (Autophradates I). 3rd century BC. Istakhr (Persepolis) mint.[133]
Main article: Frataraka
Several later Persian rulers, forming the Frataraka dynasty, are known to have acted as representatives of the Seleucids in the region of Fārs.[134] They ruled from the end of the 3rd century BC to the beginning of the 2nd century BC, and Vahbarz or Vādfradād I obtained independence circa 150 BC, when Seleucid power waned in the areas of southwestern Persia and the Persian Gulf region.[134]

Kings of Persis, under the Parthian Empire
Main article: Kings of Persis
 Dārēv I (Darios I) used for the first time the title of mlk (King). 2nd century BC.
During an apparent transitional period, corresponding to the reigns of Vādfradād II and another uncertain king, no titles of authority appeared on the reverse of their coins. The earlier title prtrk' zy alhaya (Frataraka) had disappeared. Under Dārēv I however, the new title of mlk, or king, appeared, sometimes with the mention of prs (Persis), suggesting that the kings of Persis had become independent rulers.[135]
When the Parthian Arsacid king Mithridates I (c. 171–138 BC) took control of Persis, he left the Persian dynasts in office, known as the Kings of Persis, and they were allowed to continue minting coins with the title of mlk ("King").[134]

Sasanian Empire
Main article: Sasanian Empire
With the reign of Šābuhr, the son of Pāpag, the kingdom of Persis then became a part of the Sasanian Empire. Šābuhr's brother and successor, Ardaxšir (Artaxerxes) V, defeated the last legitimate Parthian king, Artabanos V in 224 AD, and was crowned at Ctesiphon as Ardaxšir I (Ardashir I), šāhanšāh ī Ērān, becoming the first king of the new Sasanian Empire.[135]

Kingdom of Pontus
The Achaemenid line would also be carried on through the Kingdom of Pontus, based in the Pontus region of northern Asia Minor. This Pontic Kingdom, a state of Persian origin,[136][137][138][139] may even have been directly related to Darius the Great and the Achaemenid dynasty.[139] It was founded by Mithridates I in 281 BC and lasted until its conquest by the Roman Republic in 63 BC. The kingdom grew to its largest extent under Mithridates VI the Great, who conquered Colchis, Cappadocia, Bithynia, the Greek colonies of the Tauric Chersonesos and for a brief time the Roman province of Asia. Thus, this Persian dynasty managed to survive and prosper in the Hellenistic world while the main Persian Empire had fallen.[citation needed] Despite Greek influence on the Kingdom of Pontus, Pontics continued to maintain their Achaemenid lineage.[139]

 Winged sphinx from the Palace of Darius in Susa, Louvre
Both the later dynasties of the Parthians and Sasanians would on occasion claim Achaemenid descent. Recently there has been some corroboration for the Parthian claim to Achaemenid ancestry via the possibility of an inherited disease (neurofibromatosis) demonstrated by the physical descriptions of rulers and from the evidence of familial disease on ancient coinage.[140]

Causes of decline[edit]
Part of the cause of the Empire's decline had been the heavy tax burden put upon the state, which eventually led to economic decline.[141][142] An estimate of the tribute imposed on the subject nations was up to U.S. $180M per year. This does not include the material goods and supplies that were supplied as taxes.[143] After the high overhead of government—the military, the bureaucracy, whatever the satraps could safely dip into the coffers for themselves—this money went into the royal treasury. According to Diodorus, at Persepolis, Alexander III found some 180,000 Attic talents of silver besides the additional treasure the Macedonians were carrying that already had been seized in Damascus by Parmenion.[144][better source needed] This amounted to U.S. $2.7B. On top of this, Darius III had taken 8,000 talents with him on his flight to the north.[143][better source needed] Alexander put this static hoard back into the economy, and upon his death, some 130,000 talents had been spent on the building of cities, dockyards, temples, and the payment of the troops, besides the ordinary government expenses.[145][better source needed] Additionally, one of the satraps, Harpalus, had made off to Greece with some 6,000 talents, which Athens used to rebuild its economy after seizing it during the struggles with the Corinthian League.[146][better source needed] Due to the flood of money from Alexander's hoard entering Greece, however, a disruption in the economy occurred, in agriculture, banking, rents, the great increase in mercenary soldiers that cash allowed the wealthy, and an increase in piracy.[147][better source needed]
Another factor contributing to the decline of the Empire, in the period following Xerxes, was its failure to ever mold the many subject nations into a whole; the creation of a national identity was never attempted.[148] This lack of cohesion eventually affected the efficiency of the military.[149]

Government[edit]
 Daric of Artaxerxes II
Cyrus the Great founded the empire as a multi-state empire, governed from four capital cities: Pasargadae, Babylon, Susa and Ecbatana. The Achaemenids allowed a certain amount of regional autonomy in the form of the satrapy system. A satrapy was an administrative unit, usually organized on a geographical basis. A 'satrap' (governor) was the governor who administered the region, a 'general' supervised military recruitment and ensured order, and a 'state secretary' kept the official records. The general and the state secretary reported directly to the satrap as well as the central government. At differing times, there were between 20 and 30 satrapies.[150]
Cyrus the Great created an organized army including the Immortals unit, consisting of 10,000 highly trained soldiers[151] Cyrus also formed an innovative postal system throughout the empire, based on several relay stations called Chapar Khaneh.[152]
Persepolis Administrative Archives provide many insights into the Achaemenid government system. Found at Persepolis in 1930s, they are mostly in ancient Elamite; the remains of more than 10,000 of these cuneiform documents have been uncovered. Aramaic is represented by about 1,000 or more original records.[153] Only one tablet in the Old Persian has been identified so far.[154]
Also many seals and seal impressions are found in these Persepolis archives. These documents represent administrative activity and flow of data in Persepolis over more than fifty consecutive years (509 to 457 BC).

Achaemenid coinage[edit]
Main article: Achaemenid coinage
The Persian daric was the first gold coin which, along with a similar silver coin, the siglos, introduced the bimetallic monetary standard of the Achaemenid Persian Empire which has continued till today.[155] This was accomplished by Darius the Great, who reinforced the empire and expanded Persepolis as a ceremonial capital;[156] he revolutionized the economy by placing it on the silver and gold coinage.

Tax districts[edit]
See also: Districts of the Achaemenid Empire
 Volume of annual tribute per district, in the Achaemenid Empire, according to Herodotus.[157][158][159]
Darius also introduced a regulated and sustainable tax system that was precisely tailored to each satrapy, based on their supposed productivity and their economic potential. For instance, Babylon was assessed for the highest amount and for a startling mixture of commodities – 1,000 silver talents, four months' supply of food for the army. India was clearly already fabled for its gold; Egypt was known for the wealth of its crops; it was to be the granary of the Persian Empire (as later of Rome's) and was required to provide 120,000 measures of grain in addition to 700 talents of silver. This was exclusively a tax levied on subject peoples.[160] There is evidence that conquered and/or rebellious enemies could be sold into slavery.[161] Alongside its other innovations in administration and taxation, the Achaemenids may have been the first government in the ancient Near East to register private slave sales and tax them using an early form of sales tax.[162]

 Achaemenid tax collector, calculating on an Abax or Abacus, according to the Darius Vase (340–320 BC).[163]
Other accomplishments of Darius' reign included the codification of the dāta (a universal legal system which would become the basis of later Iranian law), and the construction of a new capital at Persepolis.[164][165]

Transportation and communication[edit]
Under the Achaemenids, trade was extensive and there was an efficient infrastructure that facilitated the exchange of commodities in the far reaches of the empire. Tariffs on trade, along with agriculture and tribute, were major sources of revenue for the empire.[160][166]

 Letter from the Satrap of Bactria to the governor of Khulmi, concerning camel keepers, 353 BC
The satrapies were linked by a 2,500-kilometer highway, the most impressive stretch being the Royal Road from Susa to Sardis, built by command of Darius I. It featured stations and caravanserais at specific intervals. The relays of mounted couriers (the angarium) could reach the remotest of areas in fifteen days. Herodotus observes that "there is nothing in the world that travels faster than these Persian couriers. Neither snow, nor rain, nor heat, nor gloom of night stays these courageous couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds."[167] Despite the relative local independence afforded by the satrapy system, royal inspectors, the "eyes and ears of the king", toured the empire and reported on local conditions.[citation needed]
Another highway of commerce was the Great Khorasan Road, an informal mercantile route that originated in the fertile lowlands of Mesopotamia and snaked through the Zagros highlands, through the Iranian plateau and Afghanistan into the Central Asian regions of Samarkand, Merv and Ferghana, allowing for the construction of frontier cities like Cyropolis. Following Alexander's conquests, this highway allowed for the spread of cultural syncretic fusions like Greco-Buddhism into Central Asia and China, as well as empires like the Kushan, Indo-Greek and Parthian to profit from trade between East and West. This route was greatly rehabilitated and formalized during the Abbasid Caliphate, during which it developed into a major component of the famed Silk Road.[168]

Military[edit]
Despite its humble origins in Persis, the empire reached an enormous size under the leadership of Cyrus the Great. Cyrus created a multi-state empire where he allowed regional rulers, called the "satrap", to rule as his proxy over a certain designated area of his empire called the satrapy. The basic rule of governance was based upon loyalty and obedience of each satrapy to the central power, or the king, and compliance with tax laws.[169] Due to the ethno-cultural diversity of the subject nations under the rule of Persia, its enormous geographic size, and the constant struggle for power by regional competitors,[19] the creation of a professional army was necessary for both maintenance of the peace and to enforce the authority of the king in cases of rebellion and foreign threat.[20][151] Cyrus managed to create a strong land army, using it to advance in his campaigns in Babylonia, Lydia, and Asia Minor, which after his death was used by his son Cambyses II, in Egypt against Psamtik III. Cyrus would die battling a local Iranian insurgency in the empire, before he could have a chance to develop a naval force.[170] That task would fall to Darius the Great, who would officially give Persians their own royal navy to allow them to engage their enemies on multiple seas of this vast empire, from the Black Sea and the Aegean Sea, to the Persian Gulf, Ionian Sea and the Mediterranean Sea.[citation needed]

Military composition[edit]
 Relief of throne-bearing soldiers in their native clothing at the tomb of Xerxes I, demonstrating the satrapies under his rule.
The empire's great armies were, like the empire itself, very diverse, having:[g] Persians,[172] Macedonians,[86] European Thracians, Paeonians, Medes, Achaean Greeks, Cissians, Hyrcanians,[173] Assyrians, Chaldeans,[174] Bactrians, Sacae,[175] Arians, Parthians, Caucasian Albanians,[176] Chorasmians, Sogdians, Gandarians, Dadicae,[177] Caspians, Sarangae, Pactyes,[178] Utians, Mycians, Phoenicians, Judeans, Egyptians,[179] Cyprians,[180] Cilicians, Pamphylians, Lycians, Dorians of Asia, Carians, Ionians, Aegean islanders, Aeolians, Greeks from Pontus, Paricanians,[181] Arabians, Ethiopians of Africa,[182] Ethiopians of Baluchistan,[183] Libyans,[184] Paphlagonians, Ligyes, Matieni, Mariandyni, Cappadocians,[185] Phrygians, Armenians,[186] Lydians, Mysians,[187] Asian Thracians,[188] Lasonii, Milyae,[189] Moschi, Tibareni, Macrones, Mossynoeci,[190] Mares, Colchians, Alarodians, Saspirians,[191] Red Sea islanders,[192] Sagartians,[193] Indians,[194] Eordi, Bottiaei, Chalcidians, Brygians, Pierians, Perrhaebi, Enienes, Dolopes, and Magnesians.[citation needed]

Infantry[edit]
 Achaemenid king killing a Greek hoplite. c. 500 BC–475 BC, at the time of Xerxes I. Metropolitan Museum of Art.
 Persian soldiers (left) fighting against Scythians. Cylinder seal impression.[195]
The Achaemenid infantry consisted of three groups: the Immortals, the Sparabara, and the Takabara, though in the later years of the Achaemenid Empire, a fourth group, the Cardaces, were introduced.[citation needed]
The Immortals were described by Herodotus as being heavy infantry, led by Hydarnes, that were kept constantly at a strength of exactly 10,000 men. He claimed that the unit's name stemmed from the custom that every killed, seriously wounded, or sick member was immediately replaced with a new one, maintaining the numbers and cohesion of the unit.[196] They had wicker shields, short spears, swords or large daggers, bow and arrow. Underneath their robes they wore scale armour coats. The spear counterbalances of the common soldiery were of silver; to differentiate commanding ranks, the officers' spear butt-spikes were golden.[196] Surviving Achaemenid coloured glazed bricks and carved reliefs represent the Immortals as wearing elaborate robes, hoop earrings and gold jewellery, though these garments and accessories were most likely worn only for ceremonial occasions.[197]

 Color reconstruction of Achaemenid infantry on the Alexander Sarcophagus (end of 4th century BC).
The Sparabara were usually the first to engage in hand-to-hand combat with the enemy. Although not much is known about them today, it is believed that they were the backbone of the Persian army who formed a shield wall and used their two-metre-long spears to protect more vulnerable troops such as archers from the enemy. The Sparabara were taken from the full members of Persian society, were trained from childhood to be soldiers and when not called out to fight on campaigns in distant lands they practised hunting on the vast plains of Persia. However, when all was quiet and the Pax Persica held true, the Sparabara returned to normal life farming the land and grazing their herds. Because of this, they lacked true professional quality on the battlefield, yet they were well trained and courageous to the point of holding the line in most situations long enough for a counter-attack. They were armoured with quilted linen and carried large rectangular wicker shields as a form of light manoeuvrable defence. This, however, left them at a severe disadvantage against heavily armoured opponents such as the hoplite, and their two-metre-long spear was not able to give the Sparabara ample range to plausibly engage a trained phalanx. The wicker shields were able to effectively stop arrows but not strong enough to protect the soldier from spears. However, the Sparabara could deal with most other infantry, including trained units from the East.[citation needed]
The Achaemenids relied heavily on archery. Major contributing nations were the Scythians, Medes, Persians, and the Elamites. The composite bow was used by the Persians and Medes, who adopted it from the Scythians and transmitted it to other nations, including the Greeks.[198] The socketed, three-bladed (also known as trilobate or Scythian) arrowheads made of copper alloy was the arrowhead variant normally used by the Achaemenid army. This variant required more expertise and precision to build.[199][200][failed verification]
The Takabara were a rare unit who were a tough type of peltasts.[201] They tended to fight with their own native weapons which would have included a crescent-shaped light wickerwork shield and axes as well as light linen cloth and leather. The Takabara were recruited from territories that incorporated modern Iran.

Cavalry[edit]
 Seal of Darius the Great hunting in a chariot, reading "I am Darius, the Great King" in Old Persian (𐎠𐎭𐎶𐏐𐎭𐎠𐎼𐎹𐎺𐎢𐏁𐎴 𐏋, "adam Dārayavaʰuš xšāyaθiya"), as well as in Elamite and Babylonian. The word "great" only appears in Babylonian. British Museum.[202][203]
The armoured Persian horsemen and their death dealing chariots were invincible. No man dared face them— Herodotus
The Persian cavalry was crucial for conquering nations and maintained its importance in the Achaemenid army to the last days of the Achaemenid Empire. The cavalry were separated into four groups. The chariot archers, horse cavalry, the camel cavalry, and the war elephants.[citation needed]

 Achaemenid cavalryman in the satrapy of Hellespontine Phrygia, Altıkulaç Sarcophagus, early 4th century BC.
In the later years of the Achaemenid Empire, the chariot archer had become merely a ceremonial part of the Persian army, yet in the early years of the Empire, their use was widespread. The chariot archers were armed with spears, bows, arrows, swords, and scale armour. The horses were also suited with scale armour similar to scale armour of the Sassanian cataphracts. The chariots would contain imperial symbols and decorations.

 Armoured cavalry: Achaemenid Dynast of Hellespontine Phrygia attacking a Greek psiloi, Altıkulaç Sarcophagus, early 4th century BC.
The horses used by the Achaemenids for cavalry were often suited with scale armour, like most cavalry units. The riders often had the same armour as Infantry units, wicker shields, short spears, swords or large daggers, bow and arrow, and scale armour coats. The camel cavalry was different, because the camels and sometimes the riders, were provided little protection against enemies, yet when they were offered protection, they would have spears, swords, bow, arrow, and scale armour. The camel cavalry was first introduced into the Persian army by Cyrus the Great, at the Battle of Thymbra. The elephant was most likely introduced into the Persian army by Darius I after his conquest of the Indus Valley. They may have been used in Greek campaigns by Darius and Xerxes I, but Greek accounts only mention 15 of them being used at the Battle of Gaugamela.[citation needed]

Navy[edit]
Main article: Achaemenid navy
Since its foundation by Cyrus, the Persian empire had been primarily a land empire with a strong army, but void of any actual naval forces. By the 5th century BC, this was to change, as the empire came across Greek and Egyptian forces, each with their own maritime traditions and capabilities. Darius the Great (Darius I) was the first Achaemenid king to invest in a Persian fleet.[204] Even by then no true "imperial navy" had existed either in Greece or Egypt. Persia would become the first empire, under Darius, to inaugurate and deploy the first regular imperial navy.[204] Despite this achievement, the personnel for the imperial navy would not come from Iran, but were often Phoenicians (mostly from Sidon), Egyptians and Greeks chosen by Darius the Great to operate the empire's combat vessels.[204]

 Reconstitution of Persian landing ships at the Battle of Marathon.
At first the ships were built in Sidon by the Phoenicians; the first Achaemenid ships measured about 40 meters in length and 6 meters in width, able to transport up to 300 Persian troops at any one trip. Soon, other states of the empire were constructing their own ships, each incorporating slight local preferences. The ships eventually found their way to the Persian Gulf[204] and Persian naval forces laid the foundation for a strong Persian maritime presence there. Persians also had ships often of 100 to 200 capacity patrolling the empire's various rivers including the Karun, Tigris and Nile in the west, as well as the Indus.[204]

 Greek ships against Achaemenid ships at the Battle of Salamis.
The Achaemenid navy established bases located along the Karun, and in Bahrain, Oman, and Yemen. The Persian fleet was not only used for peace-keeping purposes along the Karun but also opened the door to trade with India via the Persian Gulf.[204] Darius's navy was in many ways a world power at the time, but it would be Artaxerxes II who in the summer of 397 BC would build a formidable navy, as part of a rearmament which would lead to his decisive victory at Knidos in 394 BC, re-establishing Achaemenid power in Ionia. Artaxerxes II would also utilize his navy to later on quell a rebellion in Egypt.[205]
The construction material of choice was wood, but some armoured Achaemenid ships had metallic blades on the front, often meant to slice enemy ships using the ship's momentum. Naval ships were also equipped with hooks on the side to grab enemy ships, or to negotiate their position. The ships were propelled by sails or manpower. The ships the Persians created were unique. As far as maritime engagement, the ships were equipped with two mangonels that would launch projectiles such as stones, or flammable substances.[204]
Xenophon describes his eyewitness account of a massive military bridge created by joining 37 Persian ships across the Tigris. The Persians utilized each boat's buoyancy, in order to support a connected bridge above which supply could be transferred.[204] Herodotus also gives many accounts of Persians utilizing ships to build bridges.[206][207]
Darius the Great, in an attempt to subdue the Scythian horsemen north of the Black Sea, crossed over at the Bosphorus, using an enormous bridge made by connecting Achaemenid boats, then marched up to the Danube, crossing it by means of a second boat bridge.[208] The bridge over the Bosphorus essentially connected the nearest tip of Asia to Europe, encompassing at least some 1000 meters of open water if not more. Herodotus describes the spectacle, and calls it the "bridge of Darius":[209]

"Strait called Bosphorus, across which the bridge of Darius had been thrown, is hundred and twenty furlongs in length, reaching from the Euxine, to the Propontis. The Propontis is five hundred furlongs across and fourteen hundred long. Its waters flow into the Hellespont, the length of which is four hundred furlongs ..."
Years later, a similar boat bridge would be constructed by Xerxes the Great (Xerxes I), in his invasion of Greece. Although the Persians failed to capture the Greek city-states completely, the tradition of maritime involvement was carried down by the Persian kings, most notably Artaxerxes II. Years later, when Alexander invaded Persia and during his advancement into India, he took a page from the Persian art of war, by having Hephaestion and Perdiccas construct a similar boat-bridge at the Indus river, in India in the spring of 327 BC.[210]

Culture[edit]
Languages[edit]
Gold foundation tablets of Darius I for the Apadana Palace, in their original stone box. The Apadana coin hoard had been deposited underneath c. 510 BC.One of the two gold deposition plates. Two more were in silver. They all had the same trilingual inscription (DPh inscription).[211]
During the reign of Cyrus and Darius, and as long as the seat of government was still at Susa in Elam, the language of the chancellery was Elamite. This is primarily attested in the Persepolis fortification and treasury tablets that reveal details of the day-to-day functioning of the empire.[212] In the grand rock-face inscriptions of the kings, the Elamite texts are always accompanied by Akkadian (Babylonian dialect) and Old Persian inscriptions, and it appears that in these cases, the Elamite texts are translations of the Old Persian ones. It is then likely that although Elamite was used by the capital government in Susa, it was not a standardized language of government everywhere in the empire. The use of Elamite is not attested after 458 BC.[213]

 A section of the Old Persian part of the trilingual Behistun inscription. Other versions are in Babylonian and Elamite.
 A copy of the Behistun inscription in Aramaic on a papyrus. Aramaic was the lingua franca of the empire.
Following the conquest of Mesopotamia, the Aramaic language (as used in that territory) was adopted as a "vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed "Official Aramaic" or "Imperial Aramaic", can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the Achaemenids in holding their far-flung empire together for as long as they did."[214] In 1955, Richard Frye questioned the classification of Imperial Aramaic as an "official language", noting that no surviving edict expressly and unambiguously accorded that status to any particular language.[215] Frye reclassifies Imperial Aramaic as the lingua franca of the Achaemenid territories, suggesting then that the Achaemenid-era use of Aramaic was more pervasive than generally thought. Many centuries after the fall of the empire, Aramaic script and—as ideograms—Aramaic vocabulary would survive as the essential characteristics of the Pahlavi writing system.[216]
Although Old Persian also appears on some seals and art objects, that language is attested primarily in the Achaemenid inscriptions of Western Iran, suggesting then that Old Persian was the common language of that region. However, by the reign of Artaxerxes II, the grammar and orthography of the inscriptions was so "far from perfect"[217] that it has been suggested that the scribes who composed those texts had already largely forgotten the language, and had to rely on older inscriptions, which they to a great extent reproduced verbatim.[218]
When the occasion demanded, Achaemenid administrative correspondence was conducted in Greek, making it a widely used bureaucratic language.[8] Even though the Achaemenids had extensive contacts with the Greeks and vice versa, and had conquered many of the Greek-speaking areas both in Europe and Asia Minor during different periods of the empire, the native Old Iranian sources provide no indication of Greek linguistic evidence.[8] However, there is plenty of evidence (in addition to the accounts of Herodotus) that Greeks, apart from being deployed and employed in the core regions of the empire, also evidently lived and worked in the heartland of the Achaemenid Empire, namely Iran.[8] For example, Greeks were part of the various ethnicities that constructed Darius' palace in Susa, apart from the Greek inscriptions found nearby there, and one short Persepolis tablet written in Greek.[8]

Customs[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (October 2015)
 An Achaemenid rhyton, or drinking vessel
Herodotus mentions that the Persians were invited to great birthday feasts (Herodotus, Histories 8), which would be followed by many desserts, a treat which they reproached the Greeks for omitting from their meals. He also observed that the Persians drank wine in large quantities and used it even for counsel, deliberating on important affairs when drunk, and deciding the next day, when sober, whether to act on the decision or set it aside.[219] Bowing to superiors or royalty was one of the many Persian customs adopted by Alexander the Great.[citation needed]

Religion[edit]
Mithra[220] was the most widely worshipped and followed deity[221] in the Achaemenid Empire.[222] His temples and symbols were the most widespread,[223] most people bore names related to him[224] and most festivals were dedicated to him.[225] [226] Religious toleration has been described as a "remarkable feature" of the Achaemenid Empire.[227]
The Old Testament reports that king Cyrus the Great released the Jews from their Babylonian captivity in 539–530 BC, and permitted them to return to their homeland.[228] Cyrus the Great assisted in the restoration of the sacred places of various cities.[227]
It was during the Achaemenid period that Zoroastrianism reached South-Western Iran, where it came to be accepted by the rulers and through them became a defining element of Persian culture. The religion was not only accompanied by a formalization of the concepts and divinities of the traditional Iranian pantheon but also introduced several novel ideas, including that of free will.[229][230] Under the patronage of the Achaemenid kings, and by the 5th century BC as the de facto religion of the state, Zoroastrianism reached all corners of the empire.

 Bas-relief of Farvahar at Persepolis
During the reign of Artaxerxes I and Darius II, Herodotus wrote "[the Persians] have no images of the gods, no temples nor altars, and consider the use of them a sign of folly. This comes, I think, from their not believing the gods to have the same nature with men, as the Greeks imagine."[231] He claims the Persians offer sacrifice to: "the sun and moon, to the earth, to fire, to water, and to the winds. These are the only gods whose worship has come down to them from ancient times. At a later period, they began the worship of Urania, which they borrowed from the Arabians and Assyrians. Mylitta is the name by which the Assyrians know this goddess, to whom the Persians referred as Anahita."[231] (The original name here is Mithra, which has since been explained to be a confusion of Anahita with Mithra, understandable since they were commonly worshipped together in one temple).[citation needed]
The Babylonian scholar-priest Berosus records—although writing over seventy years after the reign of Artaxerxes II Mnemon— that the emperor had been the first to make cult statues of divinities and have them placed in temples in many of the major cities of the empire.[232] Berosus also substantiates Herodotus when he says the Persians knew of no images of gods until Artaxerxes II erected those images. On the means of sacrifice, Herodotus adds "they raise no altar, light no fire, pour no libations."[233] This sentence has been interpreted to identify a critical (but later) accretion to Zoroastrianism. An altar with a wood-burning fire and the Yasna service at which libations are poured are all clearly identifiable with modern Zoroastrianism, but apparently, were practices that had not yet developed in the mid-5th century. Boyce also assigns that development to the reign of Artaxerxes II (4th century BC), as an orthodox response to the innovation of the shrine cults.[citation needed]
Herodotus also observed that "no prayer or offering can be made without a magus present"[233] but this should not be confused with what is today understood by the term magus, that is a magupat (modern Persian: mobed), a Zoroastrian priest. Nor does Herodotus' description of the term as one of the tribes or castes of the Medes necessarily imply that these magi were Medians. They simply were a hereditary priesthood to be found all over Western Iran and although (originally) not associated with any one specific religion, they were traditionally responsible for all ritual and religious services. Although the unequivocal identification of the magus with Zoroastrianism came later (Sassanid era, 3rd–7th century AD), it is from Herodotus' magus of the mid-5th century that Zoroastrianism was subject to doctrinal modifications that are today considered to be revocations of the original teachings of the prophet. Also, many of the ritual practices described in the Avesta's Vendidad (such as exposure of the dead) were already practised by the magu of Herodotus' time.[citation needed]

Women in the Achaemenid Empire[edit]
The position of women in the Achaemenid Empire differed depending on which culture they belonged to and therefore varied depending on the region. The position of Persian women in actual Persia has traditionally been described from mythological Biblical references and the sometimes biased Ancient Greek sources, neither of them fully reliable as sources, but the most reliable reference are the archeological Persepolis Fortification Tablets (PFT), which describes women in connection to the royal court in Persepolis, from royal women to female laborers who were recipients of food rations at Persepolis.[234]
The hierarchy of the royal women at the Persian court was ranked with the king's mother first, followed by the queen and the king's daughters, the king's concubines, and the other women of the royal palace.[234]  The king normally married a female member of the royal family or a Persian noblewoman related to a satrap or another important Persian man; it was permitted for members of the royal family to marry relatives, but there is no evidence for marriage between closer family members than half-siblings.[234]  The king's concubines were often either slaves, sometimes prisoners of war, or foreign princesses, whom the king did not marry because they were foreigners, and whose children did not have the right to inherit the throne.[234]
Greek sources accuse the king of having hundreds of concubines secluded in a harem, but there is no archeological evidence supporting the existence of a harem, or the seclusion of women from contact with men, at the Persian court.[234]  The royal women joined the king at breakfast and dinner and accompanied him on his journeys.[234]  They may have participated in the royal hunt, as well as during the royal banquets; Herodotus relates how the Persian envoys at the Macedonian court demanded the presence of women during a banquet because it was the custom for women to participate in the banquets in their own country.[234]  The queen may have attended the king's audience, and archeological evidence shows that she gave her own audiences, at least for female supplicants.[234]  Royal women and noblewomen at court could furthermore travel on their own, accompanied by both male and female staff, own and manage their own fortune, land, and business.[234]  Depictions of Persian women show them with long dresses and veils which did not cover their faces nor their hair, only flowing down over their neck at the back of the head as an ornament.[234]
Royal and aristocratic Achaemenid women were given an education in subjects that did not appear compatible with seclusions, such as horsemanship and archery.[235][236]   Royal and aristocratic women held and managed vast estates and workshops and employed large numbers of servants and professional laborers.[237] Royal and aristocratic women do not seem to have lived in seclusion from men, since it is known that they appeared in public[238] and traveled with their husbands,[238] participated in hunting[239] and in feasts:[240]  at least the chief wife of a royal or aristocratic man did not live in seclusion, as it is clearly stated that wives customarily accompanied their husbands at dinner banquets, although they left the banquet when the "women entertainers" came in and the men began "merrymaking".[241]
No woman ever ruled the Achaemenid Empire, as monarch or as regent, but some queens consort are known to have had influence over the affairs of state, notably Atossa and Parysatis.
There are no evidence of any women being employed as an official in the administration or within religious service, however, there are plenty of archeological evidence of women being employed as free labourers in Persepolis, where they worked alongside men.[234]  Women could be employed as the leaders of their workforce, known by the title arraššara pašabena, which were then given a higher salary than the male workers of their workforce;[234] and while female laborers were given less than men, qualified workers within the crafts were given equal pay regardless of their sex.[234]

Art and architecture[edit]
Main article: Achaemenid architecture
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (October 2015)
Achaemenid architecture included large cities, temples, palaces, and mausoleums such as the tomb of Cyrus the Great. The quintessential feature of Persian architecture was its eclectic nature with elements of Median, Assyrian, and Asiatic Greek all incorporated, yet maintaining a unique Persian identity seen in the finished products.[242] Its influence pervades the regions ruled by the Achaemenids, from the Mediterranean shores to India, especially with its emphasis on monumental stone-cut design and gardens subdivided by water-courses.[243]
Achaemenid art includes frieze reliefs, metalwork such as the Oxus Treasure, decoration of palaces, glazed brick masonry, fine craftsmanship (masonry, carpentry, etc.), and gardening. Although the Persians took artists, with their styles and techniques, from all corners of their empire, they produced not simply a combination of styles, but a synthesis of a new unique Persian style.[244] Cyrus the Great in fact had an extensive ancient Iranian heritage behind him; the rich Achaemenid gold work, which inscriptions suggest may have been a specialty of the Medes, was for instance in the tradition of the delicate metalwork found in Iron Age II times at Hasanlu and still earlier at Marlik.[citation needed]
One of the most remarkable examples of both Achaemenid architecture and art is the grand palace of Persepolis, and its detailed workmanship, coupled with its grand scale. In describing the construction of his palace at Susa, Darius the Great records that:

Yaka timber was brought from Gandara and from Carmania. The gold was brought from Sardis and from Bactria ... the precious stone lapis-lazuli and carnelian ... was brought from Sogdiana. The turquoise from Chorasmia, the silver and ebony from Egypt, the ornamentation from Ionia, the ivory from Ethiopia and from Sindh and from Arachosia. The stone-cutters who wrought the stone were Ionians and Sardians. The goldsmiths were Medes and Egyptians. The men who wrought the wood were Sardinians and Egyptians. The men who wrought the baked brick were Babylonians. The men who adorned the wall, those were Medes and Egyptians.[citation needed]
This was imperial art on a scale the world had not seen before. Materials and artists were drawn from all corners of the empire, and thus tastes, styles, and motifs became mixed together in an eclectic art and architecture that in itself mirrored the Persian empire.[citation needed]






Reconstruction of the Palace of Darius at Susa. The palace served as a model for Persepolis.






Lion on a decorative panel from Darius I the Great's palace, Louvre






Iconic relief of lion and bull fighting, Apadana of Persepolis






Achaemenid golden bowl with lioness imagery of Mazandaran, National Museum of Iran






The ruins of Persepolis




Tombs[edit]
 Tomb of Artaxerxes III in Persepolis
Many Achaemenid rulers built tombs for themselves. The most famous, Naqsh-e Rustam, is an ancient necropolis located about 12 km north-west of Persepolis, with the tombs of four of the kings of the dynasty carved in this mountain: Darius I, Xerxes I, Artaxerxes I and Darius II. Other kings constructed their own tombs elsewhere. Artaxerxes II and Artaxerxes III preferred to carve their tombs beside their spring capital Persepolis, the left tomb belonging to Artaxerxes II and the right tomb belonging to Artaxerxes III, the last Achaemenid king to have a tomb. The tomb of the founder of the Achaemenid dynasty, Cyrus the Great, was built in Pasargadae (now a world heritage site).[citation needed]

Legacy[edit]
 The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, one of the Seven wonders of the ancient world, was built by Greek architects for the local Persian satrap of Caria, Mausolus (Scale model)
The Achaemenid Empire left a lasting impression on the heritage and cultural identity of Asia, Europe, and the Middle East, and influenced the development and structure of future empires. In fact, the Greeks, and later on the Romans, adopted the best features of the Persian method of governing an empire.[245] The Persian model of governance was particularly formative in the expansion and maintenance of the Abbasid Caliphate, whose rule is widely considered the period of the 'Islamic Golden Age'. Like the ancient Persians, the Abbasid dynasty centered their vast empire in Mesopotamia (at the newly founded cities of Baghdad and Samarra, close to the historical site of Babylon), derived much of their support from Persian aristocracy and heavily incorporated the Persian language and architecture into Islamic culture.[246]
The Achaemenid Empire is noted in Western history as the antagonist of the Greek city-states during the Greco-Persian Wars and for the emancipation of the Jewish exiles in Babylon. The historical mark of the empire went far beyond its territorial and military influences and included cultural, social, technological and religious influences as well. For example, many Athenians adopted Achaemenid customs in their daily lives in a reciprocal cultural exchange,[247] some being employed by or allied to the Persian kings. The impact of Cyrus's edict is mentioned in Judeo-Christian texts, and the empire was instrumental in the spread of Zoroastrianism as far east as China. The empire also set the tone for the politics, heritage and history of Iran (also known as Persia).[248]
Historian Arnold Toynbee regarded Abbasid society as a "reintegration" or "reincarnation" of Achaemenid society, as the synthesis of Persian, Turkic and Islamic modes of governance and knowledge allowed for the spread of Persianate culture over a wide swath of Eurasia through the Turkic-origin Seljuq, Ottoman, Safavid and Mughal empires.[246] Historian Bernard Lewis wrote that

The work of Iranians can be seen in every field of cultural endeavor, including Arabic poetry, to which poets of Iranian origin composing their poems in Arabic made a very significant contribution. In a sense, Iranian Islam is a second advent of Islam itself, a new Islam sometimes referred to as Islam-i-Ajam. It was this Persian Islam, rather than the original Arab Islam, that was brought to new areas and new peoples: to the Turks, first in Central Asia and then in the Middle East in the country which came to be called Turkey, and of course to India. The Ottoman Turks brought a form of Iranian civilization to the walls of Vienna. [...] By the time of the great Mongol invasions of the thirteenth century, Iranian Islam had become not only an important component; it had become a dominant element in Islam itself, and for several centuries the main centers of the Islamic power and civilization were in countries that were, if not Iranian, at least marked by Iranian civilization ... The major centers of Islam in the late medieval and early modern periods, the centers of both political and cultural power, such as India, Central Asia, Iran, Turkey, were all part of this Iranian civilization.
Georg W. F. Hegel in his work The Philosophy of History introduces the Persian Empire as the "first empire that passed away" and its people as the "first historical people" in history. According to his account;

The Persian Empire is an empire in the modern sense—like that which existed in Germany, and the great imperial realm under the sway of Napoleon; for we find it consisting of a number of states, which are indeed dependent, but which have retained their own individuality, their manners, and laws. The general enactments, binding upon all, did not infringe upon their political and social idiosyncrasies, but even protected and maintained them; so that each of the nations that constitute the whole, had its own form of constitution. As light illuminates everything—imparting to each object a peculiar vitality—so the Persian Empire extends over a multitude of nations, and leaves to each one its particular character. Some have even kings of their own; each one its distinct language, arms, way of life and customs. All this diversity coexists harmoniously under the impartial dominion of Light ... a combination of peoples—leaving each of them free. Thereby, a stop is put to that barbarism and ferocity with which the nations had been wont to carry on their destructive feuds.[249]
Will Durant, the American historian and philosopher, during one of his speeches, "Persia in the History of Civilization", as an address before the Iran–America Society in Tehran on 21 April 1948, stated:

For thousands of years Persians have been creating beauty. Sixteen centuries before Christ there went from these regions or near it ... You have been here a kind of watershed of civilization, pouring your blood and thought and art and religion eastward and westward into the world ... I need not rehearse for you again the achievements of your Achaemenid period. Then for the first time in known history an empire almost as extensive as the United States received an orderly government, a competence of administration, a web of swift communications, a security of movement by men and goods on majestic roads, equalled before our time only by the zenith of Imperial Rome.[250]
Achaemenid kings and rulers[edit]
Unattested[edit]
There were four unattested kings who ruled as satraps to the Neo-Assyrian Empire and the Median Empire.



Name

Image

Comments

Dates


Achaemenes



First ruler of the Achaemenid kingdom

705 BC


Teispes



Son of Achaemenes

640 BC


Cyrus I



Son of Teispes

580 BC


Cambyses I



Son of Cyrus I and father of Cyrus II

550 BC

Attested[edit]

There were 13 attested kings during the 220 years of the Achaemenid Empire's existence. The reign of Artaxerxes II was the longest, lasting 47 years.



Name

Image

Comments

Dates


Cyrus the Great



Founder of the empire; King of the "four corners of the world"

560–530 BC


Cambyses II



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

530–522 BC


Bardiya/Smerdis



King of Persia, allegedly an impostor

522 BC


Darius I



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

522–486 BC


Xerxes I



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

486–465 BC


Artaxerxes I



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

465–424 BC


Xerxes II



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

424 BC (45 days)


Sogdianus



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

424–423 BC


Darius II



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

423–405 BC


Artaxerxes II



King of Persia

405–358 BC


Artaxerxes III



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt (Regained control over Egypt after 50 years)

358–338 BC


Artaxerxes IV



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt

338–336 BC


Darius III



King of Persia in addition to Pharaoh of Egypt; last ruler of the empire

336–330 BC

Gallery[edit]




Ruins of Throne Hall, Persepolis






Apadana Hall, Persian and Median soldiers at Persepolis






Lateral view of tomb of Cambyses II, Pasargadae, Iran






Plaque with horned lion-griffins. The Metropolitan Museum of Art




See also[edit]
Part of a series on the

History of Iran

Ancient period BC Prehistory of Iran Ancient Times–4000 Kura–Araxes culture 3400–2000 Proto-Elamite 3200–2700 Jiroft culture c. 3100 – c. 2200 Elam 2700–539 Akkadian Empire 2400–2150 Lullubi culture c. 2300-700 Kassites c. 1500 – c. 1155 Neo-Assyrian Empire 911–609 Urartu 860–590 Mannaeans 850–616

Imperial period Median Empire 678–550 BC Scythian Kingdom 652–625 BC Anshanite Kingdom 635 BC–550 BC Neo-Babylonian Empire 626 BC–539 BC Achaemenid Empire 550 BC–330 BC Kingdom of Armenia 331 BC–428 AD Atropatene c. 323 BC–226 AD Kingdom of Cappadocia 320s BC–17 AD Seleucid Empire 312 BC–63 BC Kingdom of Pontus 281 BC–62 BC Fratarakas 3rd-century BC–132 BC Parthian Empire 247 BC–224 AD Elymais 147 BC–224 AD Characene 141 BC–222 AD Kings of Persis 132 BC–224 AD Indo-Parthian Kingdom 19 AD–224/5 Paratarajas 125–300 Sasanian Empire 224–651 Zarmihrids 6th century–785 Qarinvandids 550s–11th century

Medieval period Rashidun Caliphate 632-661 Umayyad Caliphate 661–750 Abbasid Caliphate 750–1258 Dabuyids 642–760 Bavandids 651–1349 Masmughans of Damavand 651–760 Baduspanids 665–1598 Justanids 791 – 11th century Alid dynasties 864 – 14th century Tahirid dynasty 821–873 Samanid Empire 819–999 Saffarid dynasty 861–1003 Ghurid dynasty pre-879 – 1215 Sajid dynasty 889–929 Sallarid dynasty 919–1062 Ziyarid dynasty 930–1090 Ilyasids 932–968 Buyid dynasty 934–1062 Rawadid dynasty 955–1070 Hasanwayhids 959–1095 Ghaznavid dynasty 977–1186 Annazids 990/1–1117 Kakuyids 1008–1141 Nasrid dynasty 1029–1236 Shabankara 1030–1355 Seljuk Empire 1037–1194 Khwarazmian dynasty 1077–1231 Eldiguzids 1135–1225 Atabegs of Yazd 1141–1319 Salghurids 1148–1282 Hazaraspids 1155–1424 Pishkinid dynasty 1155–1231 Khorshidi dynasty 1184-1597 Qutlugh-Khanids 1223-1306 Mihrabanids 1236–1537 Kurt dynasty 1244–1396 Ilkhanate Empire 1256–1335 Chobanid dynasty 1335–1357 Muzaffarid dynasty 1335–1393 Jalayirid Sultanate 1337–1376 Sarbadars 1337–1376 Injuids 1335–1357 Afrasiyab dynasty 1349–1504 Mar'ashis 1359–1596 Timurid Empire 1370–1507 Kar-Kiya dynasty 1370s–1592 Qara Qoyunlu 1406–1468 Aq Qoyunlu 1468–1508

Early modern period Safavid Iran 1501–1736 (Hotak dynasty) 1722–1729 Afsharid Iran 1736–1796 Zand dynasty 1751–1794

Modern period Qajar Iran 1789–1925 Pahlavi Iran 1925–1979

Contemporary period Iranian Revolution 1979 Interim Government 1979 Islamic Republic 1979–present

Related articles
Name
Monarchs
Heads of state
Economic history
Military history
Wars


Timeline Iran portalvte


Asia portal
Achaemenid family tree
History of Iran
List of rulers of the pre-Achaemenid kingdoms of Iran
List of Zoroastrian states and dynasties
Explanatory notes[edit]


^ The standard was described as "a golden eagle mounted upon a lofty shaft." This image is a reconstruction, the design based on an Achaemenid tile from Persepolis, and the coloring based on the Alexander Mosaic, which depicts the standard in dark red and gold.[1]

^ xšāyaθiya

^ xšāyaθiya xšāyaθiyānām

^ The chronology of the reign of Cyrus is uncertain, and these events are alternatively dated in 542–541 BC.[38]

^ a b Bardiya is referred to by a variety of names in Greek sources, including Smerdis, Tanyoxarces, Tanoxares, Mergis and Mardos. The earliest account to mention him is the Behistun Inscription, which has his name as Bardiya.[60][61]

^ Sources differ on the circumstances of Cambyses' death. According to Darius the Great in the Behistun Inscription, he died of natural causes.[60] According to Herodotus, he died after accidentally wounding himself in the thigh.[81] The true cause of death remains uncertain.[63]

^ All peoples listed (except for the Caucasian Albanians) are the ones that took part in the Second Persian invasion of Greece.[171] The total amount of ethnicities could very well amount to much more.[citation needed]



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "DERAFŠ". Encyclopædia Iranica. Encyclopædia Iranica Foundation. 21 November 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2019.

^ 2002 Oxford Atlas of World History p.42 (West portion of the Achaemenid Empire) and p.43 (East portion of the Achaemenid Empire).

^ O'Brien, Patrick Karl (2002). Atlas of World History. Oxford University Press. pp. 42–43. ISBN 9780195219210.

^ Visible online: Philip's Atlas of World History (1999)

^ The Times Atlas of World History, p.79 (1989): Barraclough, Geoffrey (1997). The Times Atlas of World History. Times Books. ISBN 978-0-7230-0906-1.

^ Yarshater, Ehsan (1993). The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 3. Cambridge University Press. p. 482. ISBN 978-0-521-20092-9. Of the four residences of the Achaemenids named by Herodotus—Ecbatana, Pasargadae or Persepolis, Susa and Babylon—the last [situated in Iraq] was maintained as their most important capital, the fixed winter quarters, the central office of bureaucracy, exchanged only in the heat of summer for some cool spot in the highlands. Under the Seleucids and the Parthians the site of the Mesopotamian capital moved slightly to the north on the Tigris—to Seleucia and Ctesiphon. It is indeed symbolic that these new foundations were built from the bricks of ancient Babylon, just as later Baghdad, a little further upstream, was built out of the ruins of the Sassanian double city of Seleucia-Ctesiphon.

^ Kittel, Harald; Frank, Armin Paul; House, Juliane; Greiner, Norbert; Schultze, Brigitte; Koller, Werner (2007). Traduction: encyclopédie internationale de la recherche sur la traduction. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 1194–95. ISBN 978-3-11-017145-7.

^ a b c d e Tucker, Elizabeth (2001). "Greek and Iranian".  In Christidis, Anastasios-Phoivos (ed.). A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83307-3.

^ Windfuhr, Gernot. "Iran vii. Non-Iranian Languages (3) Elamite". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 8 February 2017.

^ Boiy, T. (2004). Late Achaemenid and Hellenistic Babylon. Leuven: Peeters Publishers. p. 101. ISBN 978-90-429-1449-0.

^ a b Turchin, Peter; Adams, Jonathan M.; Hall, Thomas D (December 2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires". Journal of World-Systems Research. 12 (2): 223. ISSN 1076-156X. Retrieved 12 September 2016.

^ a b Taagepera, Rein (1979). "Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 600 B.C. to 600 A.D". Social Science History. 3 (3/4): 121. doi:10.2307/1170959. JSTOR 1170959.

^ Morris, Ian; Scheidel, Walter (2009). The Dynamics of Ancient Empires: State Power from Assyria to Byzantium. Oxford University Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-19-975834-0.

^ Wiesehöfer 2001, p. 119.

^ Lavan, Payne & Weisweiler 2016, p. 17.

^ Shahbazi, A. Shapour (2012). "The Achaemenid Persian Empire (550–330 bce)".  In Daryaee, Touraj (ed.). The Oxford handbook of Iranian history. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-19-973215-9. Although the Persians and Medes shared domination and others were placed in important positions, the Achaemenids did not – could not – provide a name for their multinational state. Nevertheless, they referred to it as Khshassa, "the Empire".

^ Kent, Roland G. (1954). Old Persian: grammar, texts, lexicon. American Oriental Society. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-940490-33-8.

^ Brosius 2021, p. 1.

^ a b c d Sacks, David; Murray, Oswyn; Brody, Lisa (2005). Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World. Infobase Publishing. p. 256. ISBN 978-0-8160-5722-1.

^ a b Schmitt, Rüdiger (21 July 2011). "Achaemenid Dynasty". Encyclopædia Iranica. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 4 March 2019.

^ Ulrich Wilcken (1967). Alexander the Great. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-393-00381-9.

^ Taagepera, Rein (1979). "Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 600 B.C. to 600 A.D". Social Science History. 3 (3/4): 123. doi:10.2307/1170959. JSTOR 1170959. A superimposition of the maps of Achaemenid and Alexander's empires shows a 90% match, except that Alexander's realm never reached the peak size of the Achaemenid realm.

^ Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh; Stewart, Sarah (2010). The Sasanian Era. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-0-85773-309-2.

^ Tavernier 2007, p. 17.

^ a b Jamie Stokes (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East, Volume 1. Infobase Publishing. pp. 2–3. ISBN 978-0-8160-7158-6.[dead link]

^ Kent, Roland G. (1954). Old Persian: grammar, texts, lexicon. American Oriental Society. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-940490-33-8.

^ Shapour Shahbazi, Alireza (2012).  Daryaee, Touraj (ed.). The Oxford handbook of Iranian history. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 131. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199732159.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-973215-9. Although the Persians and Medes shared domination and others were placed in important positions, the Achaemenids did not—could not—provide a name for their multinational state. Nevertheless, they referred to it as Khshassa, "the Empire".

^ Brosius 2006, p. 3.

^ Van de Mieroop, Marc (25 June 2015). A history of the ancient Near East ca. 3000–323 BC (Third ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK. ISBN 978-1-118-71817-9. OCLC 904507201.

^ a b Briant 2002, p. 17.

^ Brosius 2006, p. 6.

^ Briant 2002, p. 16.

^ Briant 2002, p. 15.

^ Nabonidus Cylinder I.8–II.25

^ Nabonidus Chronicle II.1–4

^ Briant 2002, p. 31.

^ Briant 2002, p. 33.

^ a b Briant 2002, p. 34.

^ Herodotus, Histories I.72, I.73

^ Briant 2002, p. 35.

^ Briant 2002, p. 36.

^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 11.

^ Briant 2002, p. 37.

^ Herodotus, Histories I.154

^ Briant 2002, pp. 37–38.

^ Justin, Epitome I.7

^ Briant 2002, p. 39.

^ Briant 2002, p. 40.

^ a b Briant 2002, pp. 41–43.

^ Nabonidus Chronicle III.12–16

^ Brosius 2006, pp. 11–12.

^ Cyrus Cylinder 23–35

^ Kuhrt 1983, pp. 85–86.

^ a b Briant 2002, pp. 43–44.

^ Cyrus Cylinder 43

^ Kuhrt 1983, pp. 88–89.

^ a b Briant 2002, p. 46.

^ Isaiah 41:2–4; 45:1–3

^ Ezra 6:2–5

^ a b c Behistun Inscription 11

^ a b Briant 2002, p. 98.

^ Briant 2002, pp. 49–50.

^ a b Brosius 2006, p. 13.

^ Wallinga 1984, pp. 406–409.

^ a b c d e f g Briant 2002, pp. 52–55.

^ a b Herodotus, Histories III.11, III.13

^ Herodotus, Histories III.29

^ Herodotus, Histories III.30

^ Herodotus, Histories III.31

^ Herodotus, Histories III.36

^ Herodotus, Histories III.38

^ Briant 2002, pp. 55–57.

^ Herodotus, Histories III.17

^ Herodotus, Histories III.19

^ Herodotus, Histories III.25

^ Heidorn 1992, pp. 147–150.

^ Herodotus, Histories III.61

^ Ctesias, Persica 11

^ Ctesias, Persica 15

^ Briant 2002, p. 61.

^ Herodotus, Histories III.64

^ Briant 2002, pp. 100–101.

^ Briant 2002, pp. 101–103.

^ Herodotus (1897). Herodotus: the text of Canon Rawlinson's translation, with the notes abridged, Volume 1. C. Scribner's. p. 278.

^ Herodotus. The Histories Book 3.80–83.

^ a b c d e f g Joseph Roisman, Ian Worthington A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. pp. 342–45. John Wiley & Sons, 2011 ISBN 1-4443-5163-X

^ The Oxford Classical Dictionary by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth,ISBN 0-19-860641-9, p. 1515, "The Thracians were subdued by the Persians by 516"

^ "Persian influence on Greece (2)". Retrieved 17 December 2014.

^ Howe & Reames 2008, p. 239.

^ Johannes Engels, "Ch. 5: Macedonians and Greeks", In: Roisman and Worthington, "A companion to Ancient Macedonia", p. 87. Oxford Press, 2010.

^ "Maka". livius.org.

^ Behistun Inscription

^ "DĀḠESTĀN". Retrieved 29 December 2014.

^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (1994). The Making of the Georgian Nation. ISBN 978-0-253-20915-3. Retrieved 29 December 2014.

^ Ramirez-Faria, Carlos (2007). Concise Encyclopedia of World History. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 6. ISBN 978-81-269-0775-5. Retrieved 7 October 2012.

^ Kuhrt 2013, p. 2.

^ O'Brien, Patrick (2002). Concise Atlas of World History. Oxford University Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-19-521921-0. Retrieved 7 October 2012.Curtis, John E.; Tallis, Nigel (2005). Forgotten Empire: The World of Ancient Persia. University of California Press. p. 47. ISBN 978-0-520-24731-4.Facts on File, Incorporated (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East. Infobase Publishing. p. 60. ISBN 978-1-4381-2676-0. Retrieved 7 October 2012.Parker, Grant (2008). The Making of Roman India. Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-85834-2. Retrieved 7 October 2012.Thapar, Romila (2004). Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300. University of California Press. p. 157. ISBN 978-0-520-24225-8. Retrieved 7 October 2012.

^ Willis Mason West (1904). The ancient world from the earliest times to 800 CE. Allyn and Bacon. p. 137. The Athenian support was particularly troubling to Darius since he had come to their aid during their conflict with Sparta

^ a b Joseph Roisman, Ian Worthington. "A companion to Ancient Macedonia" John Wiley & Sons, 2011. ISBN 1-4443-5163-X pp 135–38, 343–45

^ "Darius I | Biography, Accomplishments, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 29 May 2020.

^ a b Hanson, Victor Davis (18 December 2007). Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8.

^ See discussion on possible dates for the battle in the article Battle of the Eurymedon.

^ Homs, George. "Artaxerxes I Makrokheir (Artaxerxes I) Makrokheir (± 475-± 424) » Stamboom Homs » Genealogy Online". Genealogy Online. Retrieved 24 May 2020.

^ Artaxerxes I of Persia. 2010. ISBN 978-613-0-82634-5.

^ "Plutarch's Lives by Plutarch: Themistocles Themistocles, Part II". 1 October 2015. Archived from the original on 1 October 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2018.

^ Kuhrt 2013, p. 880.

^ Kitto, J (1841). Palestine: the Bible History of the holy land. London. p. 657.

^ Maurice Whittemore Mather (ed.), Joseph William Hewitt (ed.), Xenophon: Anabasis, Books 1–4. University of Oklahoma Press, 1979, ISBN 978-0-8061-1347-0, p. 44

^ (Polybius, 27 October 2012)

^ (Dandamaev & Lukonin, 1989:361–62)

^ "The Achaemenid Empire". 25 April 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2015.[1] Archived 19 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine

^ Kjeilen, Tore. "Artaxerxes 3". Archived from the original on 25 February 2008. Retrieved 5 March 2008.

^ Sekunda, Nick; Nicholas V. Sekunda; Simon Chew (1992). The Persian Army 560–330 BC. Osprey Publishing. p. 28. ISBN 978-1-85532-250-9.

^ Miller, James M. (1986). A History of Ancient Israel and Judah. John Haralson Hayes (photographer). Westminster John Knox Press. p. 465. ISBN 978-0-664-21262-9.

^ Newton, Sir Charles Thomas; R.P. Pullan (1862). A History of Discoveries at Halicarnassus, Cnidus & Branchidæ. Day & son. p. 57.

^ a b c d e f "Artaxerxes III Ochus ( 358 BC to 338 BC )". Retrieved 2 March 2008.

^ Rawlinson, George (1889). "Phœnicia under the Persians". History of Phoenicia. Longmans, Green. Archived from the original on 20 July 2006. Retrieved 10 March 2008.

^ Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Artaxerxes" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 663.

^ "The Legend of Gog And Magog". Archived from the original on 15 March 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2008.

^ Bruce, Frederick Fyvie (1990). The Acts of the Apostles: The Greek Text with Introduction and Commentary. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-8028-0966-7.

^ "Persian Period II". Archived from the original on 17 February 2008. Retrieved 6 March 2008.

^ "Chapter V: Temporary Relief". Archived from the original on 19 June 2008. Retrieved 1 March 2008.

^ "Philip of Macedon Philip II of Macedon Biography". Archived from the original on 14 March 2008. Retrieved 7 March 2008.

^ Briant 2002, p. 769.

^ a b Charles Dexter Cleveland (1861). A compendium of classical literature: comprising choice extracts translated from Greek and Roman writers, with biographical sketches. Biddle. p. 313.

^ Abraham Valentine Williams Jackson (1906). Persia past and present. The Macmillan Company. p. 278.

^ Ralph Griffiths; George Edward Griffiths; George Edward Griffiths (1816). The Monthly review. 1816. p. 509.

^ "Achaemenid Empire, Cyrus the Great, Darius the Great, Xerxes the Great – Crystalinks". www.crystalinks.com. Retrieved 24 May 2020.

^ Theodore Ayrault Dodge (1890). Alexander: a history of the origin and growth of the art of war from the earliest times to the battle of Ipsus, B.C. 301, with a detailed account of the campaigns of the great Macedonian. Houghton, Mifflin & Co. p. 438.

^ William Smith (1887). A smaller history of Greece: from the earliest times to the Roman conquest. Harper & Brothers. p. 196.

^ Pierre Briant; Amélie Kuhrt; Amélie Kuhrt (2010). Alexander the Great and His Empire: A Short Introduction. Princeton University Press. pp. 183–85. ISBN 978-0-691-14194-7.

^ "Resources – Iran History". toosfoundation.com. Retrieved 24 May 2020.

^ "CNG: Feature Auction CNG 96. KINGS of PERSIS. Vādfradād (Autophradates) I. 3rd century BC. AR Tetradrachm (28mm, 15.89 g, 9h). Istakhr (Persepolis) mint". www.cngcoins.com.

^ a b c "FRATARAKA – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org.

^ a b "CNG: Feature Auction CNG 90. KINGS of PERSIS. Vahbarz (Oborzos). 3rd century BC. AR Obol (10mm, 0.50 g, 11h)". www.cngcoins.com.

^ The Foreign Policy of Mithridates VI Eupator, King of Pontus, by B.C. McGing, p. 11

^ Children of Achilles: The Greeks in Asia Minor Since the Days of Troy, by John Freely, pp. 69–70

^ Strabo of Amasia: A Greek Man of Letters in Augustan Rome, by Daniela Dueck, p. 3

^ a b c "Pontus – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org.

^ Ashrafian, Hutan (2011). "Limb gigantism, neurofibromatosis and royal heredity in the Ancient World 2500 years ago: Achaemenids and Parthians". J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 64 (4): 557. doi:10.1016/j.bjps.2010.08.025. PMID 20832372.

^ A.T. Olmstead, History of the Persian Empire, chapter XXI: "Overtaxation and Its Results", University of Chicago Press, 1948, pp. 289–301

^ The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, ed. Arthur Cotterell, Penguin Books Ltd., London, 1980, p. 154

^ a b Will Durant, Our Oriental Heritage, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1935, p. 363

^ Charles Robinson Jr., Ancient History, 2nd ed., MacMillan Company, New York, 1967, pp. 328, 338

^ Charles Robinson Jr., Ancient History, 2nd ed., MacMillan Company, New York, 1967, pp. 391, 347

^ Charles Robinson Jr., Ancient History, 2nd ed., MacMillan Company, New York, 1967, p. 351

^ Peter Levi, The Greek World, Equinox Book-Andromeda, Oxford Ltd., 1990, p. 182

^ Will Durant, Our Oriental Heritage, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1935, p. 382

^ R.L. Fox, The Search For Alexander, Little Brown and Co., Boston, 1980, pp. 121–22

^ Engineering an Empire – The Persians. Broadcast of The History Channel, narrated by Peter Weller

^ a b Briant 2002, p. 261.

^ Herodotus, Herodotus, trans. A.D. Godley, vol. 4, book 8, verse 98, pp. 96–97 (1924).

^ Persepolis Fortification Archive. Oriental Institute - The University of Chicago

^ Stolper, Matthew W. and Tavernier, Jan (2007), From the Persepolis Fortification Archive Project, 1: An Old Persian Administrative Tablet from the Persepolis Fortification. ARTA 2007.001

^ Michael Alram, "DARIC", Encyclopaedia Iranica, 15 December 1994, last updated 17 November 2011

^ Persepolis Recreated, NEJ International Pictures; 1st edition (2005) ISBN 978-964-06-4525-3 ASIN B000J5N46S, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCwxJsk14e4

^ Herodotus Book III, 89–95

^ Archibald, Zosia; Davies, John K.; Gabrielsen, Vincent (2011). The Economies of Hellenistic Societies, Third to First Centuries BC. Oxford University Press. p. 404. ISBN 978-0-19-958792-6.

^ "India Relations: Achaemenid Period – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org.

^ a b "History of Iran (Persia)". Historyworld.net. Retrieved 7 January 2011.

^ M. Dandamayev, "Foreign Slaves on the Estates of the Achaemenid Kings and their Nobles," in Trudy dvadtsat' pyatogo mezhdunarodnogo kongressa vostokovedov II, Moscow, 1963, pp. 151–52

^ Stolper, Matthew (1989). "Registration and Taxation of Slave Sales in Achaemenid Babylonia". Zeitschrift für Assyriologie und Vorderasiatische Archäologie. 79: 80–101. doi:10.1515/zava.1989.79.1.80. S2CID 162232807.

^ Williams, Michael R. (1998). A history of computing technology (2nd ed., 2nd print. ed.). Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Computer Soc. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-8186-7739-7.

^ Nyrop, Richard F., ed. (1978). Iran, a Country Study. American University (Washington, D. C. ) Foreign Area. pp. 25–26.

^ "DĀTA – Encyclopaedia Iranica". iranicaonline.org.

^ "Darius I (Darius the Great), King of Persia (from 521 BC)". 1902encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 7 January 2011.

^ The words are actually inscribed on the frieze of the James A. Farley Post Office Building in the borough of Manhattan in New York City, New York. The inscription is based on: Herodotus with George Rawlinson, trans., The History of Herodotus (New York, New York: Tandy-Thomas Co., 1909), vol. 4, Book 8, § 98, p. 147.

^ "The Diary of Young Explorers: Iran and the Royal Road | SILK ROADS". en.unesco.org. Retrieved 11 April 2020.

^ Palmira Johnson Brummett; Robert R. Edgar; Neil J. Hackett; Robert R. Edgar; Neil J. Hackett (2003). Civilization past & present, Volume 1. Longman. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-321-09097-3.

^ A history of Greece, Volume 2, By Connop Thirlwall, Longmans, 1836, p. 174

^ Herodotus VII, 59

^ Herodotus VII, 84

^ Herodotus VII, 62

^ Herodotus VII, 63

^ Herodotus VII, 64

^ Chaumont, M.L. Albania Archived 10 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine. "Encyclopædia Iranica.

^ Herodotus VII, 66

^ Herodotus VII, 67

^ Herodotus VII, 89

^ Herodotus VII 90

^ Herodotus VII, 68

^ Herodotus VII, 69

^ Herodotus VII, 70

^ Herodotus VII, 71

^ Herodotus VII, 72

^ Herodotus VII, 73

^ Herodotus VII, 74

^ Herodotus, VII, 75

^ Herodotus VII, 77

^ Herodotus VII, 78

^ Herodotus VII, 79

^ Herodotus VII, 80

^ Herodotus VII, 85

^ Herodotus VII, 65

^ Hartley, Charles W.; Yazicioğlu, G. Bike; Smith, Adam T. (2012). The Archaeology of Power and Politics in Eurasia: Regimes and Revolutions. Cambridge University Press. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-107-01652-1.

^ a b Jona, Lendering (1997). "Immortals". Livius.org. Retrieved 16 May 2009.

^ Volume IX, Encyclopædia Britannica, Fifteenth Edition 1983

^ Potts, D. T. (1999). The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State. Cambridge University Press. p. 345. ISBN 978-0-521-56496-0.

^ Delrue, Parsival (2007). "Trilobate Arrowheads at Ed-Dur (U.A.E, Emirate of Umm Al-Qaiwain)". Arabian Archaeology and Epigraphy. 18 (2): 239–250. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0471.2007.00281.x.

^ "Collection online: arrow-head". British Museum.

^ Sekunda, Nicholas (1992). The Persian Army 560–330 BC. Osprey Publishing. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-85532-250-9.

^ "The Darius Seal". British Museum.

^ "Darius' seal: photo – Livius". www.livius.org.

^ a b c d e f g h Kaveh Farrokh (2007). Shadows in the desert: ancient Persia at war. Osprey Publishing. p. 68. ISBN 978-1-84603-108-3.

^ Elspeth R.M. Dusinberre (2002). Aspects of empire in Achaemenid Sardis. Cambridge University Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-521-81071-5.

^ Ehsan Yar-Shater (1982). Encyclopaedia Iranica, Volume 4, Issues 5–8. Routledge & Kegan Paul.

^ John Manuel Cook (1983). The Persian Empire. Schocken Books.

^ E.V. Cernenko; Angus McBride; M.V. Gorelik (24 March 1983). The Scythians, 700–300 BC. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85045-478-9.

^ Herodotus (1859). The History of Herodotus: a new English version, Volume 3. Translated by George Rawlinson; Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson; Sir John Gardner Wilkinson. John Murray. p. 77 (Chp. 86).

^ Waldemar Heckel (2006). Who's who in the age of Alexander the Great: prosopography of Alexander's empire. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 134. ISBN 978-1-4051-1210-9.

^ DPh – Livius.

^ Dandamayev, Muhammad (2002). "Persepolis Elamite Tablets". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 1 November 2013.

^ "Culture – National Radio TV of Afghanistan". Baztab News. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2020.

^ Shaked, Saul (1987). "Aramaic". Encyclopedia Iranica. Vol. 2. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp. 250–61 [251].

^ Frye, Richard N.; Driver, G. R. (1955). "Review of G.R. Driver's 'Aramaic Documents of the Fifth Century B.C.'". Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies. 18 (3/4): 456–61. doi:10.2307/2718444. JSTOR 2718444. p. 457.

^ Geiger, Wilhelm; Ernst Kuhn (2002). Grundriss der iranischen Philologie: Band I. Abteilung 1. Boston: Adamant. pp. 249ff.

^ Ware, James R.; Kent, Roland G. (1924). "The Old Persian Cuneiform Inscriptions of Artaxerxes II and Artaxerxes III". Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association. 55: 52–61. doi:10.2307/283007. JSTOR 283007. p. 53

^ Gershevitch, Ilya (1964). "Zoroaster's own contribution". Journal of Near Eastern Studies. 23 (1): 12–38. doi:10.1086/371754. S2CID 161954467. p. 20.

^ "Herodotus, The Histories, Book 1, chapter 133". www.perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 21 November 2020.

^ William W. Malandra (1983). An Introduction to Ancient Iranian Religion: Readings from the Avesta and Achaemenid Inscriptions. U of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-1114-0.

^ Pierre Briant (1 January 2002). From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of the Persian Empire. Eisenbrauns. pp. 252–. ISBN 978-1-57506-120-7.

^ M. A. Dandamaev (1989). A Political History of the Achaemenid Empire. BRILL. pp. 97–. ISBN 978-90-04-09172-6.

^ A. D. H. Bivar (1998). The Personalities of Mithra in Archaeology and Literature. Bibliotheca Persica Press. ISBN 978-0-933273-28-3.

^ Philippa Adrych; Robert Bracey; Dominic Dalglish; Stefanie Lenk; Rachel Wood (23 March 2017). Images of Mithra. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-251111-9.

^ Jean Perrot (28 August 2013). The Palace of Darius at Susa: The Great Royal Residence of Achaemenid Persia. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-84885-621-9.

^ Juri P. Stojanov; Yuri Stoyanov (11 August 2000). The Other God: Dualist Religions from Antiquity to the Cathar Heresy. Yale University Press. pp. 77–. ISBN 978-0-300-08253-1.

^ a b Fisher, William Bayne; Gershevitch, I. (1968). The Cambridge History of Iran. Cambridge University Press. p. 412. ISBN 978-0-521-20091-2.

^ "Book of Ezra | King James Bible". Kingjamesbibletrust.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 21 March 2011.

^ A. V. Williams Jackson (2003). Zoroastrian Studies: The Iranian Religion and Various Monographs (1928). Kessinger Publishing. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-7661-6655-4.

^ Virginia Schomp (2009). The Ancient Persians. Marshall Cavendish. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-7614-4218-9.

^ a b Herodotus, I.131

^ Berosus, III.65

^ a b Herodotus, I.132

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Maria Brosius, "WOMEN i. In Pre-Islamic Persia", Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition, 2021, available at WOMEN i. In Pre-Islamic Persia (accessed on 26 January 2021). Originally Published: January 1, 2000. Last Updated: March 15, 2010. Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition, New York, 1996- https://iranicaonline.org/articles/women-i

^ (Ctesias, frg. 16 (56) in Jacoby, Fragmente III/C, p. 471)

^ "Welcome to Encyclopaedia Iranica".

^ (Brosius, Maria, Women in ancient Persia (559-331 BC), Oxford, 1996. pp. 125-182)

^ a b (Brosius, Maria, Women in ancient Persia (559-331 BC), Oxford, 1996. pp. 83-93)

^ (Heracleides of Cyme apud Athenaeus, 514b)

^ (Brosius, Maria, Women in ancient Persia (559-331 BC), Oxford, 1996. pp. 94-97)

^ (Plutarch, Moralia, 140B)

^ Charles Henry Caffin (1917). How to study architecture. Dodd, Mead and Company. p. 80.

^ MacDonald, Eve. "Iran's cultural heritage reflects the grandeur and beauty of the golden age of the Persian empire". The Conversation. Retrieved 15 February 2020.

^ Edward Lipiński; Karel van Lerberghe; Antoon Schoors; Karel Van Lerberghe; Antoon Schoors (1995). Immigration and emigration within the ancient Near East. Peeters Publishers. p. 119. ISBN 978-90-6831-727-5.

^ "Mastering World History" by Philip L. Groisser, New York, 1970, p. 17

^ a b Hovannisian, Richard G.; Sabagh, Georges; Yāršātir, Iḥsān (19 November 1998). The Persian Presence in the Islamic World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-59185-0.

^ Margaret Christina Miller (2004). Athens and Persia in the Fifth Century BC: A Study in Cultural Receptivity. Cambridge University Press. p. 243. ISBN 978-0-521-60758-2.

^ Vesta Sarkhosh Curtis; Sarah Stewart (2005). Birth of the Persian Empire. I.B.Tauris. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-84511-062-8.

^ George W.F. Hegel (2007). The Philosophy of History. ISBN 978-1-60206-438-6.

^ Durant, Will. "Persia in the History of Civilization" (PDF). Addressing 'Iran-America Society. Mazda Publishers, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011.


Sources[edit]

Briant, Pierre (2002). From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of the Persian Empire. Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-1-57506-031-6.
Brosius, Maria (2006). The Persians. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-32089-4.
Brosius, Maria (2021). A History of Ancient Persia: The Achaemenid Empire. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-444-35092-0.
Cook, John Manuel (2006). The Persian Empire. Barnes & Noble. ISBN 978-1-56619-115-9.
Dandamaev, M. A. (1989). A Political History of the Achaemenid Empire. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-09172-6.
Heidorn, Lisa Ann (1992). The Fortress of Dorginarti and Lower Nubia during the Seventh to Fifth Centuries B.C. (PhD). University of Chicago.
Howe, Timothy; Reames, Jeanne (2008). Macedonian Legacies: Studies in Ancient Macedonian History and Culture in Honor of Eugene N. Borza. Regina Books. ISBN 978-1-930053-56-4.
Kosmin, Paul J. (2014). The Land of the Elephant Kings: Space, Territory, and Ideology in Seleucid Empire. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-72882-0.
Kuhrt, Amélie (1983). "The Cyrus Cylinder and Achaemenid Imperial Policy". Journal for the Study of the Old Testament. 8 (25): 83–97. doi:10.1177/030908928300802507. S2CID 170508879.
Kuhrt, Amélie (2013). The Persian Empire: A Corpus of Sources from the Achaemenid Period. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-01694-3.
Lavan, Myles; Payne, Richard E.; Weisweiler, John, eds. (2016). "Cosmopolitan Politics: The Assimilation and Subordination of Elite Cultures". Cosmopolitanism and Empire: Universal Rulers, Local Elites, and Cultural Integration in the Ancient Near East and Mediterranean. Oxford University Press.
Olmstead, Albert T. (1948). History of the Persian Empire. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-62777-9.
Tavernier, Jan (2007). Iranica in the Achaeamenid Period (ca. 550-330 B.C.): Lexicon of Old Iranian Proper Names and Loanwords, Attested in Non-Iranian Texts. Peeters Publishers. ISBN 978-90-429-1833-7.
Wallinga, Herman (1984). "The Ionian Revolt". Mnemosyne. 37 (3/4): 401–437. doi:10.1163/156852584X00619.
Wiesehöfer, Josef (2001). Ancient Persia. Translated by Azodi, Azizeh. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-86064-675-1.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Achaemenid Empire.




Look up Achaemenid Empire in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Persian History
Livius.org on Achaemenids
Swedish Contributions to the Archaeology of Iran Artikel i Fornvännen (2007) by Carl Nylander
Čišpiš
The Behistun Inscription
Livius.org on Achaemenid Royal Inscriptions
Achaemenid art on Iran Chamber Society (www.iranchamber.com)
Persepolis Fortification Archive Project
Photos of the tribute bearers from the 23 satrapies of the Achaemenid empire, from Persepolis
Coins, medals and orders of the Persian empire
Dynasty Achaemenid
Iran, The Forgotten Glory – Documentary Film About Ancient Iran (achaemenids & Sassanids)
Achemenet an electronic resource for the study of the history, literature and archaeology of the Persian Empire
Persepolis Before Incursion (Virtual tour project)
Musée achéménide virtuel et interactif (Mavi) a "Virtual Interactive Achemenide Museum" of more than 8000 items of the Persian Empire
Persian history in detail
vte Achaemenid EmpireHistory
Family tree
Timeline
History of democracy
Art
Achaemenid Persian Lion Rhyton
Oxus Treasure
Achaemenid coinage
Apadana hoard
Danake
Persian daric
Architecture
Persepolis
Apadana
Gate of All Nations
Tachara
Palace of Darius in Susa
Tomb of Cyrus
Persian column
Naqsh-e Rostam
Ka'ba-ye Zartosht
Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
Tombs at Xanthos
Harpy Tomb
Nereid Monument
Tomb of Payava
Culture
Old Persian cuneiform
Old Persian
Behistun Inscription
Xerxes I's inscription at Van
Ganjnameh
Cyrus Cylinder
Warfare
Persian Revolt
Battle of Hyrba
Battle of the Persian Border
Lydian-Persian Wars
Battle of Pteria
Battle of Thymbra
Siege of Sardis (547 BC)
Battle of Opis
Conquest of the Indus Valley
First conquest of Egypt
Scythian campaign of Darius I
Greco-Persian Wars
Ionian Revolt
Siege of Naxos (499 BC)
Battle of Lade
Siege of Eretria
Battle of Marathon
Battle of Thermopylae
Battle of Artemisium
Destruction of Athens
Battle of Salamis
Battle of Plataea
Battle of Mycale
Wars of the Delian League
Battle of the Eurymedon
Peloponnesian War
Battle of Cyzicus
Battle of Cunaxa
Corinthian War
Battle of Cnidus
Great Satraps' Revolt
Wars of Alexander the Great
Battle of the Granicus
Siege of Miletus
Siege of Halicarnassus
Battle of Issus
Siege of Tyre (332 BC)
Siege of Gaza
Battle of Gaugamela
Battle of the Persian Gate
Diplomacy
Earth and water
Peace of Callias
Peace of Antalcidas
Administration
Capitals
Pasargadae
Ecbatana
Babylon
Susa
Satrapies
Armenia
Districts of the Empire
Persepolis Administrative Archives
Royal Road
Chapar Khaneh
Angarium
Angarum
Dynasties
Achaemenid
Pharnacid
Mithridatic
Pontus
Ariarathid
Cappadocia
Orontid
Armenia
Seven Achaemenid clans
Related
2,500 year celebration of the Persian Empire
Xanthian Obelisk
Cappadocian calendar

vteProvinces of the Achaemenid Empire(Behistun / Persepolis / Naqsh-e Rustam / Susa / Daeva inscriptions)
Akaufaka (Quhistan?)
Amyrgoi
Arabia
Arachosia
Aria
Armenia
Assyria
Babylonia
Bactria
Cappadocia
Caria
Carmania
Chorasmia
Cilicia
Colchis
Dahae
Drangiana
1st Egypt / 2nd Egypt
Eber-Nari (Levant)
Elam
Kush (Nubia)
Gandāra (Gandhara)
Gedrosia
Hyrcania
Ionia
Hindush
Libya
Lydia
Maka
Margiana
Media
Massagetae
Parthia
Persis
Phoenicia
Phrygia
Hellespontine Phrygia
Greater Phrygia
Saka
Samaritan Province
Sattagydia
Skudra (Thrace)
Sogdia
Yehud
See also Taxation districts of the Achaemenid Empire (according to Herodotus)
vteTimeline of Mesopotamia




Northwestern Mesopotamia

Northern Mesopotamia

Southern Mesopotamia


c. 3500–2350 BCE

Semitic nomads

Sumerian city-states


c. 2350–2200 BCE

Akkadian Empire


c. 2200–2100 BCE

Gutians


c. 2100–2000 BCE

Third Dynasty of Ur


c. 2000–1800 BCE

Mari and other Amorite city-states

Old Assyrian Empire (Northern Akkadians)

Isin/Larsa and other Amorite city-states


c. 1800–1600 BCE

Old Hittite Kingdom

Old Babylonian Empire (Southern Akkadians)


c. 1600–1400 BCE

Mitanni (Hurrians)

Karduniaš (Kassites)


c. 1400–1200 BCE

Middle Hittite Kingdom



Middle Assyria


c. 1200–1150 BCE

Bronze Age Collapse ("Sea Peoples")

Arameans


c. 1150–911 BCE

Phoenicia

Neo-Hittitecity-states

Aram-Damascus

Arameans

Middle Babylonia

Chal-de-ans


911–729 BCE

Neo-Assyrian Empire


729–609 BCE






626–539 BCE

Neo-Babylonian Empire (Chaldeans)


539–331 BCE

Achaemenid Empire


336–301 BCE

Macedonian Empire (Ancient Greeks and Macedonians)


311–129 BCE

Seleucid Empire


129–63 BCE

Seleucid Empire

Parthian Empire


63 BCE–243 CE

Roman Empire/Byzantine Empire (Syria)


243–636 CE

Sassanid Empire



vteEmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Old Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Spring and Autumn
Warring States
Qin
Eighteen Kingdoms
Han
Three Kingdoms
Jin
Sixteen Kingdoms
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Hittite
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Indo-greek
Bactrian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Hunnic
White
Asian
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese Empire
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
Jīn
Yuan
Uyghur
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Egyptian Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Eastern
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Despotate of Epirus
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese Empire
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Darawiish
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish–Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish

Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire

vte Iran topicsHistoryPrehistoryAncient3400–539 BCE
Kura-Araxes culture (3400–2000 BC)
Proto-Elamite civilization (3100–2700 BC)
Elamite dynasties (2700–540 BC)
Akkadian Empire (c.2334 BC–c.2154 BC)
Lullubi (c.2300–675 BC)
Kassites (c.1595–c.1155 BC)
Kingdom of Mannai (10th–7th century BC)
Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–609 BC)
Urartu (860 BC–590 BC)
Median Empire (678–549 BC)
Scythian Kingdom (652–625 BC)
Neo-Babylonian Empire (626–539 BC)
550 BC–CE 224
Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BC)
Atropatene (c.323 BC–AD 226)
Kingdom of Armenia (321 BC–AD 428)
Kingdom of Cappadocia (320s BC–AD 17)
Seleucid Empire (312–63 BC)
Frataraka (c.295–220 BC)
Kingdom of Pontus (281 BC–AD 62)
Parthian Empire (247 BC–AD 224)
Kings of Persis (after 132 BC–AD 224)
AD 224–651
Sasanian Empire (AD 224–651)
Medieval andearly modern632–1090
Rashidun Caliphate (632–661)
Umayyad Caliphate (661–750)
Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258)
Samanid dynasty (819–999)
Tahirid dynasty (821–873)
Alavid dynasty (864–928)
Saffarid dynasty (861–1003)
Ziyarid dynasty (931–1090)
Buyid dynasty (934–1062)
977–1432
Ghaznavid Empire (977–1186)
Ghurid dynasty (1011–1215)
Seljuk Empire (1037–1194)
Anushtegin dynasty (1077–1231)
Eldiguzids (1135/36-1225)
Kart dynasty (1244–1381)
Ilkhanate (1256–1335)
Muzaffarid dynasty (1314–1393)
Jalayirid Sultanate dynasty (1335–1432)
Chobanid dynasty (1338–1357)
1370–1925
Timurid Empire (1370–1507)
Qara Qoyunlu Turcomans (1374–1468)
Aq Qoyunlu Turcomans (1378–1508)
Safavid Empire (1501–1736)
Afsharid Empire (1736–1796)
Zand Dynasty (1751–1794)
Qajar Empire (1789–1925)
Khanates of the Caucasus (18th–20th centuries)
Persian Constitutional Revolution (1905–1911)
1908 bombardment of the Majlis
Kurdish separatism in Iran (1918–)
1921 Persian coup d'état
Arab separatism in Khuzestan (1922–)
Modern1925–1979
Pahlavi dynasty (1925–1979)
Shatt al-Arab dispute (1936–1975)
Iran crisis of 1946
Insurgency in Balochistan (1948–)
1949 Iranian Constituent Assembly election
1953 coup d'état
Iranian Revolution (1979)
Islamic Republic1979–present
History (1979–)
Interim Government (1979)
March 1979 Iranian Islamic Republic referendum
1979 Khuzestan insurgency
Iran hostage crisis (1979–1981)
December 1979 Iranian constitutional referendum
Iranian Embassy siege (1980)
Nojeh coup plot (1980)
Iran–Iraq War (1980–88)
Interim Government of Iran (1981)
1987 Mecca incident
Iran Air Flight 655 shootdown (1988)
KDPI insurgency (1989–1996)
PJAK conflict (2004–)
2009 Iranian presidential election protests
Syrian civil war (2011–)
International military intervention against the Islamic State (2014–)
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (2015)
United States withdrawal (2018)
2017–2018 Iranian protests
2018–2019 Iranian general strikes and protests
COVID-19 pandemic
2019 Sistan and Baluchestan protests
2019–2020 Iranian protests
2021 Sistan and Baluchestan protests
2021–2022 Iranian protests
See also
Ancient Persians
Greater Iran
Persianization
Persianate society
Turco-Persian
Indo-Persian
Iranian dynasties and countries
Iranic peoples
languages
Jiroft culture
Aryans
Azerbaijanis
Peoples of the Caucasus
Persians
Monarchs of Persia
Heads of state of Iran
History of democracy in classical Iran
Military history
Years in Iran
Geography
Borders
Cities
largest
twin towns and sister cities
Earthquakes
Iranian Azerbaijan
Iranian Balochistan
Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests
Caucasus
Iranian Kurdistan
Iranian plateau
Lake Urmia
Islands
Mountains
Provinces
Wildlife
PoliticsGeneral
Censorship
Constitution (Persian Constitutional Revolution)
Elections (2009 presidential)
Foreign relations
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Human rights (LGBT)
Judicial system
Military (Army
Air Force
Navy)
Ministry of Intelligence
Cyberwarfare
Nuclear program (UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Political parties
Principlists
Propaganda
Reformists
Terrorism (state-sponsorship allegations)
White Revolution (1963)
Women's rights movement
Councils
Assembly (or Council) of Experts
Expediency Discernment Council
Guardian Council
Islamic Consultative Assembly (parliament)
Local councils
Supreme National Security Council
Officials
Ambassadors
President
Provincial governors
Supreme Leader
EconomyGeneral
Bonyad (charitable trust)
Brain drain
Companies (Automotive industry)
Corruption
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Economic history
Economic Reform Plan
Energy
Environmental issues
Foreign direct investment
Intellectual property
International oil bourse
International rankings
Iran and the World Trade Organization
Taxation
Main economic laws
Economy of the Middle East
Milad Tower and complex
Military equipment manufactured
Nuclear program (UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Privatization
Rial (currency)
Space Agency
Setad
Supreme Audit Court
Tehran Stock Exchange
Venture capital (Technology start-ups)
Sectors
Agriculture (fruit)
Banking and insurance
Central Bank
Shetab Banking System
Construction
Defense
Health care (Pharmaceuticals)
Industry
Mining
Petroleum (Anglo-Persian Oil Company)
Telecommunications and IT (TCI)
Transport (airlines
metro
railways
shipping)
Tourism
State-ownedcompanies
Defense Industries Organization (DIO)
Industrial Development and Renovation Organization (IDRO)
Iran Aviation Industries Organization (IAIO)
Iran Electronics Industries (IEI)
National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC)
National Development Fund
Places
Asaluyeh industrial corridor
Chabahar Free Trade-Industrial Zone
Kish Island Free Trade Zone
Research centers
SocietyDemographicsLanguages
Persian (Farsi)
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Kurdish
Hebrew
Georgian
Neo-Aramaic
Iranian languages
Peoples
Iranian citizens (abroad)
Ethnic minorities
Armenians
Assyrians
Azerbaijanis
Circassians
Georgians
Kurds
Jews
Turkmen
Religion
Islam
Baháʼí Faith (persecution)
Christianity
Zoroastrians (persecution)
Freedom of religion
Other
Corruption
Crime
Education (higher
scientists and scholars
universities)
International rankings
Nationality
Water supply and sanitation
Women
Culture
Architecture (Achaemenid
architects)
Art (modern / contemporary)
Astronomy
Blogs
Calendars (Persian New Year (Nowruz))
Fashion
Chicago Persian antiquities dispute
Cinema
Cuisine
Folklore
Intellectual movements
Iranians
Iranian studies
Islam (Islamization)
Literature
Media (news agencies (student)
newspapers)
Mythology
National Jewels
National symbols (Imperial Anthem)
Opium consumption
Persian gardens
Persian name
Philosophy
Public holidays
Scouting
Sport (football)
Music
Folk
Jazz
Pop
Rap and hip-hop
Rock
Traditional
Ey Iran
Other topics
Science and technology
Anti-Iranian sentiment
Tehrangeles

 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
 Commons

vteRulers of the Ancient Near East





Territories/dates[1][2][3][4][5]
Egypt
Canaan
Ebla
Mari
Akshak/Akkad
Kish
Uruk
Adab
Umma
Lagash
Ur
Elam


4000–3200 BCE

Naqada INaqada II

Egypt-Mesopotamia relations

Pre-Dynastic period (4000–2900 BCE)

Susa I


Uruk period(4000-3100 BCE)(Anonymous "King-priests")

Susa II(Uruk influence or control)


3200–3100 BCE

Proto-Dynastic period(Naqada III)Early or legendary kings:


Upper EgyptFinger Snail Fish Pen-Abu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw Iry-Hor Ka Scorpion II Narmer / Menes

Lower EgyptHedju Hor Ny-Hor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Nat-Hor Mekh Double Falcon Wash


3100–2900 BCE

Early Dynastic PeriodFirst Dynasty of EgyptNarmer Menes Neithhotep♀ (regent) Hor-Aha Djer Djet Merneith♀ (regent) DenAnedjib Semerkhet Qa'a Sneferka Horus Bird

Canaanites

Jemdet Nasr period(3100-2900 BCE)

Proto-Elamiteperiod(Susa III)(3100-2700 BCE)


2900 BCE

Second Dynasty of EgyptHotepsekhemwy Nebra/Raneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa Weneg-Nebty Wadjenes Senedj Seth-Peribsen Sekhemib-Perenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy

Early Dynastic Period I (2900–2700 BCE)


First EblaiteKingdom

First kingdom of Mari

Kish I dynastyJushur, Kullassina-belNangishlishma,En-tarah-anaBabum, Puannum, Kalibum


2800 BCE



Kalumum Zuqaqip AtabMashda Arwium EtanaBalih En-me-nunaMelem-Kish Barsal-nuna

Uruk I dynastyMesh-ki-ang-gasher


Enmerkar ("conqueror of Aratta")


2700 BCE

Early Dynastic Period II (2700–2600 BCE)






Zamug, Tizqar, IlkuIltasadum

LugalbandaDumuzid, the Fisherman


Enmebaragesi ("made the land of Elam submit")[6]


Aga of Kish 

Gilgamesh

Old Elamite period(2700–1500 BCE)Indus-Mesopotamia relations


2600 BCE

Third Dynasty of EgyptDjoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni

Early Dynastic Period III (2600–2340 BCE)


SagisuAbur-limAgur-limIbbi-DamuBaba-Damu



Kish II dynasty(5 kings)UhubMesilim

Ur-NungalUdulkalamaLabashum

LagashEn-hegalLugal-shaengur

UrA-ImdugudUr-PabilsagMeskalamdug(Queen Puabi)Akalamdug


Enun-dara-annaMes-heMelamannaLugal-kitun

AdabNin-kisalsiMe-durbaLugal-dalu




2575 BCE

Old Kingdom of EgyptFourth Dynasty of EgyptSnefru KhufuDjedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis

Ur I dynastyMesannepada"King of Ur and Kish", victorious over Uruk


2500 BCE

Phoenicia (2500-539 BCE)

Second kingdom of MariIkun-ShamashIku-ShamaganAnsudSa'umuIshtup-IsharIkun-MariIblul-IlNizi

Akshak dynastyUnziUndalulu

Kish III dynastyKu-Baba♀

Uruk II dynastyEnsha-kushanna

Mug-si

Umma I dynastyPabilgagaltuku

Lagash I dynastyUr-NansheAkurgal

A'annepadaMeskiagnunEluluBalulu

Awan dynastyPeliTataUkkutaheshHishur


2450 BCE

Fifth Dynasty of EgyptUserkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas

Enar-DamuIshar-Malik

UshEnakalle


Elamite invasions(3 kings)[6]

Shushun-taranaNapilhush


2425 BCE

Kun-Damu

Eannatum(King of Lagash, Sumer, Akkad, conqueror of Elam)


2400 BCE

Adub-DamuIgrish-HalamIrkab-Damu

Urur

Kish IV dynastyPuzur-SuenUr-Zababa

Lugal-kinishe-duduLugal-kisalsi

E-iginimpa'eMeskigal

Ur-LummaIlGishakidu(Queen Bara-irnun)

EnannatumEntemenaEnannatum IIEnentarzi

Ur II dynastyNanniMesh-ki-ang-Nanna II

Kiku-siwe-tempti


2380 BCE

Sixth Dynasty of EgyptTeti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah

Adab dynastyLugalannemundu"King of the four quarters of the world"


2370 BCE

Isar-Damu

Enna-DaganIkun-IsharIshqi-Mari

Invasion of MariAnbu, Anba, Bazi, Zizi of Mari, Limer, Sharrum-iter[6]

Ukush

LugalandaUrukagina

Luh-ishan


2350 BCE



Puzur-NirahIshu-IlShu-Sin

Uruk III dynastyLugalzagesi(Governor of Umma, King of all Sumer)


2340 BCE



Akkadian Period (2340–2150 BCE)


Akkadian EmpireSargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu

Akkadian Governors:EshpumIlshu-rabiEpirmupiIli-ishmani


2250 BCE

Naram-Sin

Lugal-ushumgal(vassal of the Akkadians)


2200 BCE

First Intermediate PeriodSeventh Dynasty of EgyptEighth Dynasty of EgyptMenkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare

Second EblaiteKingdom(Vassals of UR III)

Third kingdom of MariShakkanakkudynastyIdidishShu-DaganIshma-Dagan(Vassals of the Akkadians)

Shar-Kali-Sharri


Igigi, Imi, Nanum, Ilulu (3 years)DuduShu-turul

Uruk IV dynastyUr-niginUr-gigir



Lagash II dynastyPuzer-MamaUr-Ningirsu IPirig-meLu-BabaLu-gulaKa-ku

Hishep-RatepHeluKhitaPuzur-Inshushinak


2150 BCE

Ninth Dynasty of EgyptMeryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut

Ur III period (2150–2000 BCE)


Nûr-MêrIshtup-IlumIshgum-AdduApil-kin

Gutian dynasty(21 kings)La-erabumSi'um

Kuda (Uruk)Puzur-iliUr-Utu



Umma II dynastyLugalannatum(vassal of the Gutians)

Ur-BabaGudeaUr-NingirsuUr-garNam-mahani


Tirigan


2125 BCE

Tenth Dynasty of EgyptMeryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare

Iddi-ilumIli-IsharTura-DaganPuzur-IshtarHitial-ErraHanun-Dagan(Vassals of Ur III)[7]

Uruk V dynastyUtu-hengal


2100 BCE



Ur III dynasty"Kings of Ur, Sumer and Akkad"Ur-Nammu Shulgi Amar-Sin Shu-Sin Ibbi-Sin


2050 BCE




2000 BCE

Middle Kingdom of EgyptEleventh Dynasty of EgyptMentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV


circa 2000 BCE

Amorite invasions

Elamite invasionsKindattu (Shimashki Dynasty)


2025-1763 BCE

Twelfth Dynasty of EgyptAmenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu♀

Third EblaiteKingdomIbbit-Lim Immeya Indilimma

Lim DynastyYaggid-Lim Yahdun-Lim Yasmah-Adad Zimri-Lim (Queen Shibtu)

Isin-Larsa period (Amorites)Dynasty of Isin: Ishbi-Erra Shu-Ilishu Iddin-Dagan Ishme-Dagan Lipit-Eshtar Ur-Ninurta Bur-Suen Lipit-Enlil Erra-imitti Enlil-bani Zambiya Iter-pisha Ur-du-kuga Suen-magir Damiq-ilishuDynasty of Larsa: Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel Nur-Adad Sin-Iddinam Sin-Eribam Sin-Iqisham Silli-Adad Warad-Sin Rim-Sin I (...) Rim-Sin IIUruk VI dynasty: Alila-hadum Sumu-binasa Naram-Sin of Uruk Sîn-kāšid Sîn-iribam Sîn-gāmil Ilum-gamil Anam of Uruk Irdanene Rim-Anum Nabi-ilišu

Sukkalmah dynastySiwe-Palar-Khuppak


1800–1595 BCE

Thirteenth Dynasty of EgyptFourteenth Dynasty of Egypt

Abraham(Biblical)Kings of ByblosKings of TyreKings of Sidon

Yamhad

Old Assyria(2025–1378 BCE)Puzur-Ashur I Shalim-ahum Ilu-shuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I Puzur-Ashur II Naram-Sin Erishum II Shamshi-Adad I Ishme-Dagan I Mut-Ashkur Rimush Asinum Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi Bel-bani Libaya Sharma-Adad I Iptar-Sin Bazaya Lullaya Shu-Ninua Sharma-Adad II Erishum III Shamshi-Adad II Ishme-Dagan II Shamshi-Adad III Ashur-nirari I Puzur-Ashur III Enlil-nasir I Nur-ili Ashur-shaduni Ashur-rabi I Ashur-nadin-ahhe I Enlil-Nasir II Ashur-nirari II Ashur-bel-nisheshu Ashur-rim-nisheshu Ashur-nadin-ahhe II

First Babylonian dynasty("Old Babylonian Period")(Amorites)Sumu-abum Sumu-la-El Sin-muballitSabium Apil-Sin Sin-muballit Hammurabi Samsu-iluna Abi-eshuh Ammi-ditana Ammi-saduqa Samsu-DitanaEarly Kassite rulers

Second Babylonian dynasty("Sealand Dynasty")Ilum-ma-ili Itti-ili-nibi Damqi-ilishuIshkibal Shushushi GulkisharmDIŠ+U-EN Peshgaldaramesh AyadaragalamaAkurduana Melamkurkurra Ea-gamil



Second Intermediate PeriodSixteenthDynasty
AbydosDynasty
SeventeenthDynasty


Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt("Hyksos")Semqen 'Aper-'Anati Sakir-Har Khyan Apepi Khamudi

Mitanni(1600–1260 BCE)Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar


1531–1155 BCE

New Kingdom of EgyptEighteenth Dynasty of EgyptAhmose I Amenhotep I

Third Babylonian dynasty (Kassites)Agum-Kakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashman-harbe I Kurigalzu I Kadashman-Enlil I Burnaburiash II Kara-hardash Nazi-Bugash Kurigalzu II Nazi-Maruttash Kadashman-Turgu Kadashman-Enlil II Kudur-Enlil Shagarakti-Shuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlil-nadin-shumi Kadashman-Harbe II Adad-shuma-iddina Adad-shuma-usur Meli-Shipak II Marduk-apla-iddina I Zababa-shuma-iddin Enlil-nadin-ahi

Middle Elamite period
(1500–1100 BCE)Kidinuid dynastyIgehalkid dynastyUntash-Napirisha



Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut♀ Thutmose III


Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten♀ Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb

Hittite EmpireUgarit


Nineteenth Dynasty of EgyptRamesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret♀

Elamite EmpireShutrukid dynastyShutruk-Nakhunte


1155–1025 BCE

Twentieth Dynasty of EgyptSetnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XIThird Intermediate Period
Twenty-first Dynasty of EgyptSmendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II


PhoeniciaKings of ByblosKings of TyreKings of SidonKingdom of IsraelSaulIsh-boshethDavidSolomon

Syro-Hittite states

Middle AssyriaEriba-Adad I Ashur-uballit I Enlil-nirari Arik-den-ili Adad-nirari I Shalmaneser I Tukulti-Ninurta I Ashur-nadin-apli Ashur-nirari III Enlil-kudurri-usur Ninurta-apal-Ekur Ashur-dan I Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur Mutakkil-Nusku Ashur-resh-ishi I Tiglath-Pileser I Asharid-apal-Ekur Ashur-bel-kala Eriba-Adad II Shamshi-Adad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashur-nirari IV Ashur-rabi II Ashur-resh-ishi II Tiglath-Pileser II Ashur-dan II

Fourth Babylonian dynasty ("Second Dynasty of Isin")Marduk-kabit-ahheshu Itti-Marduk-balatu Ninurta-nadin-shumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlil-nadin-apli Marduk-nadin-ahhe Marduk-shapik-zeri Adad-apla-iddina Marduk-ahhe-eriba Marduk-zer-X Nabu-shum-libur

Neo-Elamite period (1100–540 BCE)


1025–934 BCE

Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth Babylonian dynasties ("Period of Chaos")Simbar-shipak Ea-mukin-zeri Kashshu-nadin-ahi Eulmash-shakin-shumi Ninurta-kudurri-usur I Shirikti-shuqamuna Mar-biti-apla-usur Nabû-mukin-apli


911–745 BCE

Twenty-second Dynasty of EgyptShoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV
Twenty-third Dynasty of EgyptHarsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini
Twenty-fourth Dynasty of EgyptTefnakht Bakenranef


Kingdom of SamariaKingdom of Judah

Neo-Assyrian EmpireAdad-nirari II Tukulti-Ninurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III Shamshi-Adad V Shammuramat♀ (regent) Adad-nirari III Shalmaneser IV Ashur-Dan III Ashur-nirari V

Ninth Babylonian DynastyNinurta-kudurri-usur II Mar-biti-ahhe-iddina Shamash-mudammiq Nabu-shuma-ukin I Nabu-apla-iddina Marduk-zakir-shumi I Marduk-balassu-iqbi Baba-aha-iddina (five kings) Ninurta-apla-X Marduk-bel-zeri Marduk-apla-usur Eriba-Marduk Nabu-shuma-ishkun Nabonassar Nabu-nadin-zeri Nabu-shuma-ukin II Nabu-mukin-zeri

Humban-Tahrid dynastyUrtakTeummanUmmanigashTammaritu IIndabibiHumban-haltash III


745–609 BCE

Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt("Black Pharaohs")Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun

Neo-Assyrian Empire
(Sargonid dynasty)Tiglath-Pileser† Shalmaneser† Marduk-apla-iddina II Sargon† Sennacherib† Marduk-zakir-shumi II Marduk-apla-iddina II Bel-ibni Ashur-nadin-shumi† Nergal-ushezib Mushezib-Marduk Esarhaddon† Ashurbanipal Ashur-etil-ilani Sinsharishkun Sin-shumu-lishir Ashur-uballit II



Assyrian conquest of Egypt

Assyrian conquest of Elam


626–539 BCE

Late PeriodTwenty-sixth Dynasty of EgyptNecho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III

Neo-Babylonian EmpireNabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II Amel-Marduk Neriglissar Labashi-Marduk Nabonidus

Median EmpireDeioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages


539–331 BCE

Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt(Achaemenid conquest of Egypt)

Kings of ByblosKings of TyreKings of Sidon

Achaemenid EmpireCyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III


Twenty-eighth Dynasty of EgyptTwenty-ninth Dynasty of EgyptThirtieth Dynasty of Egypt


Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt


331–141 BCE

Thirty-second Dynasty of Egypt and Thirty-third Dynasty of EgyptPtolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II♀ Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis♀ Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator♀ Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra♀ Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter♀ Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III♀ Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV♀ Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III♀ Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V♀ Cleopatra VI Tryphaena♀ Berenice IV Epiphanea♀ Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator♀ Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV♀

Hellenistic PeriodArgead dynasty: Alexander I Philip Alexander II Antigonus
Seleucid Empire: Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes



141–30 BCE

Kingdom of JudeaSimon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra♀ Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias

Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus

Parthian EmpireMithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I


30 BCE–116 CE

Roman Empire


(Roman conquest of Egypt)Province of Egypt

Judea

Syria


116-117 CE

Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan

Parthamaspates of Parthia


117–224 CE

Syria Palaestina

Province of Mesopotamia

Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV


224–270 CE

Sasanian EmpireProvince of AsoristanArdashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm


270–273 CE

Palmyrene EmpireVaballathus Zenobia♀ Antiochus


273–395 CE

Roman Empire


Province of Egypt

Syria Palaestina

Syria

Province of Mesopotamia


395–618 CE

Byzantine Empire


Byzantine Egypt

Palaestina Prima, Palaestina Secunda

Byzantine Syria

Byzantine Mesopotamia


618–628 CE

(Sasanian conquest of Egypt)Province of EgyptShahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz

Sasanian EmpireProvince of AsoristanKhosrow II Kavad II


628–641 CE

Byzantine Empire

Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapur-i Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh


Byzantine Egypt

Palaestina Prima, Palaestina Secunda

Byzantine Syria

Byzantine Mesopotamia


639–651 CE

Muslim conquest of Egypt

Muslim conquest of the Levant

Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia


 Chronology of the Neolithic period

 Rulers of Ancient Central Asia




^ Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.

^ W. Hallo; W. Simpson (1971). The Ancient Near East. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. pp. 48–49.

^ "Rulers of Mesopotamia". cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford, CNRS.

^ Thomas, Ariane; Potts, Timothy (2020). Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-60606-649-2.

^ Roux, Georges (1992). Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532–534 (Chronological Tables). ISBN 978-0-14-193825-7.

^ a b c Per Sumerian King List

^ Unger, Merrill F. (2014). Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus: A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-62564-606-4.










Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Achaemenid_Empire&oldid=1113271331"
Categories: Achaemenid Empire330s BC4th century BC in Iran550s BC5th century BC in Iran6th century BC in IranCountries in ancient AfricaFormer empires in AfricaFormer empires in AsiaFormer empires in EuropeHistory of Eastern EuropeHistory of North AfricaHistory of the Middle EastHistory of Western AsiaHistory of ZoroastrianismEmpires and kingdoms of IranIron Age countries in AsiaIron Age countries in EuropeMonarchy in Persia and IranPatronymicsStates and territories disestablished in the 4th century BCStates and territories established in the 6th century BCHistorical transcontinental empiresHidden categories: Pages using the EasyTimeline extensionAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2018All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2019Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from August 2021Articles containing Old Persian (ca. 600-400 B.C.)-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with unsourced statements from July 2022Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2015All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from July 2019Articles to be expanded from October 2015All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesCommons category link is on WikidataArticles which contain graphical timelines



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia Commons




Languages


AfrikaansالعربيةAragonésArmãneashtiঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilgeGalego客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLadinLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLingua Franca NovaMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMāoriमराठीمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuМонголNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаپنجابیپښتوPolskiPortuguêsQırımtatarcaRomânăРусскийसंस्कृतम्ScotsSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 30 September 2022, at 17:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










