



Architecture - Wikipedia










































Architecture

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Product and process of planning, designing and constructing buildings and other structures


For the profession, see Architect. For other uses, see Architecture (disambiguation).


 In adding the dome to the  Florence Cathedral (Italy) in the early 15th century, the architect Filippo Brunelleschi not only transformed the building and the city, but also the role and status of the architect.[1][2]
Architecture (from Latin  architectura; from Ancient Greek  ἀρχιτέκτων (arkhitéktōn) 'architect'; from  ἀρχι- (arkhi-) 'chief', and  τέκτων (téktōn) 'creator') is the art and technique of designing and building, as distinguished from the skills associated with construction.[3] It is both the process and the product of sketching, conceiving,[4] planning, designing, and constructing buildings or other structures.[5] Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art. Historical civilizations are often identified with their surviving architectural achievements.[6]
The practice, which began in the prehistoric era, has been used as a way of expressing culture for civilizations on all seven continents.[7] For this reason, architecture is considered to be a form of art. Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times. The earliest surviving text on architectural theories is the 1st century AD treatise De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius, according to whom a good building embodies firmitas, utilitas, and venustas (durability, utility, and beauty). Centuries later, Leon Battista Alberti developed his ideas further, seeing beauty as an objective quality of buildings to be found in their proportions. Giorgio Vasari wrote Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects and put forward the idea of style in the Western arts in the 16th century. In the 19th century, Louis Sullivan declared that "form follows function". "Function" began to replace the classical "utility" and was understood to include not only practical but also aesthetic, psychological and cultural dimensions. The idea of sustainable architecture was introduced in the late 20th century.
Architecture began as rural, oral vernacular architecture that developed from trial and error to successful replication. Ancient urban architecture was preoccupied with building religious structures and buildings symbolizing the political power of rulers until Greek and Roman architecture shifted focus to civic virtues. Indian and Chinese architecture influenced forms all over Asia and Buddhist architecture in particular took diverse local flavors. In fact, During the European Middle Ages, pan-European styles of Romanesque and Gothic cathedrals and abbeys emerged while the Renaissance favored Classical forms implemented by architects known by name. Later, the roles of architects and engineers became separated. Modern architecture began after World War I as an avant-garde movement that sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes. Emphasis was put on modern techniques, materials, and simplified geometric forms, paving the way for high-rise superstructures. Many architects became disillusioned with modernism which they perceived as ahistorical and anti-aesthetic, and postmodern and contemporary architecture developed.
Over the years, the field of architectural construction has branched out to include everything from ship design to interior decorating.

Contents

1 Definitions
2 Theory of architecture

2.1 Historic treatises
2.2 Modern concepts


3 History

3.1 Origins and vernacular architecture
3.2 Prehistoric architecture
3.3 Ancient architecture
3.4 Asian architecture
3.5 Islamic architecture
3.6 European Middle Ages
3.7 Renaissance and the architect
3.8 Early modern and the industrial age
3.9 Modernism
3.10 Postmodernism
3.11 Architecture today


4 Other types of architecture

4.1 Landscape architecture
4.2 Interior architecture
4.3 Naval architecture
4.4 Urban design
4.5 Metaphorical "architectures"
4.6 Seismic architecture


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links


Definitions
Architecture can mean:

A general term to describe buildings and other physical structures.[8]
The art and science of designing buildings and (some) nonbuilding structures.[8]
The style of design and method of construction of buildings and other physical structures.[8]
A unifying or coherent form or structure.[9]
Knowledge of art, science, technology, and humanity.[8]
The design activity of the architect,[8] from the macro-level (urban design, landscape architecture) to the micro-level (construction details and furniture). The practice of the architect, where architecture means offering or rendering professional services in connection with the design and construction of buildings, or built environments.[10]
Theory of architecture
Main articles: Architectural theory and Philosophy of architecture
 Illustration of bracket arm clusters containing cantilevers from Yingzao Fashi, a text on architecture by Li Jue (1065–1110)
 Plan of the second floor (attic storey) of the Hôtel de Brionne in Paris – 1734.
The philosophy of architecture is a branch of philosophy of art, dealing with aesthetic value of architecture, its semantics and in relation with development of culture. Many philosophers and theoreticians from Plato to Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze,[11] Robert Venturi and Ludwig Wittgenstein have concerned themselves with the nature of architecture and whether or not architecture is distinguished from building.

Historic treatises
The earliest surviving written work on the subject of architecture is De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius in the early 1st century AD.[12] According to Vitruvius, a good building should satisfy the three principles of firmitas, utilitas, venustas,[13][14] commonly known by the original translation – firmness, commodity and delight. An equivalent in modern English would be:

Durability – a building should stand up robustly and remain in good condition
Utility – it should be suitable for the purposes for which it is used
Beauty – it should be aesthetically pleasing
According to Vitruvius, the architect should strive to fulfill each of these three attributes as well as possible. Leon Battista Alberti, who elaborates on the ideas of Vitruvius in his treatise, De re aedificatoria, saw beauty primarily as a matter of proportion, although ornament also played a part. For Alberti, the rules of proportion were those that governed the idealized human figure, the Golden mean. The most important aspect of beauty was, therefore, an inherent part of an object, rather than something applied superficially, and was based on universal, recognizable truths. The notion of style in the arts was not developed until the 16th century, with the writing of Giorgio Vasari.[15] By the 18th century, his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects had been translated into Italian, French, Spanish, and English.
In the 16th century, Italian Mannerist architect, painter and theorist Sebastiano Serlio wrote Tutte L'Opere D'Architettura et Prospetiva (Complete Works on Architecture and Perspective). This treatise exerted immense influence throughout Europe, being the first handbook that emphasized the practical rather than the theoretical aspects of architecture, and it was the first to catalog the five orders.[16]
In the early 19th century, Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin wrote Contrasts (1836) that, as the title suggested, contrasted the modern, industrial world, which he disparaged, with an idealized image of neo-medieval world. Gothic architecture, Pugin believed, was the only "true Christian form of architecture."[17] The 19th-century English art critic, John Ruskin, in his Seven Lamps of Architecture, published 1849, was much narrower in his view of what constituted architecture. Architecture was the "art which so disposes and adorns the edifices raised by men … that the sight of them" contributes "to his mental health, power, and pleasure".[18] For Ruskin, the aesthetic was of overriding significance. His work goes on to state that a building is not truly a work of architecture unless it is in some way "adorned". For Ruskin, a well-constructed, well-proportioned, functional building needed string courses or rustication, at the very least.[18]
On the difference between the ideals of architecture and mere construction, the renowned 20th-century architect Le Corbusier wrote: "You employ stone, wood, and concrete, and with these materials you build houses and palaces: that is construction. Ingenuity is at work. But suddenly you touch my heart, you do me good. I am happy and I say: This is beautiful. That is Architecture".[19] Le Corbusier's contemporary Ludwig Mies van der Rohe said "Architecture starts when you carefully put two bricks together. There it begins."[20]

 The National Congress of Brazil, designed by Oscar Niemeyer
Modern concepts
The notable 19th-century architect of skyscrapers, Louis Sullivan, promoted an overriding precept to architectural design: "Form follows function". While the notion that structural and aesthetic considerations should be entirely subject to functionality was met with both popularity and skepticism, it had the effect of introducing the concept of "function" in place of Vitruvius' "utility". "Function" came to be seen as encompassing all criteria of the use, perception and enjoyment of a building, not only practical but also aesthetic, psychological and cultural.
Nunzia Rondanini stated, "Through its aesthetic dimension architecture goes beyond the functional aspects that it has in common with other human sciences. Through its own particular way of expressing values, architecture can stimulate and influence social life without presuming that, in and of itself, it will promote social development.... To restrict the meaning of (architectural) formalism to art for art's sake is not only reactionary; it can also be a purposeless quest for perfection or originality which degrades form into a mere instrumentality".[21]
Among the philosophies that have influenced modern architects and their approach to building design are Rationalism, Empiricism, Structuralism, Poststructuralism, Deconstruction and Phenomenology.
In the late 20th century a new concept was added to those included in the compass of both structure and function, the consideration of sustainability, hence sustainable architecture. To satisfy the contemporary ethos a building should be constructed in a manner which is environmentally friendly in terms of the production of its materials, its impact upon the natural and built environment of its surrounding area and the demands that it makes upon non-sustainable power sources for heating, cooling, water and waste management, and lighting.


History
Main article: History of architecture
Origins and vernacular architecture
Main article: Vernacular architecture




In Norway: wood and elevated-level






In Lesotho: rondavel stones






In Ireland: Yola hut






In Romania: peasant houses in the Dimitrie Gusti National Village Museum (Bucharest)




Building first evolved out of the dynamics between needs (shelter, security, worship, etc.) and means (available building materials and attendant skills). As human cultures developed and knowledge began to be formalized through oral traditions and practices, building became a craft, and "architecture" is the name given to the most highly formalized and respected versions of that craft. It is widely assumed that architectural success was the product of a process of trial and error, with progressively less trial and more replication as the results of the process proved increasingly satisfactory. What is termed vernacular architecture continues to be produced in many parts of the world.

Prehistoric architecture




Göbekli Tepe from Turkey, founded in 10th millennium BC and abandoned in 8th millennium BC






Pottery miniature of a Cucuteni-Trypillian house






Miniature of a regular Cucuteni-Trypillian house, full of ceramic vessels






Excavated dwellings at Skara Brae (Mainland, Orkney, Scotland, UK)




Early human settlements were mostly rural. Hence, Expending economies resulted in the creation of urban areas which in some cases grew and evolved very rapidly, such as that of Çatal Höyük in Anatolia and Mohenjo Daro of the Indus Valley Civilization in modern-day Pakistan.
Neolithic settlements and "cities" include Göbekli Tepe and Çatalhöyük in Turkey, Jericho in the Levant, Mehrgarh in Pakistan, Knap of Howar and Skara Brae, Orkney Islands, Scotland, and the  Cucuteni-Trypillian culture settlements in Romania, Moldova and Ukraine.

Ancient architecture




Mesopotamian architecture: Reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate in the Pergamon Museum (Berlin, Germany), circa 575 BC






Ancient Egyptian architecture: The Great Pyramid of Giza (Giza, Egypt), circa 2589-2566 BC, by Hemiunu






Ancient Greek architecture: The Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis, made of marble and limestone, 460-406 BC






Ancient Roman architecture: The Maison Carrée from Nîmes (France), one of the best-preserved Roman temples, circa 2 AD






Japanese architecture: Hōryū-ji, a Buddhist temple in Nara Prefecture, Japan, 607 AD




In many ancient civilizations such as those of Egypt and Mesopotamia, architecture and urbanism reflected the constant engagement with the divine and the supernatural, and many ancient cultures resorted to monumentality in architecture to symbolically represent the political power of the ruler or the state itself.
The architecture and urbanism of the Classical civilizations such as the Greek and the Roman evolved from civic ideals rather than religious or empirical ones and new building types emerged. As the Architectural "style" developed in the form of the Classical orders. Roman architecture was influenced by Greek architecture as they incorporated many Greek elements into their building practices.[22]
Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times. These texts provided both general advice and specific formal prescriptions or canons. Some examples of canons are found in the writings of the 1st-century BCE Roman Architect Vitruvius. Some of the most important early examples of canonic architecture are religious.

Asian architecture




Indian architecture: The Kandariya Mahadeva Temple (Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh, India), circa 1030






Chinese architecture: The Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests, the main building of the Temple of Heaven (Beijing, China), 1703-1790






Japanese architecture: The Himeji Castle (Himeji, Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan), 1609






Khmer architecture: The Bakong (near Siem Reap, Cambodia), earliest surviving Temple Mountain at Angkor, completed in 881 AD




The architecture of different parts of Asia developed differently than Europe; and each of Buddhist, Hindu and Sikh architecture had different characteristics. In fact, Unlike Indian and Chinese architecture which had great influence on the surrounding regions, Japanese architecture did not. Some Asian architecture showed great regional diversity such as Buddhist architecture, in particular. Moreover, other architectural achievements in Asia is the Hindu temple architecture, which developed from around the 5th century CE, is in theory governed by concepts laid down in the Shastras, and is concerned with expressing the macrocosm and the microcosm.
In many Asian countries, pantheistic religion led to architectural forms that were designed specifically to enhance the natural landscape. Also, the grandest houses were relatively lightweight structures mainly using wood until recent times, and there are few survivals of great age.  Buddhism was associated with a move to stone and brick religious structures, probably beginning as rock-cut architecture, which has often survived very well.
Early Asian writings on architecture include the Kao Gong Ji of China from the 7th–5th centuries BCE; the Shilpa Shastras of ancient India;  Manjusri Vasthu Vidya Sastra of Sri Lanka and Araniko of Nepal .

Islamic architecture
Main article: Islamic architecture




Moorish architecture: Grand arches of the Mosque–Cathedral of Córdoba (Córdoba, Spain)






Persian architecture: The Jameh Mosque in Isfahan (Iran)






Mughal architecture: The Taj Mahal in Agra (India)






Ottoman architecture: The interior side view of the main dome of the Selimiye Mosque in Edirne (Turkey)




Islamic architecture began in the 7th century CE, incorporating architectural forms from the ancient Middle East and Byzantium, but also developing features to suit the religious and social needs of the society. Examples can be found throughout the Middle East, Turkey, North Africa, the Indian Sub-continent  and in parts of Europe, such as Spain, Albania, and the Balkan States, as the result of the expansion of the Ottoman Empire.
[23][24]

European Middle Ages




Byzantine architecture: Apse of Santa Maria Maggiore (Rome), decorated in the 5th century with this glamorous mosaic






Romanesque architecture: Interior of the Durham Cathedral (Durham, UK), 1093-1133






Gothic architecture: Stained glass windows of the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, completed in 1248, mostly constructed between 1194 and 1220






Brâncovenesc architecture: The Stavropoleos Church (downtown Bucharest, Romania), with elaborate paintings on the façade, 1724




In Europe during the Medieval period, guilds were formed by craftsmen to organize their trades and written contracts have survived, particularly in relation to ecclesiastical buildings. The role of architect was usually one with that of master mason, or Magister lathomorum as they are sometimes described in contemporary documents.
The major architectural undertakings were the buildings of abbeys and cathedrals. From about 900 CE onward, the movements of both clerics and tradesmen carried architectural knowledge across Europe, resulting in the pan-European styles Romanesque and Gothic.
Also, a significant part of the Middle Ages architectural heritage is numerous fortifications across the continent. From the Balkans to Spain, and from Malta to Estonia, these buildings represent an important part of European heritage.

Renaissance and the architect
Main article: Renaissance architecture




The Florence Cathedral (Florence, Italy), 1294–1436, by Arnolfo di Cambio, Filippo Brunelleschi and Emilio De Fabris






The Tempietto (Rome), by Donato Bramante, 1444-1514






The Hall of Perspective from Villa Farnesina (Rome), by Baldassare Peruzzi, 1505-1510






The Villa La Rotonda (Vicenza, Italy), 1567 - c. 1592, by Andrea Palladio






The Château de Chenonceau (France), by Philibert de l'Orme, 1576




In Renaissance Europe, from about 1400 onwards, there was a revival of Classical learning accompanied by the development of Renaissance humanism, which placed greater emphasis on the role of the individual in society than had been the case during the Medieval period. Buildings were ascribed to specific architects – Brunelleschi, Alberti, Michelangelo, Palladio – and the cult of the individual had begun. There was still no dividing line between artist, architect and engineer, or any of the related vocations, and the appellation was often one of regional preference.
A revival of the Classical style in architecture was accompanied by a burgeoning of science and engineering, which affected the proportions and structure of buildings. At this stage, it was still possible for an artist to design a bridge as the level of structural calculations involved was within the scope of the generalist.

Early modern and the industrial age




Baroque architecture: The Château de Maisons (France), by François Mansart, 1630–1651






Rococo architecture: The pièce de la vaisselle d'or (Palace of Versailles, Versailles, France)






Neoclassical architecture: The west facade of the Petit Trianon (Versailles), 1764, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel






Historicist architecture (in this case Gothic Revival): Interior of the All Saints (London), 1850–1859, by William Butterfield






19th century Eclectic Classicist architecture: The Museum of Ages on Victory Avenue (Bucharest, Romania), late 19th century, unknown architect






19th century industrial architecture: Les Halles (Paris), 1850s-destroyed in 1971, by Victor Baltard






Orientalist architecture: The Éden-Théâtre (Paris), early 1880s-demolished in 1895, by William Klein and Albert Duclos






Revivalist architecture of a national style (in this case Romanian Revival): The C.N. Câmpeanu House on Bulevardul Dacia (Bucharest), c. 1923, by Constantin Nănescu[25]






Beaux-Arts architecture: The CEC Palace on Victory Avenue (Bucharest), 8 June 1897 – 1900, by Paul Gottereau[26]






Art Nouveau architecture: The Entrance of the Castel Béranger (Paris), 1895–1898, by Hector Guimard




The emerging knowledge in scientific fields and the rise of new materials and technology, architecture and engineering began to separate, and the architect began to concentrate on aesthetics and the humanist aspects, often at the expense of technical aspects of building design. There was also the rise of the "gentleman architect" who usually dealt with wealthy clients and concentrated predominantly on visual qualities derived usually from historical prototypes, typified by the many country houses of Great Britain that were created in the Neo Gothic or Scottish baronial styles.
Formal architectural training in the 19th century, for example at École des Beaux-Arts in France, gave much emphasis to the production of beautiful drawings and little to context and feasibility.
Meanwhile, the Industrial Revolution laid open the door for mass production and consumption. Aesthetics became a criterion for the middle class as ornamented products, once within the province of expensive craftsmanship, became cheaper under machine production.
Vernacular architecture became increasingly ornamental. Housebuilders could use current architectural design in their work by combining features found in pattern books and architectural journals.

Modernism
Main article: Modern architecture




Early Modern architecture: The Fagus Factory (Alfeld, Germany), 1911, by Walter Gropius






Expressionist architecture: The Einstein Tower (Potsdam, near Berlin, Germany), 1919–1922, by Erich Mendelsohn






Art Deco architecture: The Théâtre des Champs-Élysées (Paris), 1910–1913, by Auguste Perret






International Style: The Glaspaleis (Heerlen, the Netherlands), 1934–1935, by Frits Peutz and Philip Johnson




Around the beginning of the 20th century, general dissatisfaction with the emphasis on revivalist architecture and elaborate decoration gave rise to many new lines of thought that served as precursors to Modern architecture. Notable among these is the Deutscher Werkbund, formed in 1907 to produce better quality machine-made objects. The rise of the profession of industrial design is usually placed here. Following this lead, the Bauhaus school, founded in Weimar, Germany in 1919, redefined the architectural bounds prior set throughout history, viewing the creation of a building as the ultimate synthesis—the apex—of art, craft, and technology.
When modern architecture was first practiced, it was an avant-garde movement with moral, philosophical, and aesthetic underpinnings. Immediately after World War I, pioneering modernist architects sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order, focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes. They rejected the architectural practice of the academic refinement of historical styles which served the rapidly declining aristocratic order. The approach of the Modernist architects was to reduce buildings to pure forms, removing historical references and ornament in favor of functional details. Buildings displayed their functional and structural elements, exposing steel beams and concrete surfaces instead of hiding them behind decorative forms. Architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright developed organic architecture, in which the form was defined by its environment and purpose, with an aim to promote harmony between human habitation and the natural world with prime examples being Robie House and Fallingwater.
Architects such as Mies van der Rohe, Philip Johnson and Marcel Breuer worked to create beauty based on the inherent qualities of building materials and modern construction techniques, trading traditional historic forms for simplified geometric forms, celebrating the new means and methods made possible by the Industrial Revolution, including steel-frame construction, which gave birth to high-rise superstructures. Fazlur Rahman Khan's development of the tube structure was a technological break-through in building ever higher.  By mid-century, Modernism had morphed into the International Style, an aesthetic epitomized in many ways by the Twin Towers of New York's World Trade Center designed by Minoru Yamasaki.

Postmodernism
Main article: Postmodern architecture




Piazza d'Italia (New Orleans, USA), 1978, by Charles Moore






Team Disney Building (Los Angeles, USA), 1990, by Michael Graves






Multicolour interior of the Cambridge Judge Business School (Cambridge, the UK), 1995, by John Outram






The Dancing House (Prague, Czech Republic), 1996, by Vlado Milunić and Frank Gehry




Many architects resisted modernism, finding it devoid of the decorative richness of historical styles. As the first generation of modernists began to die after World War II, the second generation of architects including Paul Rudolph, Marcel Breuer, and Eero Saarinen tried to expand the aesthetics of modernism with Brutalism, buildings with expressive sculpture façades made of unfinished concrete. But an even  younger postwar generation critiqued modernism and Brutalism for being too austere, standardized, monotone, and not taking into account the richness of human experience offered in historical buildings across time and in different places and cultures.
One such reaction to the cold aesthetic of modernism and Brutalism is the school of metaphoric architecture, which includes such things as bio morphism and zoomorphic architecture, both using nature as the primary source of inspiration and design.  While it is considered by some to be merely an aspect of postmodernism, others consider it to be a school in its own right and a later development of expressionist architecture.[27]
Beginning in the late 1950s and 1960s, architectural phenomenology emerged as an important movement in the early reaction against modernism, with architects like Charles Moore in the United States, Christian Norberg-Schulz in Norway, and Ernesto Nathan Rogers and Vittorio Gregotti, Michele Valori, Bruno Zevi in Italy, who collectively popularized an interest in a new contemporary architecture aimed at expanding human experience using historical buildings as models and precedents.[28] Postmodernism produced a style that combined contemporary building technology and cheap materials, with the aesthetics of older pre-modern and non-modern styles, from high classical architecture to popular or vernacular regional building styles. Robert Venturi famously defined postmodern architecture as a "decorated shed" (an ordinary building which is functionally designed inside and embellished on the outside) and upheld it against modernist and brutalist "ducks" (buildings with unnecessarily expressive tectonic forms).[29]

Architecture today
Main article: Contemporary architecture




The Meadows Museum (Dallas, Texas, USA), 2001, by HBRA architects






The Beijing National Stadium (Beijing, China), 2003–2007, by Herzog & de Meuron






The Library and Learning Center of the University of Vienna (Vienna, Austria), 2008, by Zaha Hadid






The Isbjerget housing project (Aarhus, Denmark), inspired by form and color of icebergs, 2013, by CEBRA, JDS Architects, Louis Paillard, and SeARCH




Since the 1980s, as the complexity of buildings began to increase (in terms of structural systems, services, energy and technologies), the field of architecture became multi-disciplinary with specializations for each project type, technological expertise or project delivery methods. Moreover, there has been an increased separation of the 'design' architect [Notes 1] from the 'project' architect who ensures that the project meets the required standards and deals with matters of liability.[Notes 2] The preparatory processes for the design of any large building have become increasingly complicated, and require preliminary studies of such matters as durability, sustainability, quality, money, and compliance with local laws. A large structure can no longer be the design of one person but must be the work of many.
Modernism and Postmodernism have been criticized by some members of the architectural profession who feel that successful architecture is not a personal, philosophical, or aesthetic pursuit by individualists; rather it has to consider everyday needs of people and use technology to create livable environments, with the design process being informed by studies of behavioral, environmental, and social sciences.
Environmental sustainability has become a mainstream issue, with a profound effect on the architectural profession. Many developers, those who support the financing of buildings, have become educated to encourage the facilitation of environmentally sustainable design, rather than solutions based primarily on immediate cost. Major examples of this can be found in passive solar building design, greener roof designs, biodegradable materials, and more attention to a structure's energy usage. This major shift in architecture has also changed architecture schools to focus more on the environment. There has been an acceleration in the number of buildings that seek to meet green building sustainable design principles. Sustainable practices that were at the core of vernacular architecture increasingly provide inspiration for environmentally and socially sustainable contemporary techniques.[30] The U.S. Green Building Council's LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) rating system has been instrumental in this.[31][quantify]
Concurrently, the recent movements of New Urbanism, Metaphoric architecture, Complementary architecture and New Classical architecture promote a sustainable approach towards construction that appreciates and develops smart growth, architectural tradition and classical design.[32][33] This in contrast to modernist and globally uniform architecture, as well as leaning against solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl.[34] Glass curtain walls, which were the hallmark of the ultra modern urban life in many countries surfaced even in developing countries like Nigeria where international styles had been represented since the mid 20th Century mostly because of the leanings of foreign-trained architects.[35]

Other types of architecture
 Stourhead in Wiltshire, England, designed by Henry Hoare (1705–1785)
Landscape architecture
Main article: Landscape architecture
Landscape architecture is the design of outdoor public areas, landmarks, and structures to achieve environmental, social-behavioral, or aesthetic outcomes.[36] It involves the systematic investigation of existing social, ecological, and soil conditions and processes in the landscape, and the design of interventions that will produce the desired outcome.  The scope of the profession includes landscape design; site planning; stormwater management; environmental restoration; parks and recreation planning; visual resource management; green infrastructure planning and provision; and private estate and residence landscape master planning and design; all at varying scales of design, planning and management. A practitioner in the profession of landscape architecture is called a landscape architect.

Interior architecture
Main article: Interior architecture
 Charles Rennie Mackintosh – Music Room 1901
Interior architecture is the design of a space which has been created by structural boundaries and the human interaction within these boundaries.  It can also be the initial design and plan for use, then later redesigned to accommodate a changed purpose, or a significantly revised design for adaptive reuse of the building shell.[37] The latter is often part of sustainable architecture practices, conserving resources through "recycling" a structure by adaptive redesign.  Generally referred to as the spatial art of environmental design, form and practice, interior architecture is the process through which the interiors of buildings are designed, concerned with all aspects of the human uses of structural spaces.  Put simply, interior architecture is the design of an interior in architectural terms.

Naval architecture
Main article: Naval architecture
 Body plan of a ship showing the hull form
Naval architecture, also known as naval engineering, is an engineering discipline dealing with the engineering design process, shipbuilding, maintenance, and operation of marine vessels and structures.[38][39] Naval architecture involves basic and applied research, design, development, design evaluation and calculations during all stages of the life of a marine vehicle. Preliminary design of the vessel, its detailed design, construction, trials, operation and maintenance, launching and dry-docking are the main activities involved. Ship design calculations are also required for ships being modified (by means of conversion, rebuilding, modernization, or repair). Naval architecture also involves the formulation of safety regulations and damage control rules and the approval and certification of ship designs to meet statutory and non-statutory requirements.

Urban design
Main article: Urban design
Urban design is the process of designing and shaping the physical features of cities, towns, and villages. In contrast to architecture, which focuses on the design of individual buildings, urban design deals with the larger scale of groups of buildings, streets and public spaces, whole neighborhoods and districts, and entire cities, with the goal of making urban areas functional, attractive, and sustainable.[40]
Urban design is an interdisciplinary field that utilizes elements of many built environment professions, including landscape architecture, urban planning, architecture, civil engineering and municipal engineering.[41] It is common for professionals in all these disciplines to practice urban design. In more recent times different sub-subfields of urban design have emerged such as strategic urban design, landscape urbanism, water-sensitive urban design, and sustainable urbanism.

Metaphorical "architectures"
"Architecture" is used as a metaphor for many modern techniques or fields for structuring abstractions.  These include:

Computer architecture, a set of rules and methods that describe the functionality, organization, and implementation of computer systems, with software architecture, hardware architecture and network architecture covering more specific aspects.
Business architecture, defined as "a blueprint of the enterprise that provides a common understanding of the organization and is used to align strategic objectives and tactical demands",[42] Enterprise architecture is another term.
Cognitive architecture theories about the structure of the human mind
System architecture a conceptual model that defines the structure, behavior, and more views of any type of system.[43]
Seismic architecture
Main article: Earthquake engineering
The term 'seismic architecture' or 'earthquake architecture' was first introduced in 1985 by Robert Reitherman.[44] The phrase "earthquake architecture" is used to describe a degree of architectural expression of earthquake resistance or implication of architectural configuration, form or style in earthquake resistance. It is also used to describe buildings in which seismic design considerations impacted its architecture. It may be considered a new aesthetic approach in designing structures in seismic prone areas.[45]  The wide breadth of expressive possibilities ranges from metaphorical uses of seismic issues, to the more straightforward exposure of seismic technology. While outcomes of an earthquake architecture can be very diverse in their physical manifestations, architectural expression of seismic principles can also take many forms and levels of sophistication.[46]

See also


Architecture portal
Architectural engineering
Architectural technology
Ephemeral architecture
Index of architecture articles
Outline of architecture
Philosophy of architecture
Reverse architecture
Timeline of architecture
Notes


^ A design architect is one who is responsible for the design.

^ A project architect is one who is responsible for ensuring the design is built correctly and who administers building contracts – in non-specialist architectural practices the project architect is also the design architect and the term refers to the differing roles the architect plays at differing stages of the process.


References


^ Museo Galileo, Museum and Institute of History and Science, The Dome of Santa Maria del Fiore Archived 1 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine, (accessed 30 January 2013)

^ Giovanni Fanelli, Brunelleschi, Becocci, Florence (1980), Chapter: The Dome pp. 10–41.

^ "architecture - Expression of technique | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 21 September 2022.

^ Pierre, Leclercq. "ResearchGate Phases of an architectural project".

^ "architecture". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.

^ Pace, Anthony (2004). "Tarxien".  In Daniel Cilia (ed.). Malta before History – The World's Oldest Free Standing Stone Architecture. Miranda Publishers. ISBN 978-9990985085.

^ "7 Things I Learned About "Home" from Talking to Architects on Every Continent". Apartment Therapy. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2020.

^ a b c d e Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993), Oxford, ISBN 0 19 860575 7

^ Merriam–Webster's Dictionary of English Usage, ISBN 0-87779-132-5 or ISBN 978-0-87779-132-4

^ "Gov.ns.ca". Gov.ns.ca. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011.

^ Deleuze, Gilles (1990). Pourparlers. Paris: Minuit. p. 219. It is not the line that is between two points, but the point that is at the intersection of several lines.

^ D. Rowland – T.N. Howe: Vitruvius. Ten Books on Architecture. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1999, ISBN 0-521-00292-3

^ "Vitruvius Ten Books on Architecture, with regard to landscape and garden design". gardenvisit.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 14 November 2005.

^ "Vitruvius". Penelope.uchicago.edu. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 2 July 2011.

^ Françoise Choay, Alberti and Vitruvius, editor, Joseph Rykwert, Profile 21, Architectural Design, Vol. 49 No. 5–6

^ Sebastiano Serlio -- On domestic architecture Archived 16 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Columbia University Libraries, accessed February 5, 2021

^ D'Anjou, Philippe (2011). "An Ethics of Freedom for Architectural Design Practice". Journal of Architectural Education. 64 (2): 141–147. doi:10.1111/j.1531-314X.2010.01137.x. JSTOR 41318789. S2CID 110313708.

^ a b John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture, G. Allen (1880), reprinted Dover, (1989) ISBN 0-486-26145-X

^ Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, Dover Publications(1985). ISBN 0-486-25023-7

^ "Architecture starts when you carefully put two bricks together. There it begins. - Ludwig Mies van der Rohe at BrainyQuote". BrainyQuote. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2014.

^ Rondanini, Nunzia Architecture and Social Change Heresies II, Vol. 3, No. 3, New York, Neresies Collective Inc., 1981.

^ "Introduction to Greek architecture". Khan Academy. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 23 June 2017.

^ Marika Sardar (October 2004). "Essay: The Later Ottomans and the Impact of Europe". www.metmuseum.org. The Met. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 12 February 2019.

^ Lory, Bernard (1 January 2015). "The Ottoman Legacy in the Balkans" (html / pdf). Entangled Histories of the Balkans - Volume Three. Entangled Histories of the Balkans - Volume Three. pp. 355–405. doi:10.1163/9789004290365_006. ISBN 9789004290365. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 12 February 2019.

^ Woinaroski, Cristina (2013). Istorie urbană, Lotizarea și Parcul Ioanid din București în context european (in Romanian). SIMETRIA. ISBN 978-973-1872-30-8.

^ Marinache, Oana (2017). Paul Gottereau - Un Regal în Arhitectură (in Romanian). Editura Istoria Artei. p. 184. ISBN 978-606-8839-09-7.

^ 
Fez-Barringten, Barie (2012). Architecture: The Making of Metaphors. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4438-3517-6.

^ Otero-Pailos, Jorge (2010). Architecture's Historical Turn: Phenomenology and the Rise of the Postmodern. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9780816666041. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022.

^ Venturi, Robert (1966). Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture. New York: Museum of Modern Art. complexity and contradiction in architecture.

^ OneWorld.net (31 March 2004). "Vernacular Architecture in India". El.doccentre.info. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 2 July 2011.

^ Other energy efficiency and green building rating systems include Energy Star, Green Globes, and CHPS (Collaborative for High Performance Schools).

^ "The Charter of the New Urbanism". cnu.org. 20 April 2015. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2014.

^ "Beauty, Humanism, Continuity between Past and Future". Traditional Architecture Group. Archived from the original on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 23 March 2014.

^ Issue Brief: Smart-Growth: Building Livable Communities Archived 19 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine. American Institute of Architects. Retrieved on 23 March 2014.

^ "Architecture". Litcaf. 10 February 2016. Archived from the original on 19 November 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2017.

^ Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe, Susan Jellicoe, The Landscape of Man: Shaping the Environment from Prehistory to the Present Day ISBN 9780500274316

^ "Interior Architecture". RISD Interior Architecture Graduate Department. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2017.

^ RINA. "Careers in Naval Architecture". www.rina.org.uk. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 26 February 2017.

^ Biran, Adrian; (2003). Ship hydrostatics and stability (1st Ed.) – Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 0-7506-4988-7

^ Boeing;  et al. (2014). "LEED-ND and Livability Revisited". Berkeley Planning Journal. 27: 31–55. doi:10.5070/BP327120808. Archived from the original on 4 July 2019. Retrieved 15 April 2015.

^ Van Assche, K., Beunen, R., Duineveld, M., & de Jong, H. (2013). Co-evolutions of planning and design: Risks and benefits of design perspectives in planning systems Archived 28 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Planning Theory, 12(2), 177-198.

^ OMG Business Architecture Special Interest Group "What Is Business Architecture? Archived 13 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine" at bawg.omg.org, 2008 (archive.org). Accessed 04-03-2015; Cited in: William M. Ulrich, Philip Newcomb Information Systems Transformation: Architecture-Driven Modernization Case Studies. (2010), p. 4.

^ Hannu Jaakkola and Bernhard Thalheim. (2011) "Architecture-driven modelling methodologies." In: Proceedings of the 2011 conference on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases XXII. Anneli Heimbürger et al. (eds). IOS Press. p. 98

^ Reitherman, Robert (1985). "Earthquake Engineering and Earthquake Architecture. Part of the AIA Workshop for Architects and Related Building Professionals on Designing for Earthquakes in the Western Mountain States". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Llunji, Mentor (2016). Seismic Architecture - The architecture of earthquake resistant structures. Msproject. ISBN 9789940979409.

^ Charleson, Andrew (2000). "Towards An Earthquake Architecture. 12 WCEE-12th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)


External links


Architecture  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity




Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Architecture.

World Architecture Community
Architecture.com, published by Royal Institute of British Architects
Architectural centers and museums in the world, list of links from the UIA
American Institute of Architects
Glossary of Architectural Terms Archived 28 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Cities and Buildings Database – Collection of digitized images of buildings and cities drawn from across time and throughout the world from the University of Washington Library
"Architecture and Power", BBC Radio 4 discussion with Adrian Tinniswood, Gillian Darley and Gavin Stamp (In Our Time, Oct. 31, 2002)
vteGenres of modern architectureAlphabetically
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Bauhaus
Blobitecture
Brutalism
Bowellism
Constructivism
Contemporary
Critical regionalism
De Stijl
Deconstructivism
Expressionism
Functionalism
Futurism
Googie
High-tech
International style
Metabolism
Mid-Century modern
Modernisme
Monumentalism
Neo-Futurism
Neomodern
New Classical
New Objectivity
Organicism
Postconstructivism
Postmodernism
PWA Moderne
Prairie School
Rationalist-Fascist
Stalinist
Streamline Moderne
Stripped Classicism
Structuralism
By start year /decade
Modernisme (1888–1911)
Art Nouveau (1890–1910)
Prairie School (1890s–1920s)
Expressionism (1910–)
Stripped Classicism (1913–)
De Stijl (1917–1931)
Bauhaus (1919–1933)
Constructivism (1920–1932)
New Objectivity (1922–1933)
Streamline Moderne (1925–1950)
Rationalist-Fascist (1920s–1930s)
International style (1920s–)
Functionalism (1920s–1970s)
Futurism (1920s–)
Organicism (1920s–)
Art Deco (1910–1939)
Postconstructivism (1930s)
PWA Moderne (1933–1944)
Stalinist (1930s–1950s)
Googie (1930s–1970)
Mid-century modern (1933–1969)
Brutalism (1940s–late 1970s)
Structuralism (1959–)
Metabolism (1959–)
Postmodernism (1960s–)
Blobitecture (1960s–)
Neo-futurism (1960s–)
High-tech (1970s–)
Critical regionalism (1980s–)
Deconstructivism (1980s–)
Neomodern (1990s–)
New Classical (1990s–)
Contemporary (2000s–)

 Architecture portal
Related articles

vteRooms and spaces of a houseShared rooms
Bonus room
Common room
Den
Dining room
Family room
Garret
Great room
Home cinema
Kitchen
Dirty kitchen
Kitchenette
Living room
Gynaeceum
Harem
Andron
Man cave
Recreation room
Billiard room
Shrine
Study
Sunroom
Private rooms
Bathroom
toilet
Bedroom / Guest room
closet
Boudoir
Cabinet
Nursery
Spaces
Atrium
Balcony
Breezeway
Conversation pit
Cubby-hole
Deck
Elevator
Dumbwaiter
Entryway/Genkan
Fireplace
hearth
Foyer
Hall
Hallway
Inglenook
Lanai
Loft
Loggia
Overhang
Patio
Porch
screened
sleeping
Ramp
Secret passage
Stairs
Terrace
Veranda
Vestibule
Utility and storage
Attic
Basement
Carport
Cloakroom
Closet
Crawl space
Electrical room
Equipment room
Furnace room / Boiler room
Garage
Janitorial closet
Larder
Laundry room / Utility room
Mechanical room / floor
Pantry
Root cellar
Semi-basement
Storm cellar / Safe room
Studio
Wardrobe
Wine cellar
Wiring closet
Workshop
Great house areas
Antechamber
Ballroom
Kitchen-related
Butler's pantry
Buttery
Saucery
Scullery
Spicery
Still room
Conservatory / Orangery
Courtyard
Drawing room
Great chamber
Great hall
Library
Long gallery
Lumber room
Parlour
Sauna
Servants' hall
Servants' quarters
Smoking room
Solar
State room
Swimming pool
Turret
Undercroft
Other
Furniture
Hidden room
House
House plan
styles
types
Multi-family residential
Secondary suite
Detached
Semi-detached
Studio apartment
Duplex
Terraced 
Architecturalelements
Arch
Baluster
Belt course
Bressummer
Ceiling
Chimney
Colonnade / Portico
Column
Cornice / Eaves
Dome
Door
Ell
Floor
Foundation
Gable
Gate
Lighting
Ornament
Plumbing
Quoins
Roof
Style
List
Vault
Wall
Window
Related
Backyard
Driveway
Front yard
Garden
Home
Home improvement
Home repair
Shed
Tree house

 Architecture portal
 Housing portal
 Category: Rooms

vteDesign
Outline
Designer
DisciplinesCommunicationdesign
Advertising
Book design
Brand design
Exhibit design
Film title design
Graphic design
Motion
Postage stamp design
Print design
Illustration
Information design
Instructional design
News design
Photography
Retail design
Signage / Traffic sign design
Typography / Type design
Video design
Visual merchandising
Environmentaldesign
Architecture
Architectural lighting design
Building design
Passive solar
Ecological design
Environmental impact design
Garden design
Computer-aided
Healthy community design
Hotel design
Interior architecture
Interior design
EID
Keyline design
Landscape architecture
Sustainable
Landscape design
Spatial design
Urban design
Industrialdesign
Automotive design
Automotive suspension design
CMF design
Corrugated box design
Electric guitar design
Furniture design
Sustainable
Hardware interface design
Motorcycle design
Packaging and labeling
Photographic lens design
Product design
Production design
Sensory design
Service design
Interactiondesign
Experience design
EED
Game design
Level design
Video game design
Hardware interface design
Icon design
Immersive design
Information design
Sonic interaction design
User experience design
User interface design
Web design
Otherapplied arts
Public art design
Ceramic / glass design
Fashion design
Costume design
Jewellery design
Floral design
Game art design
Property design
Scenic design
Sound design
Stage/set lighting design
Textile design
Otherdesign& engineering
Algorithm design
Behavioural design
Boiler design
Database design
Drug design
Electrical system design
Experimental design
Filter design
Geometric design
Work design
Integrated circuit design
Circuit design
Physical design
Power network design
Mechanism design
Nuclear weapon design
Nucleic acid design
Organization design
Process design
Processor design
Protein design
Research design
Social design
Software design
Spacecraft design
Strategic design
Systems design
Approaches
Activity-centered
Adaptive web
Affective
Brainstorming
By committee
By contract
C-K theory
Closure
Co-design
Concept-oriented
Configuration
Contextual
Continuous
Cradle-to-cradle
Creative problem-solving
Creativity techniques
Critical
Design fiction
Defensive
Design–bid–build
Design–build
architect-led
Diffuse
Domain-driven
Ecological design
Energy neutral
Engineering design process
Probabilistic design
Error-tolerant
Fault-tolerant
Framework-oriented
For assembly
For behaviour change
For manufacturability
For Six Sigma
For testing
For X
Functional
Generative
Geodesign
HCD
High-level
Inclusive
Integrated
Integrated topside
Intelligence-based
Iterative
KISS principle
Low-level
Metadesign
Mind mapping
Modular
New Wave
Object-oriented
Open
Parametric
Participatory
Platform-based
Policy-based
Process-centered
Public interest
Rational
Regenerative
Reliability engineering
Research-based
Responsibility-driven
RWD
Safe-life
Sustainable
Systemic
SOD
Tableless web
Theory of constraints
Top-down and bottom-up
Transformation
Transgenerational
TRIZ
Universal
Design for All
Usage-centered
Use-centered
User-centered
Empathic
User innovation
Value-driven
Value sensitive
Privacy by
Design choice
computing
controls
culture
flow
leadership
management
marker
methods
pattern
research
science
sprint
strategy
theory
thinking
ToolsIntellectual propertyOrganizationsAwardsTools
AAD
Architectural model
Blueprint
Comprehensive layout
CAD
CAID
Virtual home design software
CAutoD
Design quality indicator
Electronic design automation
Flowchart
Mockup
Design specification
Prototype
Sketch
Storyboard
Technical drawing
HTML editor
Website wireframe
Intellectualproperty
Community design
Design around
Design infringement
Design patent
Fashion design copyright
Geschmacksmuster
Industrial design rights
European Union
Organizations
American Institute of Graphic Arts
Chartered Society of Designers
Design and Industries Association
Design Council
International Forum Design
The Design Society
Design Research Society
Awards
European Design Award
German Design Award
Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art)
Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum)
Graphex
IF Product Design Award
James Dyson Award
Prince Philip Designers Prize
Related topics
Aesthetics
Agile
Concept art
Conceptual design
Creative industries
Cultural icon
.design
Enterprise architecture
Form factor
Futures studies
Indie design
Innovation management
Intelligent design
Lean startup
New product development
OODA loop
Philosophy of design
Process simulation
Slow design
STEAM fields
Unintelligent design
Visualization
Wicked problem
Design brief
change
classic
competition
architectural
student
director
education
elements and principles
engineer
firm
history
knowledge
language
life
load
museum
paradigm
rationale
review
specification
studies
studio
technology

 Commons 
 Wikibooks 
 Wikinews 
 Wikiquote 
 Wikisource 
 Wiktionary 

vteAesthetics topicsPhilosophers
Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
Edmund Burke
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
Gilles Deleuze
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
G. W. F. Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Louis Lavelle
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...
Theories
Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
Theory of painting
Theory of art
more...
Concepts
Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Appropriation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Fashion
Fun
Gaze
Harmony
Humour
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Recreation
Reverence
Style
Sthayibhava
Sublime
Taste
Tragedy
Work of art
Related
Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Artistic merit
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
Japanese aesthetics
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Medieval aesthetics
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Visual arts
Painting
History of painting
Sculpture

Index
Outline
Category
 Philosophy portal

vteVisual arts
Architecture
Art
Ceramics
Computer art
Craft
Drawing
Design
Filmmaking
Light art
Painting
Photography
Printmaking
Public art
Sculpture
Site-specific art
Street art

List of artistic media

vteGlossaries of science and engineering
Aerospace engineering
Agriculture
Archaeology
Architecture
Artificial intelligence
Astronomy
Biology
Botany
Calculus
Chemistry
Civil engineering
Clinical research
Computer hardware
Computer science
Ecology
Economics
Electrical and electronics engineering
Engineering
A–L
M–Z
Entomology
Environmental science
Evolutionary biology
Genetics
Geography
Arabic toponyms
Hebrew toponyms
Western and South Asia
Geology
Ichthyology
Machine vision
Mathematics
Mechanical engineering
Medicine
Meteorology
Nanotechnology
Ornithology
Physics
Probability and statistics
Psychiatry
Quantum computing
Robotics
Scientific naming
Structural engineering
Virology

Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Architecture&oldid=1114962342"
Categories: ArchitectureArchitectural designHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Romanian-language sources (ro)CS1 errors: missing periodicalArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from February 2015Articles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Pages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikiversityWikivoyage




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésԱրեւմտահայերէնArmãneashtiArpetanঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralBislamaБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoГӀалгӀай贛語گیلکی한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKalaallisutಕನ್ನಡქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKotavaKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLadinoລາວLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىBahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandNovialOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPangasinanپنجابیPapiamentuپښتوPatoisPicardPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаसंस्कृतम्SarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوVènetoTiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWinaray吴语Xitsongaייִדיש粵語ZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 04:54 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










