



Cooking - Wikipedia










































Cooking

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Preparing food using heat
This article is about the preparation of food. For a general outline, see Outline of food preparation. For varied styles of international food, see cuisine.


 A person cooking in a restaurant in Morocco
 Pots being heated to cook food in a dwelling in South India
 Food creation - Making of Akyeke in Ghana
Cooking, cookery, or culinary arts is the art, science and craft of using heat to prepare food for consumption. Cooking techniques and ingredients vary widely, from grilling food over an open fire to using electric stoves, to baking in various types of ovens, reflecting local conditions.
Types of cooking also depend on the skill levels and training of the cooks. Cooking is done both by people in their own dwellings and by professional cooks and chefs in restaurants and other food establishments.
Preparing food with heat or fire is an activity unique to humans. Archeological evidence of cooking fires from at least 300,000 years ago exists, but some estimate that humans started cooking up to 2 million years ago.[1][2]
The expansion of agriculture, commerce, trade, and transportation between civilizations in different regions offered cooks many new ingredients. New inventions and technologies, such as the invention of pottery for holding and boiling of water, expanded cooking techniques. Some modern cooks apply advanced scientific techniques to food preparation to further enhance the flavor of the dish served.[3]

Contents

1 History
2 Ingredients

2.1 Carbohydrates
2.2 Fats
2.3 Proteins
2.4 Water
2.5 Vitamins and minerals


3 Methods
4 Health and safety

4.1 Indoor air pollution
4.2 Security while cooking
4.3 Food safety
4.4 Effects on nutritional content of food
4.5 Carcinogens
4.6 Other health issues


5 Scientific aspects
6 Home-cooking and commercial cooking
7 See also
8 References
9 External links


History[edit]
Phylogenetic analysis suggests that early hominins may have adopted cooking 1.8 million to 2.3 million years ago.[4] Re-analysis of burnt bone fragments and plant ashes from the Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa has provided evidence supporting control of fire by early humans by 1 million years ago.[5] In his seminal work Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human, Richard Wrangham suggested that evolution of bipedalism and a large cranial capacity meant that early Homo erectus regularly cooked food [6][7] However, unequivocal evidence in the archaeological record for the controlled use of fire begins at 400,000 BCE, long after Homo erectus .[8][9] Archaeological evidence from 300,000 years ago,[10] in the form of ancient hearths, earth ovens, burnt animal bones, and flint, are found across Europe and the Middle East. Anthropologists think that widespread cooking fires began about 250,000 years ago when hearths first appeared.[11]
Recently, the earliest hearths have been reported to be at least 790,000 years old.[12]

 Historical oven baking, in a painting by Jean-François Millet, 1854
Communication between the Old World and the New World in the Columbian Exchange influenced the history of cooking. The movement of foods across the Atlantic from the New World, such as potatoes, tomatoes, maize, beans, bell pepper, chili pepper, vanilla, pumpkin, cassava, avocado, peanut, pecan, cashew, pineapple, blueberry, sunflower, chocolate, gourds, and squash, had a profound effect on Old World cooking. The movement of foods across the Atlantic from the Old World, such as cattle, sheep, pigs, wheat, oats, barley, rice, apples, pears, peas, chickpeas, green beans, mustard, and carrots, similarly changed New World cooking.[13]
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, food was a classic marker of identity in Europe. In the nineteenth-century "Age of Nationalism" cuisine became a defining symbol of national identity.
The Industrial Revolution brought mass-production, mass-marketing, and standardization of food. Factories processed, preserved, canned, and packaged a wide variety of foods, and processed cereals quickly became a defining feature of the American breakfast.[14] In the 1920s, freezing methods, cafeterias, and fast food restaurants emerged.

Ingredients[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Most ingredients in cooking are derived from living organisms. Vegetables, fruits, grains and nuts as well as herbs and spices come from plants, while meat, eggs, and dairy products come from animals. Mushrooms and the yeast used in baking are kinds of fungi. Cooks also use water and minerals such as salt. Cooks can also use wine or spirits.
Naturally occurring ingredients contain various amounts of molecules called proteins, carbohydrates and fats. They also contain water and minerals. Cooking involves a manipulation of the chemical properties of these molecules.

Carbohydrates[edit]
Main article: Carbohydrate
Carbohydrates include the common sugar, sucrose (table sugar), a disaccharide, and such simple sugars as glucose (made by enzymatic splitting of sucrose) and fructose (from fruit), and starches from sources such as cereal flour, rice, arrowroot and potato.[15]
The interaction of heat and carbohydrate is complex. Long-chain sugars such as starch tend to break down into more digestible simpler sugars.[16] If the sugars are heated so that all water of crystallisation is driven off, caramelization starts, with the sugar undergoing thermal decomposition with the formation of carbon, and other breakdown products producing caramel. Similarly, the heating of sugars and proteins causes the Maillard reaction, a basic flavor-enhancing technique.
An emulsion of starch with fat or water can, when gently heated, provide thickening to the dish being cooked. In European cooking, a mixture of butter and flour called a roux is used to thicken liquids to make stews or sauces.[17] In Asian cooking, a similar effect is obtained from a mixture of rice or corn starch and water. These techniques rely on the properties of starches to create simpler mucilaginous saccharides during cooking, which causes the familiar thickening of sauces. This thickening will break down, however, under additional heat.

Fats[edit]
Main article: Fat
 Doughnuts frying in oil
Types of fat include vegetable oils, animal products such as butter and lard, as well as fats from grains, including maize and flax oils. Fats are used in a number of ways in cooking and baking. To prepare stir fries, grilled cheese or pancakes, the pan or griddle is often coated with fat or oil. Fats are also used as an ingredient in baked goods such as cookies, cakes and pies. Fats can reach temperatures higher than the boiling point of water, and are often used to conduct high heat to other ingredients, such as in frying, deep frying or sautéing. Fats are used to add flavor to food (e.g., butter or bacon fat), prevent food from sticking to pans and create a desirable texture.

Proteins[edit]
Main articles: Protein (nutrient) and Protein denaturation
Edible animal material, including muscle, offal, milk, eggs and egg whites, contains substantial amounts of protein. Almost all vegetable matter (in particular legumes and seeds) also includes proteins, although generally in smaller amounts. Mushrooms have high protein content. Any of these may be sources of essential amino acids. When proteins are heated they become denatured (unfolded) and change texture. In many cases, this causes the structure of the material to become softer or more friable – meat becomes cooked and is more friable and less flexible. In some cases, proteins can form more rigid structures, such as the coagulation of albumen in egg whites. The formation of a relatively rigid but flexible matrix from egg white provides an important component in baking cakes, and also underpins many desserts based on meringue.

 Water is often used to cook foods such as noodles.
Water[edit]
Main article: Water
Cooking often involves water and water-based liquids. These can be added in order to immerse the substances being cooked (this is typically done with water, stock or wine). Alternatively, the foods themselves can release water. A favorite method of adding flavor to dishes is to save the liquid for use in other recipes.  Liquids are so important to cooking that the name of the cooking method used is often based on how the liquid is combined with the food, as in steaming, simmering, boiling, braising and blanching. Heating liquid in an open container results in rapidly increased evaporation, which concentrates the remaining flavor and ingredients – this is a critical component of both stewing and sauce making.

Vitamins and minerals[edit]
 Vegetables contain important vitamins and minerals
Main articles: Vitamin and Mineral (nutrient)
Vitamins and minerals are required for normal metabolism but which the body cannot manufacture itself and which must therefore come from external sources. Vitamins come from several sources including fresh fruit and vegetables (Vitamin C), carrots, liver (Vitamin A), cereal bran, bread, liver (B vitamins), fish liver oil (Vitamin D) and fresh green vegetables (Vitamin K). Many minerals are also essential in small quantities including iron, calcium, magnesium, sodium chloride and sulfur; and in very small quantities copper, zinc and selenium. The micronutrients, minerals, and vitamins[18] in fruit and vegetables may be destroyed or eluted by cooking. Vitamin C is especially prone to oxidation during cooking and may be completely destroyed by protracted cooking.[19][failed verification] The bioavailability of some vitamins such as thiamin, vitamin B6, niacin, folate, and carotenoids are increased with cooking by being freed from the food microstructure.[20] Blanching or steaming vegetables is a way of minimizing vitamin and mineral loss in cooking.

Methods[edit]
See also: List of cooking techniques
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are very many methods of cooking, most of which have been known since antiquity. These include baking, roasting, frying, grilling, barbecuing, smoking, boiling, steaming and braising. A more recent innovation is microwaving. Various methods use differing levels of heat and moisture and vary in cooking time. The method chosen greatly affects the end result because some foods are more appropriate to some methods than others. Some major hot cooking techniques include:

 A cook sautees onions and green peppers in a skillet.
Roasting
Roasting – Barbecuing – Grilling/Broiling – Rotisserie – Searing
Baking
Baking – Baking Blind – Flashbaking
Boiling
Boiling – Blanching – Braising – Coddling – Double steaming – Infusion – Poaching – Pressure cooking – Simmering – Smothering – Steaming – Steeping – Stewing – Stone boiling –  Vacuum flask cooking
Frying
Fry – Air frying — Deep frying – Gentle frying - Hot salt frying – Hot sand frying – Pan frying – Pressure frying – Sautéing  – Shallow frying – Stir frying — Vacuum frying
Steaming
Steaming works by boiling water continuously, causing it to vaporise into steam; the steam then carries heat to the nearby food, thus cooking the food.  By many it is considered a healthy form of cooking, holding nutrients within the vegetable or meat being cooked.
En papillote – The food is put into a pouch and then baked, allowing its own moisture to steam the food.
Smoking
Smoking is the process of flavoring, cooking, or preserving food by exposing it to smoke from burning or smoldering material, most often wood.
Health and safety[edit]
Indoor air pollution[edit]
Main article: Household air pollution
As of 2021, over 2.6 billion people cook using open fires or inefficient stoves using kerosene, biomass, and coal as fuel. These cooking practices use fuels and technologies that produce high levels of household air pollution, causing 3.8 million premature deaths annually. Of these deaths, 27% are from pneumonia, 27% from ischaemic heart disease, 20% from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 18% from stroke, and 8% from lung cancer. Women and young children are disproportionately affected, since they spend the most time near the hearth.[21]

Security while cooking[edit]
Hazards while cooking can include

Unseen slippery surfaces (such as from oil stains or water droplets)
Cuts (1 percent of injuries in United States related to knives, ended in hospital admissions. In overall 400 000 injuries from knives are recorded in the US[22]
Burns or fires
To prevent those injuries there are protections such as cooking clothing, anti-slip shoes, fire extinguisher and more.

Food safety[edit]
Main article: Food safety
Cooking can prevent many foodborne illnesses that would otherwise occur if the food is eaten raw. When heat is used in the preparation of food, it can kill or inactivate harmful organisms, such as bacteria and viruses, as well as various parasites such as tapeworms and Toxoplasma gondii. Food poisoning and other illness from uncooked or poorly prepared food may be caused by bacteria such as pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium and Campylobacter, viruses such as noroviruses, and protozoa such as Entamoeba histolytica. Bacteria, viruses and parasites may be introduced through salad, meat that is uncooked or done rare, and unboiled water.[23]
The sterilizing effect of cooking depends on temperature, cooking time, and technique used. Some food spoilage bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum or Bacillus cereus can form spores that survive boiling, which then germinate and regrow after the food has cooled. This makes it unsafe to reheat cooked food more than once.[24]
Cooking increases the digestibility of many foods which are inedible or poisonous when raw. For example, raw cereal grains are hard to digest, while kidney beans are toxic when raw or improperly cooked due to the presence of phytohaemagglutinin, which is inactivated by cooking for at least ten minutes at 100 °C (212 °F).[25]
Food safety depends on the safe preparation, handling, and storage of food. Food spoilage bacteria proliferate in the "Danger zone" temperature range from 40 to 140 °F (4 to 60 °C), food therefore should not be stored in this temperature range. Washing of hands and surfaces, especially when handling different meats, and keeping raw food separate from cooked food to avoid cross-contamination,[26] are good practices in food preparation.[27] Foods prepared on plastic cutting boards may be less likely to harbor bacteria than wooden ones.[28][29] Washing and disinfecting cutting boards, especially after use with raw meat, poultry, or seafood, reduces the risk of contamination.[29]

Effects on nutritional content of food[edit]
See also: Raw foodism
 A raw tomato sauce with olives, celery, spinach and walnuts on zucchini noodles.
Proponents of raw foodism argue that cooking food increases the risk of some of the detrimental effects on food or health. They point out that during cooking of vegetables and fruit containing vitamin C, the vitamin elutes into the cooking water and becomes degraded through oxidation. Peeling vegetables can also substantially reduce the vitamin C content, especially in the case of potatoes where most vitamin C is in the skin.[30] However, research has shown that in the specific case of carotenoids a greater proportion is absorbed from cooked vegetables than from raw vegetables.[19]
German research in 2003 showed significant benefits in reducing breast cancer risk when large amounts of raw vegetable matter are included in the diet. The authors attribute some of this effect to heat-labile phytonutrients.[31] Sulforaphane, a glucosinolate breakdown product, which may be found in vegetables such as broccoli, has been shown to be protective against prostate cancer; however, much of it is destroyed when the vegetable is boiled.[32][33]  Although there has been some basic research on how sulforaphane might exert beneficial effects in vivo, there is no high-quality evidence for its efficacy against human diseases.
The USDA has studied retention data for 16 vitamins, 8 minerals, and alcohol for approximately 290 foods for various cooking methods.[34]

Carcinogens[edit]
 Chicken, pork and bacon-wrapped corn cooking in a barbecue smoker. Barbecuing and smoking generate carcinogens.
In a human epidemiological analysis by Richard Doll and Richard Peto in 1981, diet was estimated to cause a large percentage of cancers.[35] Studies suggest that around 32% of cancer deaths may be avoidable by changes to the diet.[36] Some of these cancers may be caused by carcinogens in food generated during the cooking process, although it is often difficult to identify the specific components in diet that serve to increase cancer risk. Many foods, such as beefsteak and broccoli, contain low concentrations of both carcinogens and anticarcinogens.[37]
Several studies published since 1990 indicate that cooking meat at high temperature creates heterocyclic amines (HCAs), which are thought to increase cancer risk in humans. Researchers at the National Cancer Institute found that human subjects who ate beef rare or medium-rare had less than one third the risk of stomach cancer than those who ate beef medium-well or well-done.[38] While avoiding meat or eating meat raw may be the only ways to avoid HCAs in meat fully, the National Cancer Institute states that cooking meat below 212 °F (100 °C) creates "negligible amounts" of HCAs. Also, microwaving meat before cooking may reduce HCAs by 90% by reducing the time needed for the meat to be cooked at high heat.[38] Nitrosamines are found in some food, and may be produced by some cooking processes from proteins or from nitrites used as food preservatives; cured meat such as bacon has been found to be carcinogenic, with links to colon cancer. Ascorbate, which is added to cured meat, however, reduces nitrosamine formation.[37][39]
Baking, grilling or broiling food, especially starchy foods, until a toasted crust is formed generates significant concentrations of acrylamide. This discovery in 2002 led to international health concerns. Subsequent research has however found that it is not likely that the acrylamides in burnt or well-cooked food cause cancer in humans; Cancer Research UK categorizes the idea that burnt food causes cancer as a "myth".[40]

Other health issues[edit]
Cooking dairy products may reduce a protective effect against colon cancer. Researchers at the University of Toronto suggest that ingesting uncooked or unpasteurized dairy products (see also Raw milk) may reduce the risk of colorectal cancer.[41] Mice and rats fed uncooked sucrose, casein, and beef tallow had one-third to one-fifth the incidence of microadenomas as the mice and rats fed the same ingredients cooked.[42][43] This claim, however, is contentious. According to the Food and Drug Administration of the United States, health benefits claimed by raw milk advocates do not exist. "The small quantities of antibodies in milk are not absorbed in the human intestinal tract," says Barbara Ingham, PhD, associate professor and extension food scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. "There is no scientific evidence that raw milk contains an anti-arthritis factor or that it enhances resistance to other diseases."[44]
Heating sugars with proteins or fats can produce advanced glycation end products ("glycotoxins").[45]
Deep fried food in restaurants may contain high level of trans fat, which is known to increase levels of low-density lipoprotein that in turn may increase risk of heart diseases and other conditions. However, many fast food chains have now switched to trans-fat-free alternatives for deep-frying.[46]

Scientific aspects[edit]
Main article: Molecular gastronomy
The scientific study of cooking has become known as molecular gastronomy. This is a subdiscipline of food science concerning the physical and chemical transformations that occur during cooking.[47]
Important contributions have been made by scientists, chefs and authors such as Hervé This (chemist), Nicholas Kurti (physicist), Peter Barham (physicist), Harold McGee (author), Shirley Corriher (biochemist, author),  Robert Wolke (chemist, author.) It is different for the application of scientific knowledge to cooking, that is "molecular cooking"( (for the technique) or "molecular cuisine" (for a culinary style), for which chefs such as Raymond Blanc, Philippe and Christian Conticini, Ferran Adria, Heston Blumenthal, Pierre Gagnaire (chef).[48]
Chemical processes central to cooking include hydrolysis (in particular beta elimination of pectins, during the thermal treatment of plant tissues), pyrolysis, glycation reactions wrongly named Maillard reactions .[49][50]
Cooking foods with heat depends on many factors — the specific heat of an object, thermal conductivity, and perhaps most significantly the difference in temperature between the two objects. Thermal diffusivity is the combination of specific heat, conductivity and density that determines how long it will take for the food to reach a certain temperature.[51]

Home-cooking and commercial cooking[edit]
 A restaurant kitchen in Munich, Germany (Haxnbauer restaurant)
 A woman cooking in a big pot
Home cooking has traditionally been a process carried out informally in a home or around a communal fire, and can be enjoyed by all members of the family, although in many cultures women bear primary responsibility.[52] Cooking is also often carried out outside of personal quarters, for example at restaurants, or schools. Bakeries were one of the earliest forms of cooking outside the home, and bakeries in the past often offered the cooking of pots of food provided by their customers as an additional service. In the present day, factory food preparation has become common, with many "ready-to-eat" as well as "ready-to-cook" foods being prepared and cooked in factories and home cooks using a mixture of scratch made, and factory made foods together to make a meal. The nutritional value of including more commercially prepared foods has been found to be inferior to home-made foods.[53] Home-cooked meals tend to be healthier with fewer calories, and less saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium on a per calorie basis while providing more fiber, calcium, and iron.[54] The ingredients are also directly sourced, so there is control over authenticity, taste, and nutritional value. The superior nutritional quality of home-cooking could therefore play a role in preventing chronic disease.[55] Cohort studies following the elderly over 10 years show that adults who cook their own meals have significantly lower mortality, even when controlling for confounding variables.[56]
"Home-cooking" may be associated with comfort food,[57] and some commercially produced foods and restaurant meals are presented through advertising or packaging as having been "home-cooked", regardless of their actual origin. This trend began in the 1920s and is attributed to people in urban areas of the U.S. wanting homestyle food even though their schedules and smaller kitchens made cooking harder.[58]

See also[edit]
Main article: Outline of food preparation


Food portal

Carryover cooking
Control of fire by early humans
Cookbook
Cooker
Cooking weights and measures
Cuisine
Culinary arts
Culinary profession
Cooking school
Dishwashing
Food and cooking hygiene
Food industry
Food preservation
Food writing
Foodpairing
Gourmet Museum and Library
High altitude cooking
International food terms
List of cooking appliances
List of cooking techniques
List of cuisines
List of films about cooking
List of food preparation utensils
List of ovens
List of stoves
Nutrition
Recipe
Scented water
Spices
Staple (cooking)

References[edit]


^ Rupp, Rebecca (2 September 2015). "A Brief History of Cooking With Fire". National Geographic. Retrieved 29 May 2019.

^ Wrangham, Richard (2009). Catching Fire: How cooking made us human.

^ W. Wayt Gibbs; Nathan Myhrvold (2011). "A New Spin on Cooking". Scientific American. 304 (3): 23. Bibcode:2011SciAm.304c..23G. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0311-23a. PMID 21438483.

^ Organ, Chris (22 August 2011). "Phylogenetic rate shifts in feeding time during the evolution of Homo". PNAS. 108 (35): 14555–14559. Bibcode:2011PNAS..10814555O. doi:10.1073/pnas.1107806108. PMC 3167533. PMID 21873223.

^ Pringle, Heather (2 April 2012), "Quest for Fire Began Earlier Than Thought", ScienceNOW, archived from the original on 15 April 2013, retrieved 4 April 2012

^ Wrangham, R. and Conklin-Brittain, N., 2003. Cooking as a biological trait. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology, 136(1), pp.35-46

^ Pollard, Elizabeth (2015). Worlds Together, Worlds Apart. New York: Norton. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-393-92207-3.

^ Luke, Kim. "Evidence That Human Ancestors Used Fire One Million Years Ago". Retrieved 27 October 2013. An international team led by the University of Toronto and Hebrew University has identified the earliest known evidence of the use of fire by human ancestors. Microscopic traces of wood ash, alongside animal bones and stone tools, were found in a layer dated to one million years ago

^ "Archaeologists Find Earliest Evidence of Humans Cooking With Fire - DiscoverMagazine.com".

^ Smith, Roff (29 January 2014). "Oldest Known Hearth Found in Israel Cave". National Geographic. Retrieved 17 March 2014.

^ "Pennisi: Did Cooked Tubers Spur the Evolution of Big Brains?". Cogweb.ucla.edu. Retrieved 7 November 2013.

^ Staff (12 August 2016). "What Does It Mean To Be Human? - Hearths & Shelters". Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved 12 August 2016.

^ Nunn, Nathan; Qian, Nancy (2010). "The Columbian Exchange: A History of Disease, Food, and Ideas". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 24 (2): 163–188. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.232.9242. doi:10.1257/jep.24.2.163. JSTOR 25703506.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2012.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Carbohydrates: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia". medlineplus.gov. Retrieved 4 February 2019.

^ Öste, Rickard E. (1991), "Digestibility of Processed Food Protein", Nutritional and Toxicological Consequences of Food Processing, Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, vol. 289, Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 371–388, doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-2626-5_27, ISBN 978-1-4899-2628-9, retrieved 19 May 2021

^ "What is...roux?". MICHELIN Guide. Retrieved 4 February 2019.

^ Loss of nutrients when vegetables are cooked Archived 9 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b "Cooking vegetables 'improves benefits'". BBC News. 2 June 1999. Retrieved 30 April 2010.

^ Hotz, Christine; Gibson, Rosalind S. (2007). "Traditional food-processing and preparation practices to enhance the bioavailability of micronutrients in plant-based diets". The Journal of Nutrition. 137 (4): 1097–1100. doi:10.1093/jn/137.4.1097. PMID 17374686.

^ "Household air pollution and health". World Health Organization. 22 September 2021. Retrieved 12 April 2022.

^ "A Guide to Keeping Safe While Cooking". StaySafe.org. Retrieved 3 July 2021.

^ "Foodborne Illnesses". National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

^ Safe Food Australia – A Guide to the Food Safety Standards Archived 22 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ Noah ND, Bender AE, Reaidi GB, Gilbert RJ (July 1980). "News, Notes, And Epidemiology". Br Med J. 281 (6234): 236–237. doi:10.1136/bmj.281.6234.235. PMC 1713670. PMID 7407532.

^ "Grilling and Food Safety" (PDF). USDA. June 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2019.

^ "Basics for Handling Food Safely". United States Department of Agriculture. Archived from the original on 28 September 2004. Retrieved 1 April 2012.

^ "Cutting Boards (Plastic Versus Wood)". Food Safety, Preparation and Storage Tips. Cooperative Extension, College of Agriculture & Life Sciences, the University of Arizona. 1998. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006.

^ a b "Cutting Boards – wood or plastic?". ReluctantGourmet.com. Archived from the original on 2 July 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006.

^ "Potato, nutrition and diet - International Year of the Potato 2008". Archived from the original on 5 November 2007. Retrieved 14 August 2011.

^ Nutr Cancer. 2003;46(2):131-7

^ Jin, Y.; Wang, M.; Rosen, R. T.; Ho, C. T. (1999). "Thermal Degradation of Sulforaphane in Aqueous Solution". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 47 (8): 3121–3123. doi:10.1021/jf990082e. PMID 10552618.

^ Bongoni, R; Verkerk, R; Steenbekkers, B; Dekker, M; Stieger (2014). "Evaluation of Different Cooking Conditions on Broccoli (Brassica oleracea var. italica) to Improve the Nutritional Value and Consumer Acceptance". Plant Foods for Human Nutrition. 69 (3): 228–234. doi:10.1007/s11130-014-0420-2. PMID 24853375. S2CID 35228794.

^ "USDA Table of Nutrient Retention Factors, Release 6" (PDF). USDA. USDA. December 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Doll, R.; Peto, R. (1981). "The causes of cancer: Quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United States today". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 66 (6): 1191–1308. doi:10.1093/jnci/66.6.1192. PMID 7017215.

^ Willett WC (1995). "Diet, nutrition, and avoidable cancer". Environ Health Perspect. 103 (Suppl 8): 165–70. doi:10.1289/ehp.95103s8165. PMC 1518978. PMID 8741778.

^ a b Carcinogens and Anticarcinogens in the Human Diet. National Academy Press. 1996. ISBN 978-0-309-05391-4.

^ a b "Heterocyclic Amines in Cooked Meats". National Cancer Institute. 2018.

^ Scanlan RA. (1983). "Formation and occurrence of nitrosamines in food". Cancer Res. 43 (5 Suppl): 2435s–2440s. PMID 6831466.

^ "Can eating burnt foods cause cancer?". Cancer Research UK. 15 October 2021.

^ Corpet DE, Yin Y, Zhang XM,  et al. (1995). "Colonic protein fermentation and promotion of colon carcinogenesis by thermolyzed casein". Nutr Cancer. 23 (3): 271–81. doi:10.1080/01635589509514381. PMC 2518970. PMID 7603887.

^ Corpet DE, Stamp D, Medline A, Minkin S, Archer MC, Bruce WR (November 1990). "Promotion of colonic microadenoma growth in mice and rats fed cooked sugar or cooked casein and fat". Cancer Res. 50 (21): 6955–8. PMID 2208161.

^ Zhang XM, Stamp D, Minkin S,  et al. (July 1992). "Promotion of aberrant crypt foci and cancer in rat colon by thermolyzed protein". J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 84 (13): 1026–30. doi:10.1093/jnci/84.13.1026. PMID 1608054.

^ "Got Milk?" by Linda Bren. FDA Consumer. Sept–Oct 2004.

^ Koschinsky T, He CJ, Mitsuhashi T, Bucala R, Liu C, Buenting C, Heitmann K, Vlassara H (1997). "Orally absorbed reactive glycation products (glycotoxins): An environmental risk factor in diabetic nephropathy". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94 (12): 6474–9. Bibcode:1997PNAS...94.6474K. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.12.6474. PMC 21074. PMID 9177242.

^ "McDonald's finally picks trans-fat-free oil". NBC News. 30 January 2007. Retrieved 13 September 2007.

^ Molecular Gastronomy from Encyclopedia Britannica

^ Guler, Ozan (October 2019). The Harmony of Science and Food:Molecular Gastronomy. Strategic Researchers Academy Publishing. ISBN 978-605-69709-1-7.

^ "Food-Info.net : Maillard reactions". www.food-info.net. Retrieved 29 March 2017.

^ Handbook of Molecular Gastronomy, CRC Press, 2021

^ Barham, Peter. The Science of Cooking. p. 39.

^ Jackson, Cecile (2013). Men at Work: Labour, Maculinities, Development. New York: Routledge. p. 225.

^ Lin, Biing-Hwan; Guthrie, Joanne. "Nutritional Quality of Food Prepared at Home and Away From Home, 1977-2008". www.ers.usda.gov. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Archived from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 21 November 2015.

^ Reicks, Marla; Trofholz, Amanda C.; Stang, Jamie S.; Laska, Melissa N. (1 August 2014). "Impact of cooking and home food preparation interventions among adults: outcomes and implications for future programs". Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 46 (4): 259–276. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2014.02.001. ISSN 1878-2620. PMC 4063875. PMID 24703245.

^ Soliah, Lu Ann Laurice; Walter, Janelle Marshall; Jones, Sheila Ann (1 March 2012). "Benefits and Barriers to Healthful Eating What Are the Consequences of Decreased Food Preparation Ability?". American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 6 (2): 152–158. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1026.8612. doi:10.1177/1559827611426394. ISSN 1559-8276. S2CID 71797396.

^ Chen, Rosalind Chia-Yu; Lee, Meei-Shyuan; Chang, Yu-Hung; Wahlqvist, Mark L. (1 July 2012). "Cooking frequency may enhance survival in Taiwanese elderly" (PDF). Public Health Nutrition. 15 (7): 1142–1149. doi:10.1017/S136898001200136X. ISSN 1475-2727. PMID 22578892. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Jones, Michael Owen; Long, Lucy M. (14 April 2017). Comfort Food: Meaning and Memories. Univ. Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-4968-1086-1.

^ Barbas, Samantha (Fall 2002). "Just Like Home: "Home Cooking" and the Domestication of the American Restaurant". Gastronomica. 2 (4): 43–52. doi:10.1525/gfc.2002.2.4.43. JSTOR 10.1525/gfc.2002.2.4.43.


External links[edit]
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Cookery" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 74–76.
vteCooking techniquesList of cooking techniquesDryConduction
Dry roasting
Hot salt frying
Searing
Convection
Baking
Roasting (modern)
Smoking
Barbecue
Radiation
Grilling (charbroiling)
Roasting (traditional)
Rotisserie
Toasting
WetHigh heat
Blanching
Boiling
Decoction
Parboiling
Shocking
Reduction
Low heat
Coddling
Creaming
Infusion
Poaching
Simmering
Slow cooking
Smothering
Steeping
Stewing
Indirect heat
Bain-marie (Double boiling)
Sous-vide
Double steaming
Steaming
Fat-basedHigh heat
Blackening
Browning
Deep frying
Pan frying
Shallow frying
Stir frying (bao)
Sautéing
Low heat
Gentle frying
Sweating
Mixed medium
Carryover cooking
Barbecuing
Braising
Flambé
Fricassee
Indirect grilling/Plank cooking
Stir frying (chao)
Device-based
Air frying
Microwaving
Pressure cooking
Pressure frying
Thermal cooking
Non-heat
Curing
Fermenting
Pickling
Souring
See also
List of cooking appliances
List of cooking vessels
Outdoor cooking
Food preparation
Food preservation
Food safety
Caramelization
 Food portal  Drink portal  Category  Commons  Cookbook  WikiProject
vteCuisinesContinental
African
North
West
list
Americas
Caribbean
North
South
list
Asian
Caucasian
Central
Indian subcontinent
Levantine
list
European
Central
Eastern
list
Oceanic
Intercontinental
Global
Latin American
Mediterranean
Middle Eastern
National andregional
Afghan
Albanian
Algerian
American
Californian
Floribbean
Hawaiian
Louisiana Creole
Lowcountry (South Carolina)
New England
New Mexico
Pacific Northwest
Pennsylvania Dutch
Puerto Rican
Southern US
Southwest US
Texas
Angolan
Argentine
Armenian
Australian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Bahraini
Bangladeshi
Barbadian
Belarusian
Belgian
Belizean
Beninese
Bhutanese
Bolivian
Bosnian-Herzegovinian
Botswana
Brazilian
British
Channel Islands
English
Northern Irish
Saint Helena
Scottish
Welsh
Bruneian
Bulgarian
Burkinabé
Burmese
Burundian
Cambodian
Cameroonian
Canadian
Acadian
Québécois
Central African Republic
Chadian
Chilean
Chinese
Cantonese
Hong Kong
Macanese
Tibetan
Colombian
Congolese
Corsican
Croatian
Cuban
Cypriot
Czech
Danish
Faroese
Greenlandic
Djiboutian
Dominican
Dominican Republic
Dutch
East Timorese
Ecuadorian
Egyptian
Emirati
Equatorial Guinean
Eritrean
Estonian
Ethiopian
Fijian
Filipino
Finnish
French
Occitan
French Guianan
Gabonese
Gambian
Gibraltarian
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Cretan
Epirotic
Greek Macedonian
Heptanesean
Guatemalan
Guinea-Bissauan
Guinean
Haitian
Honduran
Hungarian
Icelandic
Indian
Arunachalese
Assamese
Bengali
Bihari
Goan
Gujarati
Himachal Pradesh
Kashmiri
Jharkhandi
Karnataka
Kerala
Maharashtrian
Manipuri
Meghalayan
Mizo
Naga
Odia
Punjabi
Rajasthani
Sikkimese
Sindhi
Tamil
Telangana
Telugu
Indonesian
Acehnese
Balinese
Banjar
Batak
Betawi
Indo
Javanese
Madurese
Makassar
Minahasan
Minangkabau
Palembangese
Sundanese
Iranian
Iraqi
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Abruzzese
Ligurian
Lombard
Lucanial
Neapolitan
Roman
Sardinian
Sicilian
Venetian
Ivorian
Jamaican
Japanese
Okinawan
Jordanian
Kazakh
Kenyan
Korean
North Korean
South Korean
Kosovan
Kuwaiti
Kyrgyz
Lao
Latvian
Lebanese
Lesotho
Liberian
Libyan
Liechtensteiner
Lithuanian
Luxembourg
Macedonian
Malagasy
Malawian
Malaysian
Sabahan
Sarawakian
Maldivian
Malian
Maltese
Mauritanian
Mauritian
Mexican
Moldovan
Monégasque
Mongolian
Montenegrin
Moroccan
Mozambican
Namibian
Nauruan
Nepalese
New Zealand
Nicaraguan
Niger
Nigerian
Niuean
Norwegian
Omani
Pakistani
Palestinian
Panamanian
Peruvian
Polish
Portuguese
Qatari
Romanian
Russian
Bashkir
Chechen
Circassian
Komi
Mordovian
Sakha
Tatar
Udmurt
Yamal
Rwandan
Saint Lucian
Salvadoran
Sammarinese
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabian
Senegalese
Serbian
Seychellois
Sierra Leonean
Singaporean
Slovak
Slovenian
Somali
South African
Spanish
Andalusian
Asturian
Balearic
Basque
Canarian
Cantabrian
Catalan
Extremaduran
Galician
Manchegan
Valencian
Sri Lankan
Sudanese
Swazi
Swedish
Swiss
Syrian
Taiwanese
Tajik
Tanzanian
Zanzibari
Thai
Togolese
Tunisian
Turkish
Turkmen
Trinidadian and Tobagonian
Ugandan
Ukrainian
Uruguayan
Uzbek
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Western Saharan
Yemeni
Zambian
Zimbabwean
Ethnic
Ainu
Arab
Indonesian
Aromanian
Assyrian
Balochi
Berber
Cajun
Chinese
American
Canadian
Chifa
Indian
Indonesian
Malaysian
Crimean Tatar
Greek American
Hazaragi
Indian
Anglo-Indian
Indonesian
Malaysian
Indigenous American
Inuit
Italian American
Kurdish
Livonian
Malay
Ossetian
Parsi
Pashtun
Peranakan
Romani
Sámi
Soul food
Sylheti
Yup'ik
Religious
Buddhist
Christian
Goan Catholic
Mangalorean Catholic
Mennonite
Hindu
Islamic
Chinese
Jain
Jewish
American
Ashkenazi
Bukharan
Ethiopian
Mizrahi
Sephardic
Syrian
Sikh
Historical
Ancient Egyptian
Ancient Greek
Ancient Israelite
Ancient Roman
Aztec
Byzantine
Early modern European
Historical Chinese
Historical Indian subcontinent
Historical North Indian and Pakistani
History of seafood
History of vegetarianism
Historical Argentine
Historical Japanese
Inca
Mayan
Muisca
Medieval
Ottoman
Peasant
Soviet
Thirteen Colonies
Antebellum America
Styles
Classique
Fast food
Fusion
New American
Eurasian
Haute
Molecular gastronomy
Note by Note
Nouvelle
Lists
List of cuisines
List of historical cuisines
Lists of prepared foods
Related
Cookbook
Cooking
Culinary arts
Drink
Food
history
Meal preparation

 Food portal
 Drink portal
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 WikiProject
 Outline

vteMealsCommon meals
Suhur
Breakfast
Second breakfast
Elevenses
Brunch
Lunch
Merienda
Iftar
Tea
Coffee break
Dinner
Supper
Componentsand courses
Apéritif and digestif
Hors d'oeuvre
Amuse-bouche
Entrée
Main course
Side dish
Entremets
Dessert
Savoury
Meal replacement
Snack
Table service
Buffet
smörgåsbord
Conveyor belt sushi
Dish
Finger food
Full course dinner
Platter
Rodízio
Service à la française
Service à la russe
Silver service
Small plates
Table reservation
Presentation
Al fresco
Dining room
Eating utensils
Food presentation
Garnish
Nyotaimori
Pièce montée
Serving size
Table setting
Tablecloth
Tableware
Dining
Dress code
Table manners
Eating utensil etiquette
Toast
Waiting staff
Regional styles
Anju
Antipasto
Cicchetti
Banchan / Korean table d'hôte
Bandeja paisa
Dastarkhān
Dim sum / Yum cha
Fika
Izakaya / Sakana
Kaiseki
Meat and three
Meze
Plate lunch
Pu pu platter
Rijsttafel
Sadhya
Smörgåsbord
Tapas
Thali
Tiffin
Zakuski
Packed
Airline meal
Bento
Convenience food
Dosirak
Fast food
Field ration
Instant breakfast
Packed lunch
Space food
Take-out
TV dinner
Menus andmeal deals
À la carte
Blue-plate special
Combination meal
Free lunch
Free refill
Happy hour
Kids' meal
School meal
Suspended meal
Table d'hôte
Tasting menu / Degustation
Value meal
Value menu
Communal meals
Banquet
Barbecue
Commercium
Communal dining
Dining in
Mangal
Picnic
Potluck
Sittning
Soup kitchen
State banquet
Supra
Tableround
Tea party
Catering andfood delivery
Online food ordering
Meal delivery service
Virtual restaurant
Places to eat
Café
Cafeteria
Dining room
Food truck
Inn
Kitchen
Mess
Picnic table
Restaurant
Soup kitchen
Street food
Tavern
Traiteur
Related
Coffee culture
Cook
Cookbook
Cooking
Culinary arts
Cuisine
outline
Drink
Eating
Food
Meal preparation
Outline of food preparation
Salumeria
Tea culture

 Category
 Commons

vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism

Cooking at Wikipedia's sister projects:Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityPortal: Food
Authority control National libraries
Germany
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cooking&oldid=1115121871"
Categories: CookingHome economicsSurvival skillsHidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as titleWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from May 2021Articles needing additional references from March 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from February 2013Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with GND identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles containing video clips



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikiversity




Languages


AfrikaansአማርኛالعربيةAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBamanankanবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego贛語한국어HawaiʻiՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKalaallisutಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംमराठीBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀPapiamentuپښتوPatoisTok PisinPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийSakizayaसंस्कृतम्ScotsSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TayalతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаVènetoTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语Xitsonga粵語ZazakiZeêuws中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 22:44 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










