



Democratic Republic of the Congo - Wikipedia










































Democratic Republic of the Congo

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Country in Central Africa
Not to be confused with the neighbouring Republic of the Congo; for similarly named entities, see Republic of the Congo (disambiguation).
"DRC" redirects here. For other uses, see DRC (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 3°S 24°E﻿ / ﻿3°S 24°E﻿ / -3; 24

Democratic Republic of the CongoRépublique démocratique du Congo (French)Repubilika ya Kôngo ya Dimokalasi (Kituba)Republíki ya Kongó Demokratíki (Lingala)Jamhuri ya Kidemokrasia ya Kongo (Swahili)Ditunga dia Kongu wa Mungalaata (Luba-Lulua)


Flag



Coat of arms

Motto: "Justice – Paix – Travail" (French)"Justice – Peace – Work"Anthem: Debout Congolais (French)"Arise, Congolese"Show globeShow map of AfricaCapitaland largest cityKinshasa4°19′S 15°19′E﻿ / ﻿4.317°S 15.317°E﻿ / -4.317; 15.317Official languagesFrenchRecognised national languagesKikongo ya leta[a]LingalaSwahiliTshilubaReligion  (2020)[1]95.0% Christianity—54.9% Roman Catholic—40.1% Other Christian2.5% Traditional faiths1.5% Islam1.0% OthersDemonym(s)CongoleseGovernmentUnitary semi-presidential republic• President Félix Tshisekedi• Prime Minister Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde
LegislatureParliament• Upper houseSenate• Lower houseNational AssemblyFormation• Colonised 17 November 1879• Congo Free State 1 July 1885• Belgian Congo 15 November 1908• Independence from Belgium 30 June 1960[2]• Admitted to the United Nations 20 September 1960• Named Democratic Republic of the Congo 1 August 1964• Republic of Zaire 27 October 1971• First Congo War 17 May 1997• Current constitution 18 February 2006
Area • Total2,345,409 km2 (905,567 sq mi) (11th)• Water (%)3.32Population• 2022 estimate108,407,721[3] (14th)• Density46.3/km2 (119.9/sq mi)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate• Total $121.569 billion[4]• Per capita $1,316[4]GDP (nominal)2022 estimate• Total $61.800 billion[4]• Per capita $669[4]Gini (2012) 42.1[5]mediumHDI (2021) 0.479[6]low · 179thCurrencyCongolese franc (CDF)Time zoneUTC+1 to +2 (WAT and CAT)Date formatdd/mm/yyyyDriving siderightCalling code+243ISO 3166 codeCDInternet TLD.cd
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (French: République démocratique du Congo (RDC) [kɔ̃ɡo]), informally Congo-Kinshasa, DR Congo, the DRC, the DROC,[7] or the Congo, and formerly and also colloquially Zaire, is a country in Central Africa. It is bordered to the northwest by the Republic of the Congo, to the north by the Central African Republic, to the northeast by South Sudan, to the east by Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, and by Tanzania (across Lake Tanganyika), to the south and southeast by Zambia, to the southwest by Angola, and to the west by the South Atlantic Ocean and the Cabinda exclave of Angola. By area, it is the second-largest country in Africa and the 11th-largest in the world. With a population of around 108 million, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the most populous officially Francophone country in the world. The capital and largest city is Kinshasa, which is also the nation's economic center.
Centered on the Congo Basin, the territory of the DRC was first inhabited by Central African foragers around 90,000 years ago and was reached by the Bantu expansion about 3,000 years ago.[8] In the west, the Kingdom of Kongo ruled around the mouth of the Congo River from the 14th to 19th centuries. In the northeast, center and east, the kingdoms of Azande, Luba and Lunda ruled from the 16th and 17th centuries to the 19th century. King Leopold II of Belgium formally acquired rights to the Congo territory in 1885 and declared the land his private property, naming it the Congo Free State. From 1885 to 1908, his colonial military forced the local population to produce rubber and committed widespread atrocities. In 1908, Leopold ceded the territory, which thus became a Belgian colony.
Congo achieved independence from Belgium on 30 June 1960 and was immediately confronted by a series of seccessionist movements, which culminated in the seizure of power of Mobutu in a 1965 coup d'état. Mobutu renamed the country Zaire in 1971 and imposed a harsh dictatorship until his overthrow in 1997 by the First Congo War.[2] The country then had its name changed back and was confronted by the Second Congo War from 1998 to 2003, which resulted in the deaths of 5.4 million people.[9][10][11][12] The war ended under President Joseph Kabila who governed the country from 2001 to 2019, under whom human rights in the country remained poor and included frequent abuses such as forced disappearances, torture, arbitrary imprisonment and restrictions on civil liberties.[13] Following the 2018 general election, in the country's first peaceful transition of power since independence, Kabila was succeeded as president by Félix Tshisekedi, who has served as president since.[14] Since 2015, the Eastern DR Congo has been the site of an ongoing military conflict in Kivu. 
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is extremely rich in natural resources but has suffered from political instability, a lack of infrastructure, corruption, and centuries of both commercial and colonial extraction and exploitation, followed by more than 60 years of independence, with little widespread development.[15] Besides the capital Kinshasa, the two next largest cities, Lubumbashi and Mbuji-Mayi, are both mining communities. The DRC's largest export is raw minerals, with China accepting over 50% of its exports in 2019.[2] In 2019, DR Congo's level of human development was ranked 175th out of 189 countries by the Human Development Index.[16] As of 2018[update], following two decades of various civil wars and continued internal conflicts, around 600,000 Congolese refugees were still living in neighbouring countries.[17] Two million children risk starvation, and the fighting has displaced 4.5 million people.[18] The country is a member of the United Nations, Non-Aligned Movement, African Union, East African Community, COMESA, Southern African Development Community, and the Economic Community of Central African States.

Contents

1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Early history
2.2 Congo Free State (1877–1908)
2.3 Belgian Congo (1908–1960)
2.4 Independence and political crisis (1960–1965)
2.5 Mobutu dictatorship and Zaire (1965–1997)
2.6 Continental and civil wars (1996–2007)
2.7 Continued conflicts (2008–2018)

2.7.1 Kivu conflict
2.7.2 Kabila's term in office and multiple anti-government protests
2.7.3 Renewed regional violence
2.7.4 2018 ethnic conflict


2.8 2018 election and new president (2018–present)


3 Geography

3.1 Biodiversity and conservation


4 Administrative divisions
5 Government and politics

5.1 Foreign relations
5.2 Military
5.3 Corruption
5.4 Human rights

5.4.1 Crime and law enforcement
5.4.2 Violence against women




6 Economy

6.1 Mining
6.2 Transportation

6.2.1 Rail
6.2.2 Road
6.2.3 Water
6.2.4 Air


6.3 Energy

6.3.1 Renewable energy




7 Demographics

7.1 Languages
7.2 Ethnic groups
7.3 Religion
7.4 Education
7.5 Health
7.6 Largest cities
7.7 Migration


8 Culture

8.1 Music
8.2 Sports
8.3 Media
8.4 Literature


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links


Etymology[edit]
Further information: Congo River and Kongo people
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is named after the Congo River, which flows throughout the country. The Congo River is the world's deepest river and the world's second-largest river by discharge. The Comité d'études du haut Congo ("Committee for the Study of the Upper Congo"), established by King Leopold II of Belgium in 1876, and the International Association of the Congo, established by him in 1879, were also named after the river.[19]
The Congo River was named by early European sailors after the Kingdom of Kongo and its Bantu inhabitants, the Kongo people, when they encountered them in the 16th century.[20][21] The word Kongo comes from the Kongo language (also called Kikongo). According to American writer Samuel Henry Nelson: "It is probable that the word 'Kongo' itself implies a public gathering and that it is based on the root konga, 'to gather' (trans[itive])."[22] The modern name of the Kongo people, Bakongo, was introduced in the early 20th century.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been known in the past as, in chronological order, the Congo Free State, Belgian Congo, the Republic of the Congo-Léopoldville, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Zaire, before returning to its current name the Democratic Republic of the Congo.[2]
At the time of independence, the country was named the Republic of the Congo-Léopoldville to distinguish it from its neighbour the Republic of the Congo-Brazzaville. With the promulgation of the Luluabourg Constitution on 1 August 1964, the country became the DRC but was renamed to Zaire (a past name for the Congo River) on 27 October 1971 by President Mobutu Sese Seko as part of his Authenticité initiative.[23]
The word Zaire is from a Portuguese adaptation of a Kikongo word nzadi ("river"), a truncation of nzadi o nzere ("river swallowing rivers").[24][25][26] The river was known as Zaire during the 16th and 17th centuries; Congo seems to have replaced Zaire gradually in English usage during the 18th century, and Congo is the preferred English name in 19th-century literature, although references to Zaire as the name used by the natives (i.e. derived from Portuguese usage) remained common.[27]
In 1992, the Sovereign National Conference voted to change the name of the country to the "Democratic Republic of the Congo", but the change was not made.[28] The country's name was later restored by President Laurent-Désiré Kabila when he overthrew Mobutu in 1997.[29] To distinguish it from the neighboring Republic of the Congo, it is sometimes referred to as Congo (Kinshasa) or Congo-Kinshasa.

History[edit]
Main article: History of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Early history[edit]
Main articles: Early Congolese history and Kingdom of Kongo
The geographical area now known as the Democratic Republic of the Congo was populated as early as 90,000 years ago, as shown by the 1988 discovery of the Semliki harpoon at Katanda, one of the oldest barbed harpoons ever found, believed to have been used to catch giant river catfish.[30][31]
Bantu peoples reached Central Africa at some point during the first millennium BC, then gradually started to expand southward. Their propagation was accelerated by the adoption of pastoralism and of Iron Age techniques. The people living in the south and southwest were foraging groups, whose technology involved only minimal use of metal technologies. The development of metal tools during this time period revolutionized agriculture. This led to the displacement of the hunter-gatherer groups in the east and southeast. The final wave of the Bantu expansion was complete by the 10th century, followed by the establishment of the Bantu kingdoms, whose rising populations soon made possible intricate local, regional and foreign commercial networks that traded mostly in slaves, salt, iron and copper.

Congo Free State (1877–1908)[edit]
Main articles: Colonisation of the Congo and Congo Free State
See also: Atrocities in the Congo Free State and Congo Arab war
 View of Leopoldville Station and Port in 1884
Belgian exploration and administration took place from the 1870s until the 1920s. It was first led by Henry Morton Stanley, who undertook his explorations under the sponsorship of King Leopold II of Belgium. The eastern regions of the precolonial Congo were heavily disrupted by constant slave raiding, mainly from Arab–Swahili slave traders such as the infamous Tippu Tip, who was well known to Stanley.[32]
Leopold had designs on what was to become the Congo as a colony.[33] In a succession of negotiations, Leopold, professing humanitarian objectives in his capacity as chairman of the front organization Association Internationale Africaine, actually played one European rival against another.[citation needed]
King Leopold formally acquired rights to the Congo territory at the Conference of Berlin in 1885 and made the land his private property. He named it the Congo Free State.[33] Leopold's regime began various infrastructure projects, such as the construction of the railway that ran from the coast to the capital of Leopoldville (now Kinshasa), which took eight years to complete.
In the Free State, colonists coerced the local population into producing rubber, for which the spread of automobiles and development of rubber tires created a growing international market. Rubber sales made a fortune for Leopold, who built several buildings in Brussels and Ostend to honor himself and his country. To enforce the rubber quotas, the Force Publique was called in and made the practice of cutting off the limbs of the natives a matter of policy.[34]
During the period of 1885–1908, millions of Congolese died as a consequence of exploitation and disease. In some areas the population declined dramatically – it has been estimated that sleeping sickness and smallpox killed nearly half the population in the areas surrounding the lower Congo River.[34]
News of the abuses began to circulate. In 1904, the British consul at Boma in the Congo, Roger Casement, was instructed by the British government to investigate. His report, called the Casement Report, confirmed the accusations of humanitarian abuses. The Belgian Parliament forced Leopold II to set up an independent commission of inquiry. Its findings confirmed Casement's report of abuses, concluding that the population of the Congo had been "reduced by half" during this period.[35] Determining precisely how many people died is impossible, as no accurate records exist.

Belgian Congo (1908–1960)[edit]
Main article: Belgian Congo
 1908 photograph of a married Christian couple.
In 1908, the Belgian parliament, in spite of initial reluctance, bowed to international pressure (especially from the United Kingdom) and took over the Free State from King Leopold II.[36] On 18 October 1908, the Belgian parliament voted in favour of annexing the Congo as a Belgian colony. Executive power went to the Belgian minister of colonial affairs, assisted by a Colonial Council (Conseil Colonial) (both located in Brussels). The Belgian parliament exercised legislative authority over the Belgian Congo. In 1923 the colonial capital moved from Boma to Léopoldville, some 300 kilometres (190 mi) further upstream into the interior.[37]  Force Publique soldiers in the Belgian Congo in 1918. At its peak, the Force Publique had around 19,000 Congolese soldiers, led by 420 Belgian officers.The transition from the Congo Free State to the Belgian Congo was a break, but it also featured a large degree of continuity. The last governor-general of the Congo Free State, Baron Théophile Wahis, remained in office in the Belgian Congo and the majority of Leopold II's administration with him.[38] Opening up the Congo and its natural and mineral riches to the Belgian economy remained the main motive for colonial expansion – however, other priorities, such as healthcare and basic education, slowly gained in importance.
Colonial administrators ruled the territory and a dual legal system existed (a system of European courts and another one of indigenous courts, tribunaux indigènes). Indigenous courts had only limited powers and remained under the firm control of the colonial administration. The Belgian authorities permitted no political activity in the Congo whatsoever,[39] and the Force Publique put down any attempts at rebellion.  
The Belgian Congo was directly involved in the two world wars. During World War I (1914–1918), an initial stand-off between the Force Publique and the German colonial army in German East Africa turned into open warfare with a joint Anglo-Belgian-Portuguese invasion of German colonial territory in 1916 and 1917 during the East African campaign. The Force Publique gained a notable victory when it marched into Tabora in September 1916 under the command of General Charles Tombeur after heavy fighting. 
After 1918, Belgium was rewarded for the participation of the Force Publique in the East African campaign with a League of Nations mandate over the previously German colony of Ruanda-Urundi. During World War II, the Belgian Congo provided a crucial source of income for the Belgian government in exile in London, and the Force Publique again participated in Allied campaigns in Africa. Belgian Congolese forces under the command of Belgian officers notably fought against the Italian colonial army in Ethiopia in Asosa, Bortaï[40] and Saïo under Major-General Auguste-Eduard Gilliaert.[41]

Independence and political crisis (1960–1965)[edit]
Main articles: Congo Crisis and Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville)
 The leader of ABAKO, Joseph Kasa-Vubu, first democratically elected President of Congo-Léopoldville
 Patrice Lumumba, first democratically elected Prime Minister of the Congo-Léopoldville, was murdered by Belgian-supported Katangan separatists in 1961
In May 1960, a growing nationalist movement, the Mouvement National Congolais led by Patrice Lumumba, won the parliamentary elections. Lumumba became the first Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, then known as the Republic of the Congo, on 24 June 1960. The parliament elected Joseph Kasa-Vubu as president, of the Alliance des Bakongo (ABAKO) party. Other parties that emerged included the Parti Solidaire Africain led by Antoine Gizenga, and the Parti National du Peuple led by Albert Delvaux and Laurent Mbariko.[42]
The Belgian Congo achieved independence on 30 June 1960 under the name "République du Congo" ("Republic of Congo" or "Republic of the Congo" in English). As the neighboring French colony of Middle Congo (Moyen Congo) also chose the name "Republic of Congo" upon achieving its independence, the two countries are more commonly known as "Congo-Léopoldville" and "Congo-Brazzaville", after their capital cities.
Shortly after independence the Force Publique mutinied, and on 11 July the province of Katanga (led by Moïse Tshombe) and South Kasai engaged in secessionist struggles against the new leadership.[43][44] Most of the 100,000 Europeans who had remained behind after independence fled the country,[45] opening the way for Congolese to replace the European military and administrative elite.[46] After the United Nations rejected Lumumba's call for help to put down the secessionist movements, Lumumba asked for assistance from the Soviet Union, who accepted and sent military supplies and advisers. On 23 August, the Congolese armed forces invaded South Kasai. Lumumba was dismissed from office on 5 September 1960 by Kasavubu who publicly blamed him for massacres by the armed forces in South Kasai and for involving Soviets in the country.[47] Lumumba declared Kasavubu's action unconstitutional, and a crisis between the two leaders developed.[48]
On 14 September, Colonel Joseph Mobutu, with the backing of the US and Belgium, removed Lumumba from office. On 17 January 1961, Lumumba was handed over to Katangan authorities and executed by Belgian-led Katangan troops.[49] A 2001 investigation by Belgium's Parliament found Belgium "morally responsible" for the murder of Lumumba, and the country has since officially apologised for its role in his death.[50]
On 18 September 1961, in ongoing negotiations of a cease-fire, a plane crash near Ndola resulted in the death of Dag Hammarskjöld, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, along with all 15 passengers, setting off a succession crisis. Amidst widespread confusion and chaos, a temporary government was led by technicians (the Collège des commissaires généraux). Katangan secession ended in January 1963 with the assistance of UN forces. Several short-lived governments of Joseph Ileo, Cyrille Adoula, and Moise Kapenda Tshombe took over in quick succession.
Meanwhile, in the east of the country, Soviet and Cuban-backed rebels called the Simbas rose up, taking a significant amount of territory and proclaiming a communist "People's Republic of the Congo" in Stanleyville. The Simbas were pushed out of Stanleyville in November 1964 during Operation Dragon Rouge, a military operation conducted by Belgian and American forces to rescue hundreds of hostages. Congolese government forces fully defeated the Simba rebels by November 1965.[51]
Lumumba had previously appointed Mobutu chief of staff of the new Congo army, Armée Nationale Congolaise.[52] Taking advantage of the leadership crisis between Kasavubu and Tshombe, Mobutu garnered enough support within the army to launch a coup. A constitutional referendum the year before Mobutu's coup of 1965 resulted in the country's official name being changed to the "Democratic Republic of the Congo."[2] In 1971 Mobutu changed the name again, this time to "Republic of Zaire".[53][23]

Mobutu dictatorship and Zaire (1965–1997)[edit]
Main article: Zaire
 Mobutu Sese Seko and Richard Nixon in Washington, D.C., 1973.
Mobutu had the staunch support of the United States because of his opposition to communism; the U.S. believed that his administration would serve as an effective counter to communist movements in Africa.[54] A single-party system was established, and Mobutu declared himself head of state. He periodically held elections in which he was the only candidate. Although relative peace and stability were achieved, Mobutu's government was guilty of severe human rights violations, political repression, a cult of personality and corruption.
By late 1967 Mobutu had successfully neutralized his political opponents and rivals, either through co-opting them into his regime, arresting them, or rendering them otherwise politically impotent.[55] Throughout the late 1960s, Mobutu continued to shuffle his governments and cycle officials in and out of the office to maintain control. Joseph Kasa-Vubu's death in April 1969 ensured that no person with First Republic credentials could challenge his rule.[56] By the early 1970s, Mobutu was attempting to assert Zaire as a leading African nation. He traveled frequently across the continent while the government became more vocal about African issues, particularly those relating to the southern region. Zaire established semi-clientelist relationships with several smaller African states, especially Burundi, Chad, and Togo.[57]
Corruption became so common the term "le mal Zairois" or "Zairian sickness",[58] meaning gross corruption, theft and mismanagement, was coined, reportedly by Mobutu.[59] International aid, most often in the form of loans, enriched Mobutu while he allowed national infrastructure such as roads to deteriorate to as little as one-quarter of what had existed in 1960. Zaire became a kleptocracy as Mobutu and his associates embezzled government funds.

 Mobutu with the Dutch Prince Bernhard in Kinshasa in 1973
In a campaign to identify himself with African nationalism, starting on 1 June 1966, Mobutu renamed the nation's cities: Léopoldville became Kinshasa (the country was known as Congo-Kinshasa), Stanleyville became Kisangani, Elisabethville became Lubumbashi, and Coquilhatville became Mbandaka. In 1971, Mobutu renamed the country the Republic of Zaire,[23] its fourth name change in eleven years and its sixth overall. The Congo River was renamed the Zaire River.
During the 1970s and 1980s, Mobutu was invited to visit the United States on several occasions, meeting with U.S. Presidents Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush.[60] Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union U.S. relations with Mobutu cooled, as he was no longer deemed necessary as a Cold War ally. Opponents within Zaire stepped up demands for reform. This atmosphere contributed to Mobutu's declaring the Third Republic in 1990, whose constitution was supposed to pave the way for democratic reform. The reforms turned out to be largely cosmetic. Mobutu continued in power until armed forces forced him to flee in 1997. "From 1990 to 1993, the United States facilitated Mobutu's attempts to hijack political change", one academic wrote, and "also assisted the rebellion of Laurent-Desire Kabila that overthrew the Mobutu regime."[61]
In September 1997, Mobutu died in exile in Morocco.[62]

Continental and civil wars (1996–2007)[edit]
Main articles: First Congo War and Second Congo War
 Belligerents of the Second Congo War
By 1996, following the Rwandan Civil War and genocide and the ascension of a Tutsi-led government in Rwanda, Rwandan Hutu militia forces (Interahamwe) fled to eastern Zaire and used refugee camps as bases for incursions against Rwanda. They allied with the Zairian Armed Forces to launch a campaign against Congolese ethnic Tutsis in eastern Zaire.[63]
A coalition of Rwandan and Ugandan armies invaded Zaire to overthrow the government of Mobutu, launching the First Congo War. The coalition allied with some opposition figures, led by Laurent-Désiré Kabila, becoming the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo. In 1997 Mobutu fled and Kabila marched into Kinshasa, naming himself as president and reverting the name of the country to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.[64][65]
Kabila later requested that foreign military forces return to their own countries. Rwandan troops retreated to Goma and launched a new Tutsi-led rebel military movement called the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Democratie to fight Kabila, while Uganda instigated the creation of a rebel movement called the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo, led by Congolese warlord Jean-Pierre Bemba.[citation needed] The two rebel movements, along with Rwandan and Ugandan troops, started the Second Congo War by attacking the DRC army in 1998. Angolan, Zimbabwean, and Namibian militaries entered the hostilities on the side of the government.
Kabila was assassinated in 2001.[66] His son Joseph Kabila succeeded him [67] and called for multilateral peace talks. UN peacekeepers, MONUC, now known as MONUSCO, arrived in April 2001. In 2002-03 Bemba intervened in the Central African Republic on behalf of its former president, Ange-Félix Patassé.[68] Talks led to a peace accord under which Kabila would share power with former rebels. By June 2003 all foreign armies except those of Rwanda had pulled out of Congo. A transitional government was set up until after the election. A constitution was approved by voters, and on 30 July 2006 DRC held its first multi-party elections. These were the first free national elections since 1960, which many believed would mark the end to violence in the region.[69] However, an election-result dispute between Kabila and Bemba turned into a skirmish between their supporters in Kinshasa. MONUC took control of the city. A new election took place in October 2006, which Kabila won, and in December 2006 he was sworn in as president.

 Refugees in the Congo
Continued conflicts (2008–2018)[edit]
Kivu conflict[edit]
Main article: Kivu conflict People fleeing their villages due to fighting between FARDC and rebel groups, North Kivu, 2012Laurent Nkunda, a member of Rally for Congolese Democracy–Goma, a Rally for Congolese Democracy branch integrated to the army, defected along with troops loyal to him and formed the National Congress for the Defence of the People (CNDP), which began an armed rebellion against the government. They were believed[by whom?] to be again backed by Rwanda as a way to tackle the Hutu group, Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR). In March 2009, after a deal between the DRC and Rwanda, Rwandan troops entered the DRC and arrested Nkunda and were allowed to pursue FDLR militants. The CNDP signed a peace treaty with the government in which it agreed to become a political party and to have its soldiers integrated into the national army in exchange for the release of its imprisoned members.[70] In 2012 Bosco Ntaganda, the leader of the CNDP, and troops loyal to him, mutinied and formed the rebel military March 23 Movement (M23), claiming the government had violated the treaty.[71]  Government troops near Goma during the M23 rebellion in May 2013
In the resulting M23 rebellion, M23 briefly captured the provincial capital of Goma in November 2012.[72][73] Neighboring countries, particularly Rwanda, have been accused of arming rebels groups and using them as proxies to gain control of the resource-rich country, an accusation they deny.[74][75] In March 2013, the United Nations Security Council authorized the United Nations Force Intervention Brigade to neutralize armed groups.[76] On 5 November 2013, M23 declared an end to its insurgency.[77]
Additionally, in northern Katanga, the Mai-Mai created by Laurent Kabila slipped out of the control of Kinshasa with Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga's Mai Mai Kata Katanga briefly invading the provincial capital of Lubumbashi in 2013 and 400,000 persons displaced in the province as of 2013[update].[78] On and off fighting in the Ituri conflict occurred between the Nationalist and Integrationist Front and the Union of Congolese Patriots who claimed to represent the Lendu and Hema ethnic groups, respectively. In the northeast, Joseph Kony's Lord's Resistance Army moved from their original bases in Uganda and South Sudan to DR Congo in 2005 and set up camps in the Garamba National Park.[79][80]
The war in the Congo has been described as the bloodiest war since World War II.[15] On 8 December 2017, fourteen UN soldiers and five Congolese regular soldiers were killed in a rebel attack at Semuliki in Beni territory. The rebels were thought to be Allied Democratic Forces.[81] UN investigations confirmed that aggressor in the December attack.[82]
In 2009, The New York Times reported that people in the Congo continued to die at a rate of an estimated 45,000 per month[83] – estimates of the number who have died from the long conflict range from 900,000 to 5,400,000.[84] The death toll is caused by widespread disease and famine; reports indicate that almost half of the individuals who have died are children under five years of age.[85] There have been frequent reports of weapon bearers killing civilians, of the destruction of property, of widespread sexual violence,[86] causing hundreds of thousands of people to flee their homes, and of other breaches of humanitarian and human rights law. One study found that more than 400,000 women are raped in the Democratic Republic of Congo every year.[87] In 2018 and 2019, Congo reported the highest levels of sexual violence in the world.[69] According to the Human Rights Watch and the New York University-based Congo Research Group, armed troops in DRC's eastern Kivu region have killed over 1,900 civilians and kidnapped at least 3,300 people since June 2017 to June 2019.[88]

Kabila's term in office and multiple anti-government protests[edit]
In 2015, major protests broke out across the country and protesters demanded that Kabila step down as president. The protests began after the passage of a law by the Congolese lower house that, if also passed by the Congolese upper house, would keep Kabila in power at least until a national census was conducted (a process which would likely take several years and therefore keep him in power past the planned 2016 elections, which he is constitutionally barred from participating in). This bill passed; however, it was gutted of the provision that would keep Kabila in power until a census took place. A census is supposed to take place, but it is no longer tied to when the elections take place. In 2015, elections were scheduled for late 2016 and a tenuous peace held in the Congo.[89]
On 27 November 2016 Congolese foreign minister Raymond Tshibanda told the press no elections would be held in 2016, after 20 December, the end of president Kabila's term. In a conference in Madagascar, Tshibanda said that Kabila's government had "consulted election experts" from Congo, the United Nations and elsewhere, and that "it has been decided that the voter registration operation will end on July 31, 2017, and that election will take place in April 2018."[90] Protests broke out in the country on 20 December when Kabila's term in office ended. Across the country, dozens of protesters were killed and hundreds were arrested.

Renewed regional violence[edit]
See also: Ituri conflict
According to Jan Egeland, presently Secretary-General of the Norwegian Refugee Council, the situation in the DRC became much worse in 2016 and 2017 and is a major moral and humanitarian challenge comparable to the wars in Syria and Yemen, which receive much more attention. Women and children are abused sexually and "abused in all possible manners". Besides the conflict in North Kivu, violence increased in the Kasai region. The armed groups were after gold, diamonds, oil, and cobalt to line the pockets of rich men both in the region and internationally. There were also ethnic and cultural rivalries at play, as well as religious motives and the political crisis with postponed elections. Egeland says people believe the situation in the DRC is "stably bad" but in fact, it has become much, much worse. "The big wars of the Congo that were really on top of the agenda 15 years ago are back and worsening".[91] Disruption in planting and harvesting caused by the conflict was estimated to escalate starvation in about two million children.[92]
Human Rights Watch said in 2017 that Kabila recruited former March 23 Movement fighters to put down country-wide protests over his refusal to step down from office at the end of his term. "M23 fighters patrolled the streets of Congo's main cities, firing on or arresting protesters or anyone else deemed to be a threat to the president," they said.[93]
Fierce fighting has erupted in Masisi between government forces and a powerful local warlord, General Delta. The United Nations mission in the DRC is its largest and most expensive peacekeeping effort, but it shut down five UN bases near Masisi in 2017, after the U.S. led a push to cut costs.[94]
On 10 May 2018, Congolese gynecologist Denis Mukwege was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his effort to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict.

2018 ethnic conflict[edit]
Main article: 2018 Yumbi violence
A tribal conflict erupted on 16–17 December 2018 at Yumbi in Mai-Ndombe Province. Nearly 900 Banunu people from four villages were slaughtered by members of the Batende community in a deep-rooted rivalry over monthly tribal duties, land, fields and water resources. Some 100 Banunus fled to Moniende island in the Congo River, and another 16,000 to Makotimpoko District in Republic of Congo. Military-style tactics were employed in the bloodbath, and some assailants were clothed in army uniforms. Local authorities and elements within the security forces were suspected of lending them support.[95]

2018 election and new president (2018–present)[edit]
 DR Congo's President Félix Tshisekedi with neighbouring Congolese President Denis Sassou Nguesso in 2020; both wear face masks due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
On 30 December 2018 a general election was held. On 10 January 2019, the electoral commission announced opposition candidate Félix Tshisekedi as the winner of the presidential vote,[96] and he was officially sworn in as president on 24 January.[97] However, there were widespread suspicions that the results were rigged and that a deal had been made between Tshisekedi and Kabila. The Catholic Church said that the official results did not correspond to the information its election monitors had collected.[98] The government had also "delayed" the vote until March in some areas, citing the Ebola outbreak in Kivu as well as the ongoing military conflict. This was criticized as these regions are known as opposition strongholds.[99][100][101] In August 2019, six months after the inauguration of Félix Tshisekedi, a coalition government was announced.[102]
The political allies of Kabila maintained control of key ministries, the legislature, judiciary and security services. However, Tshisekedi succeeded in strengthening his hold on power. In a series of moves, he won over more legislators, gaining the support of almost 400 out of 500 members of the National Assembly. The pro-Kabila speakers of both houses of parliament were forced out. In April 2021, the new government was formed without the supporters of Kabila.[103]
A major measles outbreak in the country left nearly 5,000 dead in 2019.[104] The Ebola outbreak ended in June 2020, which had caused 2,280 deaths over 2 years.[105] Another, smaller Ebola outbreak in the Équateur Province began in June 2020, ultimately causing 55 deaths.[106][107] The global COVID-19 pandemic also reached the DRC in March 2020, with a vaccination campaign beginning on 19 April 2021.[108][109]
The Italian ambassador to the DRC, Luca Attanasio, and his bodyguard were killed in North Kivu on 22 February 2021.[110] On 22 April 2021, meetings between Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta and the Tshisekedi resulted in new agreements increasing international trade and security (counterterrorism, immigration, cyber security, and customs) between the two countries.[111] In February 2022, allegations of a coup d'état in the country led to uncertainty,[112] but the coup attempt failed.[113]

Geography[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 The map of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Democratic Republic of the Congo map of Köppen climate classification
Main articles: Geography of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Geology of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The DRC is located in central sub-Saharan Africa, bordered to the northwest by the Republic of the Congo, to the north by the Central African Republic, to the northeast by South Sudan, to the east by Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, and by Tanzania (across Lake Tanganyika), to the south and southeast by Zambia, to the southwest by Angola, and to the west by the South Atlantic Ocean and the Cabinda Province exclave of Angola. The country lies between latitudes 6°N and 14°S, and longitudes 12°E and 32°E. It straddles the Equator, with one-third to the north and two-thirds to the south. With an area of 2,345,408 square kilometres (905,567 sq mi), it is the second-largest country in Africa by area, after Algeria.
As a result of its equatorial location, the DRC experiences high precipitation and has the highest frequency of thunderstorms in the world. The annual rainfall can total upwards of 2,000 millimetres (80 in) in some places, and the area sustains the Congo rainforest, the second-largest rain forest in the world after the Amazon rainforest. This massive expanse of lush jungle covers most of the vast, low-lying central basin of the river, which slopes toward the Atlantic Ocean in the west. This area is surrounded by plateaus merging into savannas in the south and southwest, by mountainous terraces in the west, and dense grasslands extending beyond the Congo River in the north. The glaciated Rwenzori Mountains are found in the extreme eastern region.

 Ituri Rainforest
The tropical climate produced the Congo River system which dominates the region topographically along with the rainforest it flows through. The Congo Basin occupies nearly the entire country and an area of nearly 1,000,000 km2 (390,000 sq mi). The river and its tributaries form the backbone of Congolese economics and transportation. Major tributaries include the Kasai, Sangha, Ubangi, Ruzizi, Aruwimi, and Lulonga.

 Satellite image of Democratic Republic of the Congo
The Congo River has the second-largest flow and the second-largest watershed of any river in the world (trailing the Amazon in both respects). The sources of the Congo River are in the Albertine Rift Mountains that flank the western branch of the East African Rift, as well as Lake Tanganyika and Lake Mweru. The river flows generally west from Kisangani just below Boyoma Falls, then gradually bends southwest, passing by Mbandaka, joining with the Ubangi River, and running into the Pool Malebo (Stanley Pool). Kinshasa and Brazzaville are on opposite sides of the river at the Pool. Then the river narrows and falls through a number of cataracts in deep canyons, collectively known as the Livingstone Falls, and runs past Boma into the Atlantic Ocean. The river and a 37 kilometres (23 mi) wide strip of coastline on its north bank provide the country's only outlet to the Atlantic.
The Albertine Rift plays a key role in shaping the Congo's geography. Not only is the northeastern section of the country much more mountainous, but tectonic movement results in volcanic activity, occasionally with loss of life. The geologic activity in this area also created the African Great Lakes, four of which lie on the Congo's eastern frontier: Lake Albert, Lake Kivu, Lake Edward, and Lake Tanganyika. 
The rift valley has exposed an enormous amount of mineral wealth throughout the south and east of the Congo, making it accessible to mining. Cobalt, copper, cadmium, industrial and gem-quality diamonds, gold, silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium, uranium, radium, bauxite, iron ore, and coal are all found in plentiful supply, especially in the Congo's southeastern Katanga region.[114]

 Mount Nyiragongo, which last erupted in 2021.
 Salonga National Park.
 Masisi Territory
 Lake Kivu in North Kivu province
On 17 January 2002 Mount Nyiragongo erupted, with the lava running out at 64 km/h (40 mph) and 46 m (50 yd) wide. One of the three streams of extremely fluid lava flowed through Goma, killing 45 and leaving 120,000 homeless. Four hundred thousand people were evacuated from the city during the eruption. The lava poisoned the water of Lake Kivu, killing fish. Only two planes left the local airport because of the possibility of the explosion of stored petrol. The lava passed the airport, ruining a runway and trapping several airplanes. Six months after the eruption, nearby Mount Nyamuragira also erupted. Mount Nyamuragira then erupted in 2006 and again in January 2010.[115]

Biodiversity and conservation[edit]
Main articles: Wildlife of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de la Nature, and Environmental issues in the Democratic Republic of the CongoFurther information: List of ecoregions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Bas-Congo landscape
 An Okapi
 A male western gorilla
 Hippopotami
The rainforests of the Democratic Republic of the Congo contain great biodiversity, including many rare and endemic species, such as the common chimpanzee and the bonobo, the African forest elephant, the mountain gorilla, the okapi and the white rhinoceros. Five of the country's national parks are listed as World Heritage Sites: the Garumba, Kahuzi-Biega, Salonga and Virunga National Parks, and the Okapi Wildlife Reserve. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of 17 Megadiverse countries and is the most biodiverse African country.[116]
Conservationists have particularly worried about primates. The Congo is inhabited by several great ape species: the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), the bonobo (Pan paniscus), the eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei), and possibly the western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla).[117] It is the only country in the world in which bonobos are found in the wild. Much concern has been raised about great ape extinction. Because of hunting and habitat destruction, the chimpanzee, the bonobo and the gorilla, each of whose populations once numbered in the millions, have now dwindled down to only about 200,000 gorillas, 100,000 chimpanzees and possibly only about 10,000 bonobos.[118][119] The gorillas, chimpanzee, bonobo, and okapi are all classified as endangered by the World Conservation Union.
Major environmental issues in DRC include deforestation, poaching, which threatens wildlife populations, water pollution and mining. 
Displaced refugees cause or are otherwise responsible for significant deforestation, soil erosion and wildlife poaching. Another significant issue is environmental damage from the mining of minerals, especially diamonds, gold, and coltan – a mineral used to manufacture capacitors.

Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Territories of the Democratic Republic of the CongoFurther information: Administrative divisions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The country is currently divided into the city-province of Kinshasa and 25 other provinces.[2] The provinces are subdivided into 145 territories and 32 cities. Before 2015, the country had 11 provinces.[120]



 

1. Kinshasa
14. Ituri Province


2. Kongo Central
15. Haut-Uele


3. Kwango
16. Tshopo


4. Kwilu Province
17. Bas-Uele


5. Mai-Ndombe Province
18. Nord-Ubangi


6. Kasaï Province
19. Mongala


7. Kasaï-Central
20. Sud-Ubangi


8. Kasaï-Oriental
21. Équateur


9. Lomami Province
22. Tshuapa


10. Sankuru
23. Tanganyika Province


11. Maniema
24. Haut-Lomami


12. South Kivu
25. Lualaba Province


13. North Kivu
26. Haut-Katanga Province

Government and politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Joseph Kabila was President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from January 2001 to January 2019.
After a four-year interlude between two constitutions, with new political institutions established at the various levels of government, as well as new administrative divisions for the provinces throughout the country, a new constitution came into effect in 2006 and politics in the Democratic Republic of the Congo finally settled into a stable presidential democratic republic.
The 2003 transitional constitution[121] had established a parliament with a bicameral legislature, consisting of a Senate and a National Assembly.
The Senate had, among other things, the charge of drafting the new constitution of the country. The executive branch was vested in a 60-member cabinet, headed by a President and four vice presidents. The President was also the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. The transitional constitution also established a relatively independent judiciary, headed by a Supreme Court with constitutional interpretation powers.[122]
The 2006 constitution, also known as the Constitution of the Third Republic, came into effect in February 2006. It had concurrent authority, however, with the transitional constitution until the inauguration of the elected officials who emerged from the July 2006 elections. Under the new constitution, the legislature remained bicameral; the executive was concomitantly undertaken by a President and the government, led by a Prime Minister, appointed from the party able to secure a majority in the National Assembly.
The government – not the President – is responsible to the Parliament. The new constitution also granted new powers to the provincial governments, creating provincial parliaments which have oversight of the Governor and the head of the provincial government, whom they elect. The new constitution also saw the disappearance of the Supreme Court, which was divided into three new institutions. The constitutional interpretation prerogative of the Supreme Court is now held by the Constitutional Court.[123]
Although located in the Central African UN subregion, the nation is also economically and regionally affiliated with Southern Africa as a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).[124]

Foreign relations[edit]
See also: Foreign relations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 President Joseph Kabila with U.S. President Barack Obama in August 2014
The global growth in demand for scarce raw materials and the industrial surges in China, India, Russia, Brazil and other developing countries require that developed countries employ new, integrated and responsive strategies for identifying and ensuring, on a continual basis, an adequate supply of strategic and critical materials required for their security needs.[125] Highlighting the DR Congo's importance to United States national security, the effort to establish an elite Congolese unit is the latest push by the U.S. to professionalize armed forces in this strategically important region.[126]
There are economic and strategic incentives to bring more security to the Congo, which is rich in natural resources such as cobalt, a strategic and critical metal used in many industrial and military applications.[125] The largest use of cobalt is in superalloys, used to make jet engine parts. Cobalt is also used in magnetic alloys and in cutting and wear-resistant materials such as cemented carbides. The chemical industry consumes significant quantities of cobalt in a variety of applications including catalysts for petroleum and chemical processing; drying agents for paints and inks; ground coats for porcelain enamels; decolorant for ceramics and glass; and pigments for ceramics, paints, and plastics. The country possesses 80% of the world's cobalt reserves.[127]
It is thought that due to the importance of cobalt for batteries for electric vehicles and stabilization of electric grids with large proportions of intermittent renewables in the electricity mix, the DRC could become an object of increased geopolitical competition.[125]
In the 21st century, Chinese investment in the DRC and Congolese exports to China have grown rapidly. In July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including DRC, have signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending China's treatment of Uyghurs and other Muslim ethnic minorities.[128] In 2021, President Félix Tshisekedi called for a review of mining contracts signed with China by his predecessor Joseph Kabila,[129] in particular the Sicomines multibillion 'minerals-for-infrastructure' deal.[130][131]

Military[edit]
See also: Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 FARDC soldiers on patrol in Ituri province
The Forces Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) consist of about 144,000 personnel, the majority of whom are part of the land forces, also with a small air force and an even smaller navy. The FARDC was established in 2003 after the end of the Second Congo War and integrated many former rebel groups into its ranks. Due to the presence of undisciplined and poorly trained ex-rebels, as well as a lack of funding and having spent years fighting against different militias, the FARDC suffers from rampant corruption and inefficiency. The agreements signed at the end of the Second Congo War called for a new "national, restructured and integrated" army that would be made up of Kabila's government forces (the FAC), the RCD, and the MLC. Also stipulated was that rebels like the RCD-N, RCD-ML, and the Mai-Mai would become part of the new armed forces. It also provided for the creation of a Conseil Superieur de la Defense (Superior Defence Council) which would declare states of siege or war and give advice on security sector reform, disarmament/demobilisation, and national defence policy. The FARDC is organised on the basis of brigades, which are dispersed throughout the provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Congolese troops have been fighting the Kivu conflict in the eastern North Kivu region, the Ituri conflict in the Ituri region, and other rebellions since the Second Congo War. Besides the FARDC, the largest peacekeeping mission of the United Nations, known as MONUSCO, is also present in the country with about 18,000 peacekeepers.
The Democratic Republic of Congo signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.[132]

Corruption[edit]
Main article: Corruption in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
A relative of Mobutu explained how the government illicitly collected revenue during his rule: "Mobutu would ask one of us to go to the bank and take out a million. We'd go to an intermediary and tell him to get five million. He would go to the bank with Mobutu's authority and take out ten. Mobutu got one, and we took the other nine."[133] Mobutu institutionalized corruption to prevent political rivals from challenging his control, leading to an economic collapse in 1996.[134]
Mobutu allegedly stole as much as US$4–5 billion while in office.[135] He was not the first corrupt Congolese leader by any means: "Government as a system of organized theft goes back to King Leopold II," noted Adam Hochschild in 2009.[136] In July 2009, a Swiss court determined that the statute of limitations had run out on an international asset recovery case of about $6.7 million of deposits of Mobutu's in a Swiss bank, and therefore the assets should be returned to Mobutu's family.[137]
President Kabila established the Commission of Repression of Economic Crimes upon his ascension to power in 2001.[138] However, in 2016 the Enough Project issued a report claiming that the Congo is run as a violent kleptocracy.[139]
In June 2020, a court in the Democratic Republic of Congo found President Tshisekedi's chief of staff Vital Kamerhe guilty of corruption. He was sentenced to 20 years' hard labour, after facing charges of embezzling almost $50m (£39m) of public funds. He was the most high-profile figure to be convicted of corruption in the DRC.[140]
In November 2021, a judicial investigation targeting Kabila and his associates was opened in Kinshasa after revelations of alleged embezzlement of $138 million.[141]

Human rights[edit]
 A group of demobilized child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Main article: Human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Further information: Sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The International Criminal Court investigation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was initiated by Kabila in April 2004. The International Criminal Court prosecutor opened the case in June 2004.Child soldiers have been used on a large scale in DRC, and in 2011 it was estimated that 30,000 children were still operating with armed groups.[142] Instances of child labor and forced labor have been observed and reported in the U.S. Department of Labor's Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor in the DRC in 2013[143] and six goods produced by the country's mining industry appear on the department's December 2014 List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor.

Crime and law enforcement[edit]
Main article: Crime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The Congolese National Police are the primary police force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.[144]

Violence against women[edit]
Main articles: Sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Military macho-violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and International Criminal Court investigation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Violence against women seems to be perceived by large sectors of society to be normal.[145] The 2013–2014 DHS survey (pp. 299) found that 74.8% of women agreed that a husband is justified in beating his wife in certain circumstances.[146]
The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 2006 expressed concern that in the post-war transition period, the promotion of women's human rights and gender equality is not seen as a priority.[147][148] Mass rapes, sexual violence and sexual slavery are used as a weapon of war by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and armed groups in the eastern part of the country.[149] The eastern part of the country in particular has been described as the "rape capital of the world" and the prevalence of sexual violence there described as the worst in the world.[150][151]
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is also practiced in DRC, although not on a large scale. The prevalence of FGM is estimated at 5% of women.[152][153] FGM is illegal: the law imposes a penalty of two to five years of prison and a fine of 200,000 Congolese francs on any person who violates the "physical or functional integrity" of the genital organs.[154][155]
In July 2007, the International Committee of the Red Cross expressed concern about the situation in eastern DRC.[156] A phenomenon of "pendulum displacement" has developed, where people hasten at night to safety. According to Yakin Ertürk, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women who toured eastern Congo in July 2007, violence against women in North and South Kivu included "unimaginable brutality". Ertürk added that "Armed groups attack local communities, loot, rape, kidnap women and children, and make them work as sexual slaves".[157] In December 2008, GuardianFilms of The Guardian released a film documenting the testimony of over 400 women and girls who had been abused by marauding militia.[158]
In June 2010, Oxfam reported a dramatic increase in the number of rapes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and researchers from Harvard discovered that rapes committed by civilians had increased seventeenfold.[159] In June 2014, Freedom from Torture published reported rape and sexual violence being used routinely by state officials in Congolese prisons as punishment for politically active women.[160] The women included in the report were abused in several locations across the country including the capital Kinshasa and other areas away from the conflict zones.[160]
In 2015, figures both inside and outside of the country, such as Filimbi and Emmanuel Weyi, spoke out about the need to curb violence and instability as the 2016 elections approached.[161][162]

Economy[edit]
Main articles: Economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Poverty in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 A proportional representation of Democratic Republic of the Congo exports, 2019
 Change in per capita GDP of Congo, 1950–2018. Figures are inflation-adjusted to 2011 International dollars.
The Central Bank of the Congo is responsible for developing and maintaining the Congolese franc, which serves as the primary form of currency in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2007, The World Bank decided to grant the Democratic Republic of Congo up to $1.3 billion in assistance funds over the following three years.[163] The Congolese government started negotiating membership in the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA), in 2009.[164]
The DRC is widely considered one of the world's richest countries in natural resources; its untapped deposits of raw minerals are estimated to be worth in excess of US$24 trillion.[165][166][167] The DRC has 70% of the world's coltan, a third of its cobalt, more than 30% of its diamond reserves, and a tenth of its copper.[168][169]
Despite such vast mineral wealth, the economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has declined drastically since the mid-1980s. The DRC generated up to 70% of its export revenue from minerals in the 1970s and 1980s and was particularly hit when resource prices deteriorated at that time. By 2005, 90% of the DRC's revenues derived from its minerals.[170] Congolese citizens are among the poorest people on Earth. DR Congo consistently has the lowest, or nearly the lowest, nominal GDP per capita in the world. The DRC is also one of the twenty lowest-ranked countries on the Corruption Perceptions Index.

Mining[edit]
Main article: Mining industry of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Rough diamonds ≈1 to 1.5 mm in size from DR Congo.
The DRC is the world's largest producer of cobalt ore, and a major producer of copper and diamonds.[171] The latter come from Kasai province in the west. By far the largest mines in the DRC are located in southern Katanga province and are highly mechanized, with a capacity of several million tons per year of copper and cobalt ore, and refining capability for metal ore. The DRC is the second-largest diamond-producing nation in the world,[172] and artisanal and small-scale miners account for most of its production.
At independence in 1960, DRC was the second-most industrialized country in Africa after South Africa; it boasted a thriving mining sector and a relatively productive agriculture sector.[173] Foreign businesses have curtailed operations because of uncertainty about the outcome of long-term conflicts, lack of infrastructure, and the difficult operating environment. The wars intensified the impact of such basic problems as an uncertain legal framework, corruption, inflation, and lack of openness in government economic policy and financial operations.
Conditions improved in late 2002, when a large portion of the invading foreign troops withdrew. A number of International Monetary Fund and World Bank missions met with the government to help it develop a coherent economic plan, and President Kabila began implementing reforms. Much economic activity still lies outside the GDP data. Through 2011 the DRC had the lowest Human Development Index of the 187 ranked countries.[174]

 DR Congo's Human Development Index scores, 1970–2010.
 Collecting firewood in Basankusu.
The economy of DRC relies heavily on mining. However, the smaller-scale economic activity from artisanal mining occurs in the informal sector and is not reflected in GDP data.[175] A third of the DRC's diamonds are believed to be smuggled out of the country, making it difficult to quantify diamond production levels.[176] In 2002, tin was discovered in the east of the country but to date has only been mined on a small scale.[177] Smuggling of conflict minerals such as coltan and cassiterite, ores of tantalum and tin, respectively, helped to fuel the war in the eastern Congo.[178]
Katanga Mining Limited, a Swiss-owned company, owns the Luilu Metallurgical Plant, which has a capacity of 175,000 tonnes of copper and 8,000 tonnes of cobalt per year, making it the largest cobalt refinery in the world. After a major rehabilitation program, the company resumed copper production operations in December 2007 and cobalt production in May 2008.[179]
In April 2013, anti-corruption NGOs revealed that Congolese tax authorities had failed to account for $88 million from the mining sector, despite booming production and positive industrial performance. The missing funds date from 2010 and tax bodies should have paid them into the central bank.[180] Later in 2013, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative suspended the country's candidacy for membership due to insufficient reporting, monitoring and independent audits, but in July 2013 the country improved its accounting and transparency practices to the point where the EITI gave the country full membership.
In February 2018, global asset management firm AllianceBernstein[181] defined the DRC as economically "the Saudi Arabia of the electric vehicle age," because of its cobalt resources, as essential to the lithium-ion batteries that drive electric vehicles.[182]

Transportation[edit]
Main article: Transport in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Train from Lubumbashi arriving in Kindu on a newly refurbished line.
Ground transport in the Democratic Republic of Congo has always been difficult. The terrain and climate of the Congo Basin present serious barriers to road and rail construction, and the distances are enormous across this vast country. The DRC has more navigable rivers and moves more passengers and goods by boat and ferry than any other country in Africa, but air transport remains the only effective means of moving goods and people between many places within the country, especially in rural areas. Chronic economic mismanagement, political corruption and internal conflicts have led to long-term under-investment of infrastructure.

Rail[edit]
Main article: Rail transport in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Map of rail network
Rail transportation is provided by the Congo Railroad Company (Société nationale des chemins de fer du Congo), the Office National des Transports Congo and the Office of the Uele Railways (Office des Chemins de fer des Ueles, CFU). Like much of the infrastructure in the Congo, the railways are poorly maintained, dirty, crowded and dangerous.

Road[edit]
The DRC has fewer all-weather paved highways than any country of its population and size in Africa — a total of 2,250 km (1,400 mi), of which only 1,226 km (762 mi) is in good condition. To put this in perspective, the road distance across the country in any direction is more than 2,500 km (1,600 mi) (e.g. Matadi to Lubumbashi, 2,700 km (1,700 mi) by road). The figure of 2,250 km (1,400 mi) converts to 35 km (22 mi) of paved road per 1,000,000 of population. Comparative figures for Zambia and Botswana are 721 km (448 mi) and 3,427 km (2,129 mi) respectively.[183]
Three routes in the Trans-African Highway network pass through DR Congo:

Tripoli–Cape Town Highway: this route crosses the western extremity of the country on National Road No. 1 between Kinshasa and Matadi, a distance of 285 km (177 mi) on one of the only paved sections in fair condition.
Lagos–Mombasa Highway: the DR Congo is the main missing link in this east–west highway and requires a new road to be constructed before it can function.
Beira–Lobito Highway: this east–west highway crosses Katanga and requires re-construction over most of its length, being an earth track between the Angolan border and Kolwezi, a paved road in very poor condition between Kolwezi and Lubumbashi, and a paved road in fair condition over the short distance to the Zambian border.
Water[edit]
The DRC has thousands of kilometres of navigable waterways. Traditionally water transport has been the dominant means of moving around in approximately two-thirds of the country.

Air[edit]
As of June 2016[update], DR Congo had one major national airline (Congo Airways) that offered flights inside DR Congo. Congo Airways was based at Kinshasa's international airport. All air carriers certified by the DRC have been banned from European Union airports by the European Commission, because of inadequate safety standards.[184]
Several international airlines service Kinshasa's international airport and a few also offer international flights to Lubumbashi International Airport.

Energy[edit]
Main article: Energy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Both coal and crude oil resources were mainly used domestically up to 2008. The DRC has the infrastructure for hydro-electricity from the Congo River at the Inga dams.[185] The country also possesses 50% of Africa's forests and a river system that could provide hydro-electric power to the entire continent, according to a UN report on the country's strategic significance and its potential role as an economic power in central Africa.[186]
The generation and distribution of electricity are controlled by Société nationale d'électricité, but only 15% of the country has access to electricity.[187] The DRC is a member of three electrical power pools. These are Southern African Power Pool, East African Power Pool, and Central African Power Pool.

Renewable energy[edit]
Main article: Renewable energy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Because of abundant sunlight, the potential for solar development is very high in the DRC. There are already about 836 solar power systems in the DRC, with a total power of 83 MW, located in Équateur (167), Katanga (159), Nord-Kivu (170), the two Kasaï provinces (170), and Bas-Congo (170). Also, the 148 Caritas network system has a total power of 6.31 MW.[188]

Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Further information: Poverty in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Child marriage in Democratic Republic of the Congo
Languages[edit]
 The four Bantu languages with elevated "national" status.
Main article: Languages of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
French is the official language of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is culturally accepted as the lingua franca, facilitating communication among the many different ethnic groups of the Congo. According to a 2018 OIF report, 49 million Congolese people (51% of the population) could read and write in French.[189] A 2021 survey found that 74% of the population could speak French, making it the most widely spoken language in the country.[190]
In Kinshasa, 67% of the population in 2014 could read and write French, and 68.5% could speak and understand it.[191]
Approximately 242 languages are spoken in the country, of which four have the status of national languages: Kituba (Kikongo), Lingala, Tshiluba, and Swahili. Although some limited number of people speak these as first languages, most of the population speak them as a second language, after the native language of their own ethnic group. Lingala was the official language of the Force Publique under Belgian colonial rule and remains to this day the predominant language of the armed forces. Since the recent rebellions, a good part of the army in the east also uses Swahili, where it competes to be the regional lingua franca.
Under Belgian rule, the colonizers instituted teaching and use of the four national languages in primary schools, making it one of the few African nations to have had literacy in local languages during the European colonial period. This trend was reversed after independence, when French became the sole language of education at all levels.[192] Since 1975, the four national languages have been reintroduced in the first two years of primary education, with French becoming the sole language of education from the third year onward, but in practice many primary schools in urban areas solely use French from the first year of school onward.[192]
Portuguese is taught in the Congolese schools as a foreign language. The lexical similarity and phonology with French makes Portuguese a relatively easy language for the people to learn. Most of the roughly 175,000 Portuguese speakers in the DRC are Angolan and Mozambican expatriates.

Ethnic groups[edit]
Over 200 ethnic groups populate the DRC, of which the majority are Bantu peoples. Together, Mongo, Luba, Kongo peoples, Mangbetu and the Azande peoples constitute around 45% of the population.[193]
In 2021, the UN estimated the country's population to be 96 million,[194][195] a rapid increase from 39.1 million in 1992 despite the ongoing war.[196] As many as 250 ethnic groups have been identified and named. The most numerous people are the Kongo, Luba, and Mongo. About 600,000 Pygmies are the aboriginal people of the DR Congo.[197]

Religion[edit]
Main article: Religion in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 The Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral, Lubumbashi
 Our Lady of Peace Cathedral in Bukavu
Christianity is the predominant religion of the DRC. A 2013-14 survey, conducted by the Demographic and Health Surveys Program in 2013–2014 indicated that Christians constituted 93.7% of the population (with Catholics making up 29.7%, Protestants 26.8%, and other Christians 37.2%). A new Christian religious movement, Kimbanguism, had the adherence of 2.8%, while Muslims made up 1%.[198] Other recent estimates have found Christianity the majority religion, followed by 95.8% of the population according to a 2010 Pew Research Center[199] estimate, while the CIA World Factbook reports this figure to be 95.9%.[200] The proportion of followers of Islam is variously estimated from 1%[201] to 12% [202]
There are about 35 million Catholics in the country[2] with six archdioceses and 41 dioceses.[203] The impact of the Catholic Church is difficult to overestimate. Schatzberg has called it the country's "only truly national institution apart from the state."[204] Its schools have educated over 60% of the nation's primary school students and more than 40% of its secondary students. The church owns and manages an extensive network of hospitals, schools, and clinics, as well as many diocesan economic enterprises, including farms, ranches, stores, and artisans' shops.[citation needed]
Sixty-two Protestant denominations are federated under the umbrella of the Church of Christ in the Congo. It is often simply referred to as the Protestant Church, since it covers most of the DRC Protestants. With more than 25 million members, it constitutes one of the largest Protestant bodies in the world.
Kimbanguism was seen as a threat to the colonial regime and was banned by the Belgians. Kimbanguism, officially "the church of Christ on Earth by the prophet Simon Kimbangu", has about three million members,[205] primarily among the Bakongo of Kongo Central and Kinshasa.
Islam has been present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the 18th century, when Arab traders from East Africa pushed into the interior for ivory- and slave-trading purposes. Today, Muslims constitute approximately 1% of the Congolese population according to the Pew Research Center. The majority are Sunni Muslims.
The first members of the Baháʼí Faith to live in the country came from Uganda in 1953. Four years later the first local administrative council was elected. In 1970 the National Spiritual Assembly (national administrative council) was first elected. Though the religion was banned in the 1970s and 1980s, due to misrepresentations of foreign governments, the ban was lifted by the end of the 1980s. In 2012 plans were announced to build a national Baháʼí House of Worship in the country.[206]
Traditional religions embody such concepts as monotheism, animism, vitalism, spirit and ancestor worship, witchcraft, and sorcery and vary widely among ethnic groups. The syncretic sects often merge elements of Christianity with traditional beliefs and rituals and are not recognized by mainstream churches as part of Christianity. New variants of ancient beliefs have become widespread, led by US-inspired Pentecostal churches which have been in the forefront of witchcraft accusations, particularly against children and the elderly.[clarification needed][207] Children accused of witchcraft are sent away from homes and family, often to live on the street, which can lead to physical violence against these children.[208][clarification needed][209] There are charities supporting street children such as the Congo Children Trust.[210] The Congo Children Trust's flagship project is Kimbilio,[211] which works to reunite street children in Lubumbashi. The usual term for these children is enfants sorciers (child witches) or enfants dits sorciers (children accused of witchcraft). Non-denominational church organizations have been formed to capitalize on this belief by charging exorbitant fees for exorcisms. Though recently outlawed, children have been subjected in these exorcisms to often-violent abuse at the hands of self-proclaimed prophets and priests.[212]

Education[edit]
Main article: Education in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 A classroom in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In 2014, the literacy rate for the population between the ages of 15 and 49 was estimated to be 75.9% (88.1% male and 63.8% female) according to a DHS nationwide survey.[213] The education system is governed by three government ministries: the Ministère de l'Enseignement Primaire, Secondaire et Professionnel (MEPSP), the Ministère de l'Enseignement Supérieur et Universitaire (MESU) and the Ministère des Affaires Sociales (MAS). Primary education is not free nor compulsory,[citation needed] even though the Congolese constitution says it should be (Article 43 of the 2005 Congolese Constitution).[214]
As a result of the First and Second Congo Wars in the late 1990s—early 2000s, over 5.2 million children in the country did not receive any education.[215] Since the end of the civil war, the situation has improved tremendously, with the number of children enrolled in primary schools rising from 5.5 million in 2002 to 16.8 million in 2018, and the number of children enrolled in secondary schools rising from 2.8 million in 2007 to 4.6 million in 2015 according to UNESCO.[216]
Actual school attendance has also improved greatly in recent years, with primary school net attendance estimated to be 82.4% in 2014 (82.4% of children ages 6–11 attended school; 83.4% for boys, 80.6% for girls).[217]

Health[edit]
Main articles: Health in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and HIV/AIDS in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Development of life expectancy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The hospitals in the DRC include the General Hospital of Kinshasa. The DRC has the world's second-highest rate of infant mortality (after Chad). In April 2011, through aid from Global Alliance for Vaccines, a new vaccine to prevent pneumococcal disease was introduced around Kinshasa.[218] In 2012, it was estimated that about 1.1% of adults aged 15–49 were living with HIV/AIDS.[219] Malaria[220][221] and yellow fever are problems.[222] In May 2019, the death toll from the Ebola outbreak in DRC surpassed 1,000.[223]
Maternal health is poor in DRC. According to 2010 estimates, DRC has the 17th highest maternal mortality rate in the world.[224] According to UNICEF, 43.5% of children under five are stunted.[225]
United Nations emergency food relief agency warned that amid the escalating conflict and worsening situation following COVID-19 in the DRC, millions of lives were at risk as they could die of hunger. According to the data of the World Food Programme, in 2020 four in ten people in Congo lacked food security and about 15.6 million were facing a potential hunger crisis.[226]
Air pollution levels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) are very unhealthy. In 2020, annual average air pollution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo stood at 34.2 µg/m³, which is almost 6.8 times the World Health Organization PM2.5 guideline (5 µg/m³: set in September 2021).[227] These pollution levels are estimated to reduce the life expectancy of an average citizen of the DRC by almost 2.9 years.[227] Currently, the DRC does not have a national ambient air quality standard.[228]

Largest cities[edit]



   Largest cities or towns in the Democratic Republic of the Congo[229][230]



Rank

Name

Province

Pop.




KinshasaMbuji-Mayi

1
Kinshasa
Kinshasa
15,628,000

LubumbashiKananga


2
Mbuji-Mayi
Kasai-Oriental
2,765,000


3
Lubumbashi
Haut-Katanga
2,695,000


4
Kananga
Kasaï-Central
1,593,000


5
Kisangani
Tshopo
1,366,000


6
Bukavu
South Kivu
1,190,000


7
Tshikapa
Kasaï
1,024,000


8
Bunia
Ituri
768,000


9
Goma
North Kivu
707,000


10
Uvira
South Kivu
657,000


Migration[edit]
 Population fleeing their villages due to fighting between FARDC and rebels groups, Sake North Kivu 30 April 2012
Given the often unstable situation in the country and the condition of state structures, it is extremely difficult to obtain reliable migration data. However, evidence suggests that DRC continues to be a destination country for immigrants, in spite of recent declines in their numbers. Immigration is very diverse in nature; refugees and asylum-seekers – products of the numerous and violent conflicts in the Great Lakes Region – constitute an important subset of the population. Additionally, the country's large mine operations attract migrant workers from Africa and beyond. There is also considerable migration for commercial activities from other African countries and the rest of the world, but these movements are not well studied.[231] Transit migration towards South Africa and Europe also plays a role.
Immigration to the DRC has decreased steadily over the past two decades, most likely as a result of the armed violence that the country has experienced. According to the International Organization for Migration, the number of immigrants in the DRC has fallen from just over one million in 1960, to 754,000 in 1990, to 480,000 in 2005, to an estimated 445,000 in 2010. Official figures are unavailable, partly due to the predominance of the informal economy in the DRC. Data are also lacking on irregular immigrants, however given neighbouring countries' ethnic links to DRC nationals, irregular migration is assumed to be a significant phenomenon.[231]
Figures for Congolese nationals abroad vary greatly depending on the source, from three to six million. This discrepancy is due to a lack of official, reliable data. Emigrants from the DRC are above all long-term emigrants, the majority of whom live in Africa and to a lesser extent in Europe; 79.7% and 15.3% respectively, according to estimated 2000 data. New destination countries include South Africa and various points en route to Europe. The DRC has produced a considerable number of refugees and asylum-seekers located in the region and beyond. These numbers peaked in 2004 when, according to UNHCR, there were more than 460,000 refugees from the DRC; in 2008, Congolese refugees numbered 367,995 in total, 68% of whom were living in other African countries.[231]
Since 2003, more than 400,000 Congolese migrants have been expelled from Angola.[232]

Culture[edit]
Main articles: Culture of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congolese cuisine
 A Hemba male statue
The culture reflects the diversity of its hundreds of ethnic groups and their differing ways of life throughout the country—from the mouth of the River Congo on the coast, upriver through the rainforest and savanna in its centre, to the more densely populated mountains in the far east. Since the late 19th century, traditional ways of life have undergone changes brought about by colonialism, the struggle for independence, the stagnation of the Mobutu era, and most recently, the First and Second Congo Wars. Despite these pressures, the customs and cultures of the Congo have retained much of their individuality. The country's 81 million inhabitants (2016) are mainly rural. The 30% who live in urban areas have been the most open to Western influences.

Music[edit]
The DRC has its influences on Cuban rumba, originally kumba from Congo and merengue. And those two later give birth to soukous.[233] Other African nations produce music genres derived from Congolese soukous. Some of the African bands sing in Lingala, one of the main languages in the DRC. The same Congolese soukous, under the guidance of "le sapeur", Papa Wemba, have set the tone for a generation of young men always dressed up in expensive designer clothes. They came to be known as the fourth generation of Congolese music and mostly come from the former well-known band Wenge Musica. 
The musical artist Elizo Kisonga, who now lives in England, is originally from Congo.

Sports[edit]
 Stade des Martyrs in Kinshasa.
Many sports are played in the DRC, including football, basketball, and rugby. The sports are played in numerous stadiums throughout the country, including the Stade Frederic Kibassa Maliba.[234] As Zaire they participated in the World Cup Football (Final stage) in 1974.
Internationally, the country is especially famous for its professional basketball NBA and football players. Dikembe Mutombo is one of the best African basketball players to ever play the game. Mutombo is well known for humanitarian projects in his home country. Bismack Biyombo, Christian Eyenga, Jonathan Kuminga, and Emmanuel Mudiay are others who gained significant international attention in basketball. Several Congolese players and players of Congolese descent—including strikers Romelu Lukaku, Yannick Bolasie, and Dieumerci Mbokani—have gained prominence in world football. DR Congo has twice won the African Cup of Nations football tournament.
DR Congo's women's national volleyball team lastly qualified for the 2021 Women's African Nations Volleyball Championship.[235] The country featured a national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup in both the women's and the men's section.[236]

Media[edit]
Main article: Media of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Newspapers of the DRC include L'Avenir, Radion Télévision Mwangaza, La Conscience [fr], L'Observateur [fr], Le Phare, Le Potentiel, Le Soft and LeCongolais.CD,[237] a web-based daily.[238] Radio Télévision Nationale Congolaise (RTNC) is the national broadcaster of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. RTNC currently broadcasts in Lingala, French, and English.

Literature[edit]
Congolese authors use literature as a way to develop a sense of national consciousness amongst the people of the DRC. Frederick Kambemba Yamusangie writes literature for the between generations of those who grew up in the Congo, during the time when they were colonised, fighting for independence and after. Yamusangie in an interview[239] said he felt the distance in literature and wanted to remedy that he wrote the novel, Full Circle, which is a story of a boy named Emanuel who in the beginning of the book feels a difference in culture among the different groups in the Congo and elsewhere.[240] Rais Neza Boneza, an author from the Katanga province, wrote novels and poems to promote artistic expressions as a way to address and deal with conflicts.[241]

See also[edit]


Democratic Republic of the Congo portal
Outline of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Index of Democratic Republic of the Congo-related articles
Democratic Republic of the Congo–South Sudan border
Notes[edit]


^ The term "Kikongo" in the Constitution  is actually referring to the Kituba language – which is known as Kikongo ya leta by its speakers – not the Kongo language proper. The confusion arises from the fact that the government of the DRC officially recognizes and refers to the language simply as "Kikongo".


References[edit]


^ Joel C. "National Profiles". Thearda.com. Retrieved 30 September 2022.

^ a b c d e f g Central Intelligence Agency (2014). "Democratic Republic of the Congo". The World Factbook. Langley, Virginia: Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2014.

^ "Congo Democratic Republic of the". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 24 September 2022.

^ a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 7 April 2020.

^ "GINI index coefficient". CIA Factbook. Archived from the original on 7 July 2021. Retrieved 16 July 2021.

^ "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022.

^ * Starbird, Caroline; Deboer, Dale; Pettit, Jenny (2004). Teaching International Economics and Trade. Center for Teaching International Relations, University of Denver. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-943804-92-7. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. Aid Applicant: The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DROC)
Weigert, Stephen L. (2011). Angola: A Modern Military History, 1961–2002 (electronic ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. PT122, PT157. ISBN 9780230337831. Archived from the original on 15 March 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2020.
Worldmark Yearbook 2000. Vol. 1. Gale Group. 2000. pp. 79, 645. ISBN 9780787649333. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020.
Thom, William G. (Fall 1999). "Congo-Zaire's 1996-97 civil war in the context of evolving patterns of military conflict in Africa in the era of independence". Journal of Conflict Studies. XIX (2). Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2020.
Ballinger, Benjamin; Stringer, Martin; Schmeda-Lopez, Diego R. (1 December 2019). "The vulnerability of electric vehicle deployment to critical mineral supply". Applied Energy. 255: 113844. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113844. S2CID 203130461. Archived from the original on 3 January 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2020.
Office of the United States Trade Representative (2003).  United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means (ed.). Comprehensive Report on U.S. Trade and Investment Policy Toward Sub-Saharan Africa. Message from the President of the United States. United States Government Printing Office. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-4289-5014-6. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2015. Democratic Republic of the Congo (DROC) will become eligible for AGOA trade benefits upon formation of a transitional government.

^ Van Reybrouck, David (2015). Congo : the epic history of a people. New York, NY: HarperCollins. pp. Chapter 1 and 2. ISBN 9780062200129.

^ 
Coghlan, Benjamin;  et al. (2007). Mortality in the Democratic Republic of Congo: An ongoing crisis: Full 26-page report (PDF) (Report). p. 26. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013.

^ 
Robinson, Simon (28 May 2006). "The deadliest war in the world". Time. Archived from the original on 11 September 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ 
Bavier, Joe (22 January 2008). "Congo War driven crisis kills 45,000 a month". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 April 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ 
"Measuring Mortality in the Democratic Republic of Congo" (PDF). International Rescue Committee. 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 2 September 2011.

^ "Democratic Republic of Congo in Crisis | Human Rights Watch". Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

^ Mwanamilongo, Saleh; Anna, Cara (24 January 2019). "Congo's surprise new leader in 1st peaceful power transfer". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ a b 
BBC. (9 October 2013). "DR Congo: Cursed by its natural wealth".
BBC News website Archived 31 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 9 December 2017.

^ Human Development Report 2020 The Next Frontier: Human Development and the Anthropocene (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 15 December 2020. pp. 343–346. ISBN 978-92-1-126442-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020.

^ Samir Tounsi (6 June 2018). "DR Congo crisis stirs concerns in central Africa". AFP. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2018.

^ Robyn Dixon (12 April 2018). "Violence is roiling the Democratic Republic of Congo. Some say it's a strategy to keep the president in power". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 8 June 2018. Retrieved 8 June 2018.

^ Bobineau, Julien; Gieg, Philipp (2016). The Democratic Republic of the Congo. La République Démocratique du Congo. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 32. ISBN 978-3-643-13473-8.

^ Kisangani, Emizet Francois (2016). Historical Dictionary of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 158. ISBN 978-1-4422-7316-0.

^ Anderson, David (2000). Africa's Urban Past. ISBN 978-0-85255-761-7. Archived from the original on 1 December 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2017.

^ Nelson, Samuel Henry. Colonialism In The Congo Basin, 1880–1940. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1994

^ a b c Emizet Francois Kisangani; Scott F. Bobb (2010). Historical Dictionary of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Scarecrow Press. p. i. ISBN 978-0-8108-6325-5. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2016.

^ Forbath, Peter. The River Congo (1977), p. 19.

^ Ghislain C. Kabwit, Zaïre: the Roots of the Continuing Crisis, Cambridge University Press, 1979

^ Jean-Jacques Arthur Malu-Malu, Le Congo Kinshasa, KARTHALA Editions, 2014, p. 171

^ James Barbot, An Abstract of a Voyage to Congo River, Or the Zair and to Cabinde in the Year 1700 (1746). James Hingston Tuckey, Narrative of an Expedition to Explore the River Zaire, Usually Called the Congo, in South Africa, in 1816 (1818). "Congo River, called Zahir or Zaire by the natives" John Purdy, Memoir, Descriptive and Explanatory, to Accompany the New Chart of the Ethiopic or Southern Atlantic Ocean, 1822, p. 112.

^ Nzongola-Ntalaja, Georges (2004). From Zaire to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nordic Africa Institute. pp. 5–. ISBN 978-91-7106-538-4. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2015.

^ Yusuf, A.A. (1998). African Yearbook of International Law, 1997. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1055-8. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2015.

^ "Katanda Bone Harpoon Point | The Smithsonian Institution's Human Origins Program". Humanorigins.si.ed. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ Yellen, John E. (1 September 1998). "Barbed Bone Points: Tradition and Continuity in Saharan and Sub-Saharan Africa". African Archaeological Review. 15 (3): 173–98. doi:10.1023/A:1021659928822. S2CID 128432105.

^ The East African slave trade Archived 6 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. BBC World Service: The Story of Africa; accessed 2 December 2017.

^ a b Keyes, Michael. The Congo Free State – a colony of gross excess. Archived 19 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine September 2004.

^ a b Fage, John D. (1982). The Cambridge history of Africa: From the earliest times to c. 500 BC Archived 18 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge University Press. p. 748; ISBN 0-521-22803-4

^ Hochschild, Adam. King Leopold's Ghost, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1999; ISBN 0-547-52573-7

^ Tim Stanley (October 2012). "Belgium's Heart of Darkness". History Today. Vol. 62, no. 10. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2016.

^ "Kinshasa – national capital, Democratic Republic of the Congo". britannica.com. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. Retrieved 22 April 2021.

^ Stengers, Jean (2005), Congo: Mythes et réalités, Brussels: Editions Racine.

^ Meredith, Martin (2005). The Fate of Africa. New York: Public Affairs. p. 6. ISBN 9781586482466.

^ Philippe Brousmiche (2010). Bortaï: journal de campagne: Abyssinie 1941, offensive belgo-congolaise, Faradje, Asosa, Gambela, Saio (in French). Harmattan. ISBN 978-2-296-13069-2. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020 – via Google Books.

^ 
McCrummen, Stephanie (4 August 2009). "Nearly Forgotten Forces of WWII". The Washington Post. Washington Post Foreign Service. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2017.

^ Congo 1960, dossiers du CRISP, Belgium

^ "Jungle Shipwreck Archived 16 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine", Time, 25 July 1960.

^ "- HeinOnline.org". www.heinonline.org. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 16 November 2018.

^ "The United Nations and the Congo". Historylearningsite.co.uk. 30 March 2007. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ "Hearts of Darkness" Archived 25 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, allacademic.com

^ Nzongola-Ntalaja, Georges (2007). The Congo, From Leopold to Kabila: A People's History (3rd ed.). New York: Palgrave. p. 108. ISBN 978-1-84277-053-5.

^ Sécession au Katanga – J.Gérard-Libois -Brussels- CRISP

^ "Patrice Lumumba: 50 Years Later, Remembering the U.S.-Backed Assassination of Congo's First Democratically Elected Leader". Democracy Now!. 21 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 March 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "Belgians accused of war crimes in killing of Congo leader Lumumba". The Independent. 23 June 2010. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017.

^ Abbott, Peter (2014). Modern African Wars (4): The Congo 1960–2002. Oxford; New York City: Osprey Publishing. p. 14–18. ISBN 978-1-78200-076-1.

^ Kanza, Thomas R. (1994). The Rise and Fall of Patrice Lumumba: Conflict in the Congo (expanded ed.). Rochester, Vermont: Schenkman Books, Inc. ISBN 978-0-87073-901-9.

^ Payanzo, Ntsomo. "Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)". britannica.com. Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 9 October 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2015.

^ Adam Hochschild (13 August 2009). "Rape of the Congo". New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018.

^ Young & Turner 2013, p. 58.

^ Young & Turner 2013, pp. 61–62.

^ Young & Turner 2013, p. 64.

^ ""Zaire: The Hoax of Independence", The Aida Parker Newsletter #203, 4 August 1997". cycad.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 4 February 2010.

^ Young & Turner 2013, p. 74.

^ Johns, Michael (29 June 1989) "Zaire's Mobutu Visits America", Heritage Foundation Executive Memorandum #239.

^ "The 2006 Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Congo" (PDF). Icla.up.ac.za. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018.

^ "CNN - Mobutu dies in exile in Morocco - Sept. 7, 1997". edition.cnn.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

^ Thom, William G. "Congo-Zaire's 1996–97 civil war in the context of evolving patterns of military conflict in Africa in the era of independence", Conflict Studies Journal at the University of New Brunswick, Vol. XIX No. 2, Fall 1999.

^ "CNN - Capture of Zaire's capital complete - May 18, 1997". edition.cnn.com. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

^ "Zaire Chooses Confusing New Name | The Spokesman-Review". www.spokesman.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

^ Guardian Staff (11 February 2001). "Revealed: how Africa's dictator died at the hands of his boy soldiers". the Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

^ agencies, Staff and (19 January 2001). "Kabila's son to be sworn in as president". the Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022.

^ 
"ICC Convicts Bemba of War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity". International Justice Resource Center. 29 March 2016. Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2016.

^ a b Autesserre, Séverine; Gbowee, Leymah (3 May 2021). The Frontlines of Peace: An Insider's Guide to Changing the World (1 ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780197530351.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-753035-1. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021.

^ "DR Congo government, CNDP rebels 'sign peace deal'". Agence France-Presse. 23 March 2012. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 18 November 2012.

^ Gouby, Melanie (4 April 2012). "Congo-Kinshasa: General Ntaganda and Loyalists Desert Armed Forces". allafrica.com. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2012.

^ "Rebels in DR Congo withdraw from Goma". BBC News. 1 December 2012. Archived from the original on 6 December 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2012.

^ "Goma: M23 rebels capture DR Congo city". BBC News. 20 November 2012. Archived from the original on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 18 November 2012.

^ "Rwanda defence chief leads DR Congo rebels, UN report says". BBC News. 17 October 2012. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2012.

^ "Rwanda military aiding DRC mutiny, report says". BBC News. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2012.

^ "Tanzanian troops arrive in eastern DR Congo as part of UN intervention brigade". United Nations. 10 May 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013.

^ "DR Congo M23 rebels 'end insurgency'". BBC News. 5 November 2013. Archived from the original on 6 November 2013. Retrieved 5 November 2013.

^ "Katanga: Fighting for DR Congo's cash cow to secede". BBC News. 11 August 2013. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013.

^ Fessy, Thomas (23 October 2008). "Congo terror after LRA rebel raids". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ "thousands flee LRA in DR Congo". BBC News. 25 September 2008. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ BBC. "DR Congo: UN peacekeepers killed in attack in North Kivu". (9 December 2017) BBC website Archived 16 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 9 December 2017.

^ Lederer, Edith M.; Associated Press. (2 March 2018). "UN probe blames ADF rebels in Congo for peacekeeper attacks." Washington Post website Archived 3 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 10 March 2018.

^ Kristof, Nicholas D. (31 January 2010) "Orphaned, Raped and Ignored" Archived 25 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times

^ Butty, James (21 January 2010) "A New Study Finds Death Toll in Congo War too High" Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, VOA News, 21 January 2010.

^ Polgreen, Lydia (23 January 2008). "Congo's Death Rate Unchanged Since War Ended". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 27 March 2010.

^ "IHL and Sexual Violence" Archived 4 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine. The Program for Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research.

^ 
"400,000 rapes in Congo in one year" Archived 22 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent, 12 May 2011.

^ "1,900 killed, over 3,300 abducted in DR Congo's eastern Kivu provinces". Africa News. 15 August 2019. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2019.

^ Global, PGW. "The Democratic Republic of the Congo: Hurdle After Hurdle". PGW Global Risk Management. PGW Global Risk Management LLP. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017.

^ "No elections in DR Congo before April 2018: minister". modernghana.com. 27 November 2016. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.

^ Interview on BBC Newshour, Feb. 15, 2018 Archived 5 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine. See also BBC DR Congo country profile Archived 29 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine

^ Al Jazeera News (9 March 2018). "UN: Two million children risk starvation in DRC." Al Jazeera News website Archived 9 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 9 March 2018.

^ "DR Congo: Rebels Were Recruited to Crush Protests". Hrw.org. 4 December 2017. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018.

^ Jason Burke (3 April 2018). "'The wars will never stop' – millions flee bloodshed as Congo falls apart: Starving and sick, people living in the Democratic Republic of Congo are caught in a bloody cycle of violence and political turmoil". TheGuardian.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 8 June 2018.

^ Huguet, Alexis (12 February 2019). "Fear and trauma haunt Congolese massacre survivors". AFP. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2019.

^ Gonzales, Richard; Schwartz, Matthew S. (9 January 2019). "Surprise Winner Of Congolese Election Is An Opposition Leader". NPR. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019.

^ "REFILE-Opposition leader Felix Tshisekedi sworn in as Congo president". Reuters. 24 January 2019. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019.

^ "DR Congo presidential election: Outcry as Tshisekedi named winner". BBC. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019.

^ Mohamed, Hamza (26 December 2018). DR Congo election board delays vote in three cities Archived 10 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Al Jazeera.

^ DR Congo: Nearly 900 killed in ethnic clashes last month, UN says Archived 5 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Published 16 January 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2019.

^ Nearly 900 killed in ethnic violence in Congo in mid-December -UN Archived 22 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Reuters. Published 16 January 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2019.

^ "DR Congo announces new govt 7 months after president inaugurated". Journal du Cameroun (in French). 26 August 2019. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2019.

^ "DR Congo names new cabinet, cements president's power". Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

^ "DR Congo measles: Nearly 5,000 dead in major outbreak" Archived 11 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine (21 November 2019). BBC.  Retrieved 20 November 2020.

^ Dahir, Abdi Latif (25 June 2020). "Congo's Deadliest Ebola Outbreak Is Declared Over". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ Maclean, Ruth (1 June 2020). "New Ebola Outbreak in Congo, Already Hit by Measles and Coronavirus". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 1 June 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ "Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) - Ebola Situation Report #40 - April 10, 2021 - Democratic Republic of the Congo". ReliefWeb. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ "Covid: DR Congo in race against time to vaccinate people". BBC News. 10 May 2021. Archived from the original on 5 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021.

^ Dahir, Abdi Latif (16 April 2021). "Vaccine hesitancy runs high in some African countries, in some cases leaving unused doses to expire". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ Pianigiani, Gaia (23 February 2021). "Italy Mourns an Ambassador and His Bodyguard, Killed in Congo". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ "Kenya, DRC sign deals on security, trade and transport". The East African. 22 April 2021. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.

^ AfricaNews (9 February 2022). "RDC failed coup plot: president's security adviser in detention". Africanews. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2022.

^ "Combat troops patrol in Kinshasa after failed coup attempt". Africanews. 13 February 2022. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2022.

^ "About Katanga | Pamoja Tujenge". pamojasolutions.org. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017.

^ "Nyamuragira Volcano, Democratic Republic of Congo | John Seach". Volcanolive.com. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 29 November 2017.

^ "Lambertini, A Naturalist's Guide to the Tropics, excerpt". Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2008.

^ "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. April 2016. April 2016. Archived from the original on 23 October 2018. Retrieved 23 October 2018.

^ 
"Gorillas on Thin Ice". United Nations Environment Programme. 15 January 2009. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2010.

^ 
Vigilant, Linda (2004). "Chimpanzees". Current Biology. 14 (10): R369–R371. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.006. PMID 15186757.

^ The National Assembly adopts the laws regarding the limits of the provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo Archived 27 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine, National Assembly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 10 January 2015. (in French)

^ Full text of constitution (in French)

^ "Interim Constitution – Democratic Republic of the Congo (2003–2006)". ConstitutionNet. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 2 February 2019.

^ "Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 2005 (rev. 2011)". Constitute. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2015.

^ "Member States". Southern African Development Community: Towards a common future. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014.

^ a b c Overland, Indra (1 March 2019). "The geopolitics of renewable energy: Debunking four emerging myths" (PDF). Energy Research & Social Science. 49: 36–40. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.10.018. ISSN 2214-6296. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2019.

^ Vandiver, John. "GIs retrain Congo troops known for being violent". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017.

^ 
Vandiver, John. "An April 2009 report to Congress by the National Defense Stockpile Center". Stripes.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2010. Retrieved 22 November 2010.

^ "Which Countries Are For or Against China's Xinjiang Policies?". The Diplomat. 15 July 2019. Archived from the original on 16 July 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2019.

^ "DRC's Tshisekedi has secured his power base: now it's time to deliver". The Conversation. 27 October 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021.

^ "Congo Reviews $6.2 Billion China Mining Deal as Criticism Grows". Bloomberg. 28 September 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021.

^ "China Cash Flowed Through Congo Bank to Former President's Cronies". Bloomberg. 28 November 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021.

^ "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament – No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons". United Nations Treaty Collection. 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2019.

^ Ludwig, Arnold M. (2002). King of the Mountain: The Nature of Political Leadership. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-8131-2233-5.

^ Nafziger, E. Wayne; Raimo Frances Stewart (2000). War, Hunger, and Displacement: The Origins of Humanitarian Emergencies. p. 261. ISBN 978-0-19-829739-0.

^ Mesquita, Bruce Bueno de (2003). The Logic of Political Survival. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-262-02546-1.

^ Adam Hochschild (13 August 2009). "Rape of the Congo". New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018.

^ "Court agrees to release Mobutu assets" Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Swissinfo, Basel Institute of Governance, 14 July 2009.

^ Werve, Jonathan (2006). The Corruption Notebooks 2006. p. 57.

^ "New Study Shows Congo is Run as Violent Kleptocracy". enough. Enough Project. 27 October 2016. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2019.

^ "Vital Kamerhe: DRC president's chief of staff found guilty of corruption". BBC News. 20 June 2020. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021.

^ "DRC: Investigation opens on Joseph Kabila over $138 million embezzlement". Africanews. 24 November 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021.

^ Drumbl, Mark A. (2012). Reimagining Child Soldiers in International Law and Policy. Oxford University Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0199592654.

^ 
"Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor – Democratic Republic of the Congo". United States Department of Labor. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ Democratic Republic of the Congo: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper-Progress Report (EPub). International Monetary Fund. 2010. pp. 56–. ISBN 978-1-4552-2241-4. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2015.

^ "UN expert on violence against women expresses serious concerns following visit to Democratic Republic of Congo". UNOG.ch. 30 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 February 2008.

^ Ministère du Plan et Suivi de la Mise en œuvre de la Révolution de la Modernité (MPSMRM), Ministère de la Santé Publique (MSP) et ICF International (2014). Enquête Démographique et de Santé en République Démocratique du Congo 2013–2014 Archived 26 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Rockville, Maryland, USA : MPSMRM, MSP and ICF International

^ 
"Concluding comments of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women: Democratic Republic of the Congo" (PDF). United Nations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2017.

^ 
"Violence Against Women in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)" (PDF). peacewomen.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2007.

^ "OHCHR | Africa Region". Ohchr.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017.

^ 
McCrummen, Stephanie (9 September 2007). "Prevalence of Rape in E. Congo Described as Worst in World". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2010.

^ 
"UN official calls DR Congo 'rape capital of the world.'". BBC. 28 April 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2012. Retrieved 23 November 2012.

^ 
Matundu Mbambi, Annie; Faray-Kele, Marie-Claire (April–December 2010). "Gender Inequality and Social Institutions in the D.R.Congo" (PDF). peacewomen.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 12 November 2014.

^ "Female Genital Cutting Rates | African Women's Health Center at BWH" Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine. brighamandwomens.org.

^ RESPONSES TO INFORMATION REQUESTS (RIRs) Archived 14 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine. justice.gov. 17 April 2012.

^ The law on sexual violence, DRC 2006 (Les lois sur les violences sexuelles) reads (in French): "Article 3, Paragraphe 7: De la mutilation sexuelle; Article 174g; Sera puni d’une peine de servitude pénale de deux à cinq ans et d’une amende de deux cent mille francs congolais constants, quiconque aura posé un acte qui porte atteinte à l’intégrité physique ou fonctionnelle des organes génitaux d’une personne. Lorsque la mutilation a entraîné la mort, la peine est de servitude pénale à perpétuité.""Les lois sur les violences sexuelles" [The laws against sexual violence]. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 12 November 2014.

^ 
"DRC: 'Civilians bearing brunt of South Kivu violence'". 2 July 2007. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 11 March 2015. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has expressed concern over abuses against civilians, especially women and children, in South Kivu in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. It frequently receives reports of abductions, executions, rapes, and pillage.

^ 
"DRC: 'Pendulum displacement' in the Kivus". IRIN. 1 August 2007. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ 
Bennett, Christian (5 December 2008). "Rape in a lawless land". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 September 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2010.

^ "Rapes 'surge' in DR Congo". Al Jazeera. 15 April 2010. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 22 November 2010.

^ a b Rape As torture in the DRC Archived 22 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Freedom From Torture. June 2014

^ "Rights Groups, DRC Lawmakers Call for 'Filimbi' Activists' Release". VOA. Archived from the original on 12 April 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016.

^ "Is Emmanuel Weyi "the change" the DRC needs?". Africa Agenda. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016.

^ 
"World Bank Pledges $1 Billion to Democratic Republic of Congo". VOA News. Voice of America. 10 March 2007. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2008.

^ "OHADA.com: The business law portal in Africa". Archived from the original on 26 March 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2009.

^ 
"DR Congo's $24 trillion fortune". Thefreelibrary.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ 
"Congo with $24 Trillion in Mineral Wealth BUT still Poor". News About Congo. 15 March 2009. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ 
Kuepper, Justin (26 October 2010). "Mining Companies Could See Big Profits in Congo". Theotcinvestor.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ Coltan is a major source of tantalum which is used in the fabrication of electronic components in computers and mobile phones. The coltan mines are small, and non-mechanized. DR Congo poll crucial for Africa" Archived 2 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News. 16 November 2006.

^ Bream, Rebecca (8 November 2007). "A bid for front-line command in Africa" Archived 17 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Financial Times.

^ 
Exenberger, Andreas; Hartmann, Simon (2007). "The Dark Side of Globalization. The Vicious Cycle of Exploitation from World Market Integration: Lesson from the Congo" (PDF). Working Papers in Economics and Statistics. University of Innsbruck. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 August 2011. Retrieved 11 May 2011.

^ 
"Cobalt: World Mine Production, By Country". Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 30 June 2008.

^ In terms of annual carats produced

^ 
"Province orientale: le diamant et l'or quelle part dans la reconstruction socio – économique de la Province?". societecivile.cd (in French). 23 October 2009. Archived from the original on 25 November 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ "UN human development rankings place Norway at the top and DR Congo last". United Nations. 2 November 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2021.

^ 
"Economic activity in DRC". Research and Markets. Archived from the original on 3 July 2010. Retrieved 22 November 2010.

^ "Ranking Of The World's Diamond Mines By Estimated 2013 Production" Archived 21 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Kitco, 20 August 2013.

^ 
Polgreen, Lydia (16 November 2008). "Congo's Riches, Looted by Renegade Troops". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 27 March 2010.

^ 
"What is happening in the Congo". Archived from the original on 30 September 2011.

^ 
"Katanga Project Update and 2Q 2008 Financials, Katanga Mining Limited, 12 August 2008". Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ 
"Watchdog says $88m missing in Congolese mining taxes", Mining Weekly, South Africa, 2013, archived from the original on 21 September 2013, retrieved 16 April 2013

^ Bernstein Archived 22 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine 10th Annual Pan-European Conference Strategic Decisions 2013, AllianceBernstein LP, Sanford C. Bernstein Ltd., 2013. Retrieved 21 November 2018.

^ Mining Journal Archived 22 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine "The [Ivanhoe] pullback investors have been waiting for", Aspermont Ltd., London, UK, 22 February 2018. Retrieved 21 November 2018.

^ The figures are obtained by dividing the population figures in the Wikipedia country articles by the paved roads figure in the 'Transport in [country]' articles.

^ List of airlines banned within the EU, Official EC list, updated 20 April 2011. Retrieved 20 September 2011.

^ "Energie hydraulique des barrages d'Inga : Grands potentiels pour le développement de la République Démocratique du Congo et de l'Afrique" [Technical Study preparing lobby-work on energy-resources and conflict prevention – Hydroelectric power dams at Inga: Great potential for the development of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Africa] (PDF) (in French). suedwind-institut.de. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 27 February 2013.

^ Vandiver, John. "DR Congo economic and strategic significance". Stripes.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2010. Retrieved 22 November 2010.

^ Yee, Amy (30 August 2017). "The Power Plants That May Save a Park, and Aid a Country". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2017.

^ "Energy Profile Congo, Dem. Rep". Reegle.info. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017. Retrieved 21 January 2017.

^ La langue française dans le monde, Éditions Gallimard, Organisation internationale de la Francophonie

^ "Target Survey: French, the most spoken language in DRC, far ahead of Lingala". 10 July 2021.

^ Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (2014). La langue française dans le monde 2014. Paris: Éditions Nathan. p. 30. ISBN 978-2-09-882654-0. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2015.

^ a b Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (2014). La langue française dans le monde 2014. Paris: Éditions Nathan. p. 117. ISBN 978-2-09-882654-0. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2015.

^ Anthony Appiah; Henry Louis Gates (2010). Encyclopedia of Africa. Oxford University Press. pp. 14–15. ISBN 978-0-19-533770-9. Archived from the original on 23 March 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2016.

^ ""World Population Prospects 2022"". population.un.org. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022.

^ "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX). population.un.org ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022.

^ "Zaire – Population Archived 28 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine". Library of Congress Country Studies.

^ "Pygmies want UN tribunal to address cannibalism Archived 21 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine." The Sydney Morning Herald. 23 May 2003.

^ "Enquête Démographique et de Santé (EDS-RDC) 2013–2014" (PDF) (in French). Ministère du Plan et Suivi de la Mise en œuvre de la Révolution de la Modernité, Ministère de la Santé Publique. p. 36. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2018.

^ "Global Religious Landscape". Pew Forum. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 23 June 2018.

^ "Enquête Démographique et de Santé (EDS-RDC) 2013–2014" (PDF). Dhsprogram.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2018.

^ "Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life / Islam and Christianity in Sub-Saharan Africa" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2015.

^ "Structured View of Dioceses". Catholic-Hierarchy.org. David M. Cheney. Retrieved 21 January 2015.

^ Schatzberg, Michael G (February 1980) Politics and Class in Zaire: Bureaucracy, Business and Beer in Lisala, Africana Pub. Co. ISBN 0-8419-0438-3

^ "Zaire (Democratic Republic of Congo)", Adherents.com – Religion by Location. Sources quoted are The World Factbook (1998), 'official government web site' of Democratic Republic of Congo. Retrieved 25 May 2007.

^ Ridvan Message 2012 Archived 8 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine. p. 3. Universal House of Justice;

^ De Boeck, Filip; Plissart, Marie-Frangoise (1899). Kinshasa tales of the invisible City. Ludion. ISBN 978-90-5544-554-7.

^ "Street Children in D.R.Congo". Congo Children Trust. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2019.

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (2011). "2010 Human Rights Report: Democratic Republic of the Congo". 2010 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. US Department of State. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2011.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "About the trust". Congo Children Trust. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2019.

^ "Home". Kimbilio. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2019.

^ 
Harris, Dan (21 May 2009). "Children in Congo forced into exorcisms". world news. USA today. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2011.

^ Ministère du Plan et Suivi de la Mise en oeuvre de la Révolution de la Modernité (MPSMRM), Ministère de la Santé Publique (MSP), and ICF International. "Enquête Démographique et de Santé en République Démocratique du Congo 2013–2014" (PDF). pp. 41–43. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ (in French) Constitution de la République démocratique du Congo – Wikisource Archived 25 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Fr.wikisource.org. Retrieved 27 February 2013.

^ "Congo, Democratic Republic of the." www.dol.gov 2005 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor, Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor (2006). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ UNESCO Institute for Statistics. "UIS.Stat (see: National Monitoring >> Number of students and enrolment rates by level of education >> Enrollment by level of education)". Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 29 November 2020.

^ Ministère du Plan et Suivi de la Mise en oeuvre de la Révolution de la Modernité (MPSMRM), Ministère de la Santé Publique (MSP), and ICF International. "Enquête Démographique et de Santé en République Démocratique du Congo 2013–2014" (PDF). p. XXV. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ McNeil, Donald G. Jr. (11 April 2011). "Congo, With Donors' Help, Introduces New Vaccine for Pneumococcal Disease". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 July 2016. Retrieved 21 February 2017.

^ "The World Factbook – Field Listing : HIV/AIDS : adult prevalence rate". Cia.gov. 2012. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "DRC: Malaria still biggest killer". IRIN. 28 April 2008. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "Democratic Republic of the Congo, Epidemiological profile, World Malaria Report 2014" (PDF). World Health Organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "Yellow fever in the Democratic Republic of Congo". World Health Organization. 24 April 2014. Archived from the original on 5 June 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "The Latest: Ebola deaths top 1,000 in Congo outbreak". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 May 2019.

^ "The World Factbook – Country Comparison : Maternal mortality rate". Cia.gov. 2010. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015.

^ "Democratic Republic of Congo" Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. scalingupnutrition.org.

^ "Millions 'on the edge' in DR Congo, now in even greater danger of tipping over: WFP". UN News. 12 August 2020. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2020.

^ a b "The Air Quality Life Index (AQLI)". AQLI. Retrieved 1 September 2022.

^ Environment, U. N. (31 August 2021). "Regulating Air Quality: the First Global Assessment of Air Pollution Legislation". UNEP - UN Environment Programme. Retrieved 1 September 2022.

^ "The World Factbook: Africa - Congo, Democratic Republic of the". The World Factbook. CIA. Archived from the original on 11 May 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2016.

^ "Africa Population (2022)". populationstat.com.

^ a b c 
Migration en République Démocratique du Congo: Profil national 2009 (in French). International Organization for Migration. 2010. ISBN 978-92-9068-567-8. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2010.

^ ""Calls for Angola to Investigate Abuse of Congolese Migrants" Archived 25 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Inter Press Service. 21 May 2012.

^ Stone, Ruth M. (2010). The Garland Handbook of African Music. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-135-90001-4. Archived from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 24 August 2014.

^ Stadiums in the Democratic Republic Congo Archived 6 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine. World Stadiums. Retrieved 27 February 2013.

^ "Rwanda Kicks Off Quest for Africa Women's Volleyball Championship Against Morocco". Damas Sikubwabo (AllAfrica). 12 September 2021. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021.

^ "Continental Cup Finals start in Africa". FIVB. 22 June 2021. Archived from the original on 7 August 2021. Retrieved 7 August 2021.

^ International, Courrier. "Le Congolais". Courrierinternational.com/. Courrier International. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015.

^ "Countries: Democatric Republic of the Congo: News" (Archive). [sic] Stanford University Libraries & Academic Information Resources. Retrieved 28 April 2014.

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Frederick Kambemba Yamusangie Interview". YouTube.

^ Yamusangie, Frederick (2003). Full Circle. ISBN 978-0595282944.

^ "Rais Neza Boneza's Baraza". 17 October 2018. Archived from the original on 5 December 2018.


Further reading[edit]

Young, M. Crawford; Turner, Thomas Edwin (2013). The Rise and Decline of the Zairian State (illustrated, reprint ed.). University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-10113-8. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
Clark, John F., The African Stakes of the Congo War, 2004.
Callaghy, T., The State-Society Struggle: Zaire in Comparative Perspective. New York: Columbia University Press, 1984, ISBN 0-231-05720-2.
Devlin, Larry (2007). Chief of Station, Congo: A Memoir of 1960–67. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-405-7..
Drummond, Bill and Manning, Mark, The Wild Highway, 2005.
Edgerton, Robert, The Troubled Heart of Africa: A History of the Congo. St. Martin's Press, 2002.
Exenberger, Andreas/Hartmann, Simon. The Dark Side of Globalization. The Vicious Cycle of Exploitation from World Market Integration: Lesson from the Congo Archived 15 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Working Papers in Economics and Statistics 31, University Innsbruck 2007.
Exenberger, Andreas/Hartmann, Simon. Doomed to Disaster? Long-term Trajectories of Exploitation in the Congo, Paper to be presented at the Workshop "Colonial Extraction in the Netherlands Indies and Belgian Congo: Institutions, Institutional Change and Long Term Consequences", Utrecht 3–4 December 2010.
Gondola, Ch. Didier, "The History of Congo", Westport: Greenwood Press, 2002.
Joris, Lieve, translated by Waters, Liz, The Rebels' Hour, Atlantic, 2008.
Justenhoven, Heinz-Gerhard; Ehrhart, Hans Georg. Intervention im Kongo: eine kritische Analyse der Befriedungspolitik von UN und EU. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag, 2008. (In German) ISBN 978-3-17-020781-3.
Kingsolver, Barbara. The Poisonwood Bible HarperCollins, 1998.
Larémont, Ricardo René, ed. 2005. Borders, nationalism and the African state. Boulder, Colorado and London: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Lemarchand, Reni and Hamilton, Lee; Burundi: Ethnic Conflict and Genocide. Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 1994.
Mealer, Bryan: "All Things Must Fight To Live", 2008. ISBN 1-59691-345-2.
Melvern, Linda, Conspiracy to Murder: The Rwandan Genocide and the International Community. Verso, 2004.
Miller, Eric: "The Inability of Peacekeeping to Address the Security Dilemma", 2010. ISBN 978-3-8383-4027-2.
Mwakikagile, Godfrey, Nyerere and Africa: End of an Era, Third Edition, New Africa Press, 2006, "Chapter Six: Congo in The Sixties: The Bleeding Heart of Africa", pp. 147–205, ISBN 978-0-9802534-1-2; Mwakikagile, Godfrey, Africa and America in The Sixties: A Decade That Changed The Nation and The Destiny of A Continent, First Edition, New Africa Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-9802534-2-9; Congo in The Sixties, ISBN 978-1448665709, 2009; Africa: Dawn of a New Era, ISBN 978-9987160488, 2015.
Nzongola-Ntalaja, Georges, The Congo from Leopold to Kabila: A People's History, 2002.
O'Hanlon, Redmond, Congo Journey, 1996.
O'Hanlon, Redmond, No Mercy: A Journey into the Heart of the Congo, 1998.
Prunier, Gérard, Africa's World War: Congo, the Rwandan Genocide, and the Making of a Continental Catastrophe, 2011 (also published as From Genocide to Continental War: The Congolese Conflict and the Crisis of Contemporary Africa: The Congo Conflict and the Crisis of Contemporary Africa).
Renton, David; Seddon, David; Zeilig, Leo. The Congo: Plunder and Resistance, 2007. ISBN 978-1-84277-485-4.
Reyntjens, Filip, The Great African War: Congo and Regional Geopolitics, 1996–2006 , 2009.
Rorison, Sean, Bradt Travel Guide: Congo  — Democratic Republic/Republic, 2008.
Schulz, Manfred. Entwicklungsträger in der DR Kongo: Entwicklungen in Politik, Wirtschaft, Religion, Zivilgesellschaft und Kultur, Berlin: Lit, 2008, (in German) ISBN 978-3-8258-0425-1.
Stearns, Jason: Dancing in the Glory of Monsters: the Collapse of the Congo and the Great War of Africa, Public Affairs, 2011.
Tayler, Jeffrey, Facing the Congo, 2001.
Turner, Thomas, The Congo Wars: Conflict, Myth and Reality, 2007.
Van Reybrouck, David, Congo: The Epic History of a People, 2014
Wrong, Michela, In the Footsteps of Mr. Kurtz: Living on the Brink of Disaster in Mobutu's Congo.

External links[edit]


Democratic Republic of the Congo  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata




Scholia has a topic profile for Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Country Profile from the BBC News
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Democratic Republic of the Congo from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Democratic Republic of the Congo at Curlie
 Wikimedia Atlas of Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Geographic data related to Democratic Republic of the Congo at OpenStreetMap
The Democratic Republic of Congo from Global Issues
Karen Fung (ed.). "Democratic Republic of the Congo". Africa South of the Sahara: Selected Internet Resources. Stanford University.
vteDemocratic Republic of the Congo articlesHistory
Early history
Colonization (1867–85)
Colonial governors (1885–1960)
Congo Free State (1885–1908)
Atrocities
Belgian Congo (1908–60)
World War II
Congo-Léopoldville (1960–65)
Congo Crisis (1960–65)
State of Katanga (1960–63)
Zaire (1965–97)
First Congo War (1996–98)
Second Congo War (1998–2003)
2000s
Transitional Government (2003–06)
M23 rebellion (2012–13)
Geography
Cities
Conservation
Deforestation
Ecoregions
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes
Wildlife
Former place names
Politics
Administrative divisions
Constitution
Court of Cassation
Elections
Foreign relations
Foreign policy under Mobutu
Government
Human rights
LGBT
Law enforcement
Military
Parliament
Senate
National Assembly
Political parties
President
List
Prime Minister
List
Economy
Agriculture
Central Bank
Companies
Energy
Franc (currency)
Mining
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Society
Child marriage
Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health
Human trafficking
Languages
Prostitution
Religion
Social issues
Women
Culture
Cinema
Cuisine
Flag
Football
Media
Music
Public holidays
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Links to related articles
vteCountries and territories of AfricaSovereign states
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt (partly in Asia)
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
States with limitedrecognition
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (unclear sovereignty)
Somaliland
DependentterritoriesFrance
Îles Éparses
Mayotte
Réunion
Italy
Pantelleria
Pelagie Islands
Spain
Canary Islands
Ceuta
Melilla
Plazas de soberanía
Others
Madeira (Portugal)
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Socotra (Yemen)

 Category
 Africa portal

vteSouthern African Development Community (SADC)Member states
Angola
Botswana
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Eswatini
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Seychelles
South Africa
Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
LeadersChairpersons
Levy Mwanawasa
Kgalema Motlanthe
Secretaries-General
Kaire Mbuende
Prega Ramsamy
Tomaz Salomão
See also
Southern African Development Coordination Conference (forerunner)
Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
Common Monetary Area (CMA)
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)

vteAfrican UnionHistory
Pan-Africanism
Decolonisation of Africa
Casablanca Group
Monrovia Group
African and Malagasy Union
Abuja Treaty
Sirte Declaration
Lome Summit
Organisation of African Unity
Chairperson
Secretary General
Geography
Borders
Extreme points
Member states
Regions
Organs
Executive Council
Permanent Representatives' Committee
Specialized Technical Committees
Assembly
Chairperson
Commission
Chairperson
Deputy Chairperson
AUCC
Pan-African Parliament
Bureau
Secretariat
Gallagher Estate
African Court of Justice
African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights
ECOSOCC Committees
Peace and Security
Political Affairs
Infrastructure and Energy
Social Affairs and Health
HR, Sciences and Technology
Trade and Industry
Rural Economy and Agriculture
Economic Affairs
Women and Gender
Cross-Cutting Programs
Financial institutions
African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank
Peace and Security Council
ACIRC
African Standby Force
Panel of the Wise
UNAMID
AMIB
AMIS
AMISOM
MISCA
Specialised agencies and institutions
Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention
Politics
APRM
Foreign relations
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Enlargement
United States Africa Command (United States military bases)
United States ambassador
Symbols
Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Economy
Currencies (Gold standard)
Development Bank
African Economic Community
NEPAD
African Continental Free Trade Area
Single African Air Transport Market
Culture
Africa Day
Languages
Theory
Afro
United States of Africa
United States of Latin Africa
East African Federation

 Category

vteOrganisation internationale de la FrancophonieMembersMembers
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Belgium
Benin
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Dominica
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
France
Gabon
Greece
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Ivory Coast
Laos
Lebanon
Luxembourg
North Macedonia
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Moldova
Monaco
Morocco
Niger
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Switzerland
Togo
Tunisia
Vanuatu
Vietnam
National/regional members
French Community of Belgium
New Brunswick
Quebec
Associate members
Gambia
Ghana
Cyprus
Serbia
United Arab Emirates
Observers
Argentina
Austria
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Georgia
Hungary
Ireland
Kosovo
Latvia
Lithuania
Louisiana
Mexico
Montenegro
Mozambique
Ontario
Poland
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Korea
Ukraine
Uruguay
Suspended members
Thailand
Organization
Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique
Agence universitaire de la Francophonie
Culture
French language
UN French Language Day
International Francophonie Day
Jeux de la Francophonie
Prix des cinq continents de la francophonie
Senghor University
AFFOI
TV5Monde
LGBT rights

 Category

Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
1
İslâm Ansiklopedisi





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_Republic_of_the_Congo&oldid=1114770604"
Categories: Democratic Republic of the CongoFrench-speaking countries and territoriesMember states of the Organisation internationale de la FrancophonieMember states of the African UnionLeast developed countriesRepublicsMember states of the United NationsCentral African countriesStates and territories established in 19601960 establishments in the Republic of the Congo (Léopoldville)Countries in AfricaHidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1: long volume valueArticles with French-language sources (fr)CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesCoordinates on WikidataUse dmy dates from December 2019Articles containing French-language textArticles containing Kituba (Democratic Republic of Congo)-language textArticles containing Lingala-language textArticles containing Swahili (macrolanguage)-language textArticles containing Luba-Lulua-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2018All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013Articles needing additional references from June 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2016Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataPages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with Curlie linksArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with EMU identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with MusicBrainz area identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with TDVİA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage




Languages


AcèhAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛAnarâškielâÆngliscАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐArpetanAsturianuAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa BaliBamanankanবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralBislamaБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChavacano de ZamboangaChiShonaCymraegDagbanliDanskالدارجةDavvisámegiellaDeitschDeutschދިވެހިބަސްDiné bizaadDolnoserbskiडोटेलीEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraEʋegbeفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFulfuldeGaeilgeGaelgGagauzGàidhligGalegoГӀалгӀай贛語Gĩkũyũગુજરાતી客家語/Hak-kâ-ngîХальмг한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueИронIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიҚазақшаKernowekIkinyarwandaKiswahiliKongoKotavaKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаКырык марыLadinLadinoLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLa .lojban.LugandaLombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiMāoriमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄МокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlDorerin NaoeroNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOromooOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPangcahپنجابیPapiamentuپښتوPatoisPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaGagana Samoaसंस्कृतम्SängöᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSarduScotsSeediqSeelterskSesothoSesotho sa LeboaShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSiSwatiSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitTarandíneТатарча/tatarçaၽႃႇသႃႇတႆး TayalతెలుగుไทยThuɔŋjäŋТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTsetsêhestâheseTürkçeTürkmençeTyapУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalon文言West-VlamsWinarayWolof吴语XitsongaייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 05:17 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










