



History of technology - Wikipedia










































History of technology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
History of the invention of tools and techniques
This article is about the use of technology in human history. For the book series, see History of Technology (book series). For the academic discipline that studies the history of technology, see History of science and technology. For an account of the contemporary use of production techniques, see Technology. For a historical account of economically important technologies, see Productivity improving technologies  (economic history). For other uses, see Technology (disambiguation).
 The wheel, invented sometime before the 4th millennium BC, is one of the most ubiquitous and important technologies. This detail of the "Standard of Ur", c. 2500 BCE., displays a Sumerian chariot
History of technology
By technological eras
Pre-modern history
Prehistoric
Stone Age
Neolithic Revolution
Copper Age
Bronze Age
Iron Age
Ancient
Modern history
Proto-industrialization
First Industrial Revolution
Standardization
Second Industrial Revolution
Machine Age
Atomic Age
Jet Age
Space Age
Digital Revolution (Third Industrial Revolution)
Digital transformation
Information Age
Fourth Industrial Revolution
Imagination Age
Future
Emerging technologies

By historical regions
Ancient Africa
Ancient Egypt
Indian subcontinent
Ancient China
Maya civilization
Hellenistic world
Roman Empire
Byzantine Empire
Medieval Islamic world
Arab Agricultural Revolution
Medieval Europe
Renaissance Europe

By type of technology
History of agriculture
History of biotechnology
History of communication
History of computer hardware
History of electrical engineering
History of manufacturing
History of materials science
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of nuclear technology
History of transport

Technology timelines
Timeline of historic inventions
Complete list by category

Article indices
Outline of technology
Outline of prehistoric technology
vte
The history of technology is the history of the invention of tools and techniques and is one of the categories of world history. Technology can refer to methods ranging from as simple as stone tools to the complex genetic engineering and information technology that has emerged since the 1980s. The term technology comes from the Greek word techne, meaning art and craft, and the word logos, meaning word and speech. It was first used to describe applied arts, but it is now used to describe advancements and changes which affect the environment around us.[1]
New knowledge has enabled people to create new things, and conversely, many scientific endeavors are made possible by technologies which assist humans in traveling to places they could not previously reach, and by scientific instruments by which we study nature in more detail than our natural senses allow.
Since much of technology is applied science, technical history is connected to the history of science. Since technology uses resources, technical history is tightly connected to economic history. From those resources, technology produces other resources, including technological artifacts used in everyday life.
Technological change affects, and is affected by, a society's cultural traditions. It is a force for economic growth and a means to develop and project economic, political, military power and wealth.

Contents

1 Measuring technological progress
2 By period and geography

2.1 Prehistory

2.1.1 Stone Age


2.2 Ancient

2.2.1 Copper and bronze Ages
2.2.2 Iron Age
2.2.3 Mesopotamia
2.2.4 Egypt
2.2.5 Indus Valley
2.2.6 China
2.2.7 Hellenistic Mediterranean
2.2.8 Roman Empire
2.2.9 Inca, Maya, and Aztec


2.3 Medieval to early modern

2.3.1 East Asia
2.3.2 Indian subcontinent
2.3.3 Islamic world
2.3.4 Medieval Europe
2.3.5 Renaissance technology
2.3.6 Age of Exploration
2.3.7 Pre-Industrial Revolution


2.4 Industrial Revolution (1760–1830s)
2.5 Second Industrial Revolution (1860s–1914)
2.6 20th century
2.7 21st century


3 By type

3.1 Biotechnology
3.2 Civil engineering
3.3 Communication
3.4 Computing
3.5 Consumer technology
3.6 Electrical engineering
3.7 Energy
3.8 Materials science
3.9 Measurement
3.10 Medicine
3.11 Military
3.12 Nuclear
3.13 Science and technology
3.14 Transport


4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Measuring technological progress[edit]
Many sociologists and anthropologists have created social theories dealing with social and cultural evolution. Some, like Lewis H. Morgan, Leslie White, and Gerhard Lenski have declared technological progress to be the primary factor driving the development of human civilization. Morgan's concept of three major stages of social evolution (savagery, barbarism, and civilization) can be divided by technological milestones, such as fire. White argued the measure by which to judge the evolution of culture was energy.[2]
For White, "the primary function of culture" is to "harness and control energy." White differentiates between five stages of human development: In the first, people use the energy of their own muscles. In the second, they use the energy of domesticated animals. In the third, they use the energy of plants (agricultural revolution). In the fourth, they learn to use the energy of natural resources: coal, oil, gas. In the fifth, they harness nuclear energy. White introduced the formula P=E/T, where P is the development index,  E is a measure of energy consumed, and T is the measure of the efficiency of technical factors using the energy. In his own words, "culture evolves as the amount of energy harnessed per capita per year is increased, or as the efficiency of the instrumental means of putting the energy to work is increased". Nikolai Kardashev extrapolated his theory, creating the Kardashev scale, which categorizes the energy use of advanced civilizations.

Lenski's approach focuses on information. The more information and knowledge (especially allowing the shaping of natural environment) a given society has, the more advanced it is. He identifies four stages of human development, based on advances in the history of communication. In the first stage, information is passed by genes. In the second, when humans gain sentience, they can learn and pass information through experience. In the third, the humans start using signs and develop logic. In the fourth, they can create symbols, develop language and writing. Advancements in communications technology translate into advancements in the economic system and political system, distribution of wealth, social inequality and other spheres of social life. He also differentiates societies based on their level of technology, communication, and economy: Agriculture preceded writing in the history of technology.
hunter-gatherer,
simple agricultural,
advanced agricultural,
industrial,
special (such as fishing societies).
In economics, productivity is a measure of technological progress. Productivity increases when fewer inputs (classically labor and capital but some measures include energy and materials) are used in the production of a unit of output. Another indicator of technological progress is the development of new products and services, which is necessary to offset unemployment that would otherwise result as labor inputs are reduced. In developed countries productivity growth has been slowing since the late 1970s; however, productivity growth was higher in some economic sectors, such as manufacturing.[3] For example, employment in manufacturing in the United States declined from over 30% in the 1940s to just over 10% 70 years later. Similar changes occurred in other developed countries. This stage is referred to as post-industrial.
In the late 1970s sociologists and anthropologists like Alvin Toffler (author of Future Shock), Daniel Bell and John Naisbitt have approached the theories of post-industrial societies, arguing that the current era of industrial society is coming to an end, and services and information are becoming more important than industry and goods. Some extreme visions of the post-industrial society, especially in fiction, are strikingly similar to the visions of near and post-Singularity societies.[4]

By period and geography[edit]
The following is a summary of the history of technology by time period and geography:


Olduvai stone technology (Oldowan) 2.5 million years ago (scrapers; to butcher dead animals)
Huts, 2 million years ago.
Acheulean stone technology 1.6 million years ago (hand axe)
Fire creation and manipulation, used since the Paleolithic, possibly by Homo erectus as early as 1.5 Million years ago
Boats, 900,000 years ago.
Cooking, 500,000 years ago.
Javelins, 400,000 years ago.
(Homo sapiens sapiens – modern human anatomy arises, around 300,000 years ago.)
Glue, 200,000 years ago.
Clothing possibly 170,000 years ago.
Stone tools, used by Homo floresiensis, possibly 100,000 years ago.
Harpoons, 90,000 years ago.
Bow and arrows, 70,000–60,000 years ago.
Sewing needles, 60,000 - 50,000 BC
Flutes, 43,000 years ago.
Fishing nets, 43,000 years ago.
Ropes, 40,000 years ago.
Ceramics c. 25,000 BC
Fishing hooks, C. 23,000 years ago.
Domestication of animals, c. 15,000 BC
Sling (weapon) c. 9th millennium BC
Microliths c. 9th millennium BC
Brick used for construction in the Middle East c. 6000 BC
Agriculture and Plough c. 4000 BC
Wheel c. 4000 BC
Gnomon c. 4000 BC
Writing systems c. 3500 BC
Copper c. 3200 BC
Bronze c. 2500 BC
Salt c. 2500 BC
Chariot c. 2000 BC
Iron c. 1500 BC
Sundial c. 800 BC
Glass ca. 500 BC
Catapult c. 400 BC
Cast iron c. 400 BC
Horseshoe c. 300 BC
Stirrup first few centuries AD

Prehistory[edit]
Hominin timelineThis box:  viewtalkedit−10 —–−9 —–−8 —–−7 —–−6 —–−5 —–−4 —–−3 —–−2 —–−1 —–0 —MiocenePliocenePleistoceneHomininiNakalipithecusOuranopithecusOreopithecusSahelanthropusOrrorinArdipithecusAustralopithecusHomo habilisHomo erectusHomo bodoensisHomo sapiensNeanderthals,Denisovans←Earlier apes←Gorilla split←Chimpanzee split←Earliest bipedal←Earliest stone tools←Dispersal beyond Africa←Earliest fire / cooking←Earliest clothes←Modern humansHominids(million years ago)
Main article: Prehistoric technology
Stone Age[edit]
Main article: Stone Age
 A variety of stone tools
During most of the Paleolithic – the bulk of the Stone Age – all humans had a lifestyle which involved limited tools and few permanent settlements. The first major technologies were tied to survival, hunting, and food preparation. Stone tools and weapons, fire, and clothing were technological developments of major importance during this period.
Human ancestors have been using stone and other tools since long before the emergence of Homo sapiens approximately 300,000 years ago.[5] The earliest direct evidence of tool usage was found in Ethiopia within the Great Rift Valley, dating back to 2.5 million years ago.[6] The earliest methods of stone tool making, known as the Oldowan "industry", date back to at least 2.3 million years ago.[7] This era of stone tool use is called the Paleolithic, or "Old stone age", and spans all of human history up to the development of agriculture approximately 12,000 years ago.
To make a stone tool, a "core" of hard stone with specific flaking properties (such as flint) was struck with a hammerstone. This flaking produced sharp edges which could be used as tools, primarily in the form of choppers or scrapers.[8] These tools greatly aided the early humans in their hunter-gatherer lifestyle to perform a variety of tasks including butchering carcasses (and breaking bones to get at the marrow); chopping wood; cracking open nuts; skinning an animal for its hide, and even forming other tools out of softer materials such as bone and wood.[9]
The earliest stone tools were irrelevant, being little more than a fractured rock. In the Acheulian era, beginning approximately 1.65 million years ago, methods of working these stones into specific shapes, such as hand axes emerged. This early Stone Age is described as the Lower Paleolithic.
The Middle Paleolithic, approximately 300,000 years ago, saw the introduction of the prepared-core technique, where multiple blades could be rapidly formed from a single core stone.[8] The Upper Paleolithic, beginning approximately 40,000 years ago, saw the introduction of pressure flaking, where a wood, bone, or antler punch could be used to shape a stone very finely.[10]
The end of the last Ice Age about 10,000 years ago is taken as the end point of the Upper Paleolithic and the beginning of the Epipaleolithic / Mesolithic. The Mesolithic technology included the use of microliths as composite stone tools, along with wood, bone, and antler tools.
The later Stone Age, during which the rudiments of agricultural technology were developed, is called the Neolithic period. During this period, polished stone tools were made from a variety of hard rocks such as flint, jade, jadeite, and greenstone, largely by working exposures as quarries, but later the valuable rocks were pursued by tunneling underground, the first steps in mining technology. The polished axes were used for forest clearance and the establishment of crop farming and were so effective as to remain in use when bronze and iron appeared. These stone axes were used alongside a continued use of stone tools such as a range of projectiles, knives, and scrapers, as well as tools, made organic materials such as wood, bone, and antler.[11]
Stone Age cultures developed music and engaged in organized warfare. Stone Age humans developed ocean-worthy outrigger canoe technology, leading to migration across the Malay archipelago, across the Indian Ocean to Madagascar and also across the Pacific Ocean, which required knowledge of the ocean currents, weather patterns, sailing, and celestial navigation.
Although Paleolithic cultures left no written records, the shift from nomadic life to settlement and agriculture can be inferred from a range of archaeological evidence. Such evidence includes ancient tools,[12] cave paintings, and other prehistoric art, such as the Venus of Willendorf. Human remains also provide direct evidence, both through the examination of bones, and the study of mummies. Scientists and historians have been able to form significant inferences about the lifestyle and culture of various prehistoric peoples, and especially their technology.

Ancient[edit]
Main article: Ancient technology
Copper and bronze Ages[edit]
Main article: Bronze Age
 A late Bronze Age sword or dagger blade
Metallic copper occurs on the surface of weathered copper ore deposits and copper was used before copper smelting was known.  Copper smelting is believed to have originated when the technology of pottery kilns allowed sufficiently high temperatures.[13]  The concentration of various elements such as arsenic increase with depth in copper ore deposits and smelting of these ores yields arsenical bronze, which can be sufficiently work hardened to be suitable for making tools.[13]
Bronze is an alloy of copper with tin; the latter being found in relatively few deposits globally caused a long time to elapse before true tin bronze became widespread. (See: Tin sources and trade in ancient times) Bronze was a major advancement over stone as a material for making tools, both because of its mechanical properties like strength and ductility and because it could be cast in molds to make intricately shaped objects. Bronze significantly advanced shipbuilding technology with better tools and bronze nails.  Bronze nails replaced the old method of attaching boards of the hull with cord woven through drilled holes.[14]  Better ships enabled long-distance trade and the advance of civilization. 
This technological trend apparently began in the Fertile Crescent and spread outward over time.[citation needed] These developments were not, and still are not, universal. The three-age system does not accurately describe the technology history of groups outside of Eurasia, and does not apply at all in the case of some isolated populations, such as the Spinifex People, the Sentinelese, and various Amazonian tribes, which still make use of Stone Age technology, and have not developed agricultural or metal technology.

Iron Age[edit]
Main article: Iron Age
 An axehead made of iron, dating from the Swedish Iron Age
Before iron smelting was developed the only iron was obtained from meteorites and is usually identified by having nickel content.  Meteoric iron was rare and valuable, but was sometimes used to make tools and other implements, such as fish hooks.
The Iron Age involved the adoption of iron smelting technology. It generally replaced bronze and made it possible to produce tools which were stronger, lighter and cheaper to make than bronze equivalents. The raw materials to make iron, such as ore and limestone, are far more abundant than copper and especially tin ores. Consequently, iron was produced in many areas.
It was not possible to mass manufacture steel or pure iron because of the high temperatures required.  Furnaces could reach melting temperature but the crucibles and molds needed for melting and casting had not been developed.  Steel could be produced by forging bloomery iron to reduce the carbon content in a somewhat controllable way, but steel produced by this method was not homogeneous.
In many Eurasian cultures, the Iron Age was the last major step before the development of written language, though again this was not universally the case.
In Europe, large hill forts were built either as a refuge in time of war or sometimes as permanent settlements. In some cases, existing forts from the Bronze Age were expanded and enlarged. The pace of land clearance using the more effective iron axes increased, providing more farmland to support the growing population.

Mesopotamia[edit]
Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) and its peoples (Sumerians, Akkadians, Assyrians and Babylonians) lived in cities from c. 4000 BC,[15] and developed a sophisticated architecture in mud-brick and stone,[16] including the use of the true arch. The walls of Babylon were so massive they were quoted as a Wonder of the World. They developed extensive water systems; canals for transport and irrigation in the alluvial south, and catchment systems stretching for tens of kilometers in the hilly north. Their palaces had sophisticated drainage systems.[17]
Writing was invented in Mesopotamia, using the cuneiform script. Many records on clay tablets and stone inscriptions have survived. These civilizations were early adopters of bronze technologies which they used for tools, weapons and monumental statuary. By 1200 BC they could cast objects 5 m long in a single piece.
Several of the six classic simple machines were invented in Mesopotamia.[18] Mesopotamians have been credited with the invention of the wheel. The wheel and axle mechanism first appeared with the potter's wheel, invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC.[19] This led to the invention of the wheeled vehicle in Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium BC. Depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk are dated between 3700 and 3500 BC.[20] The lever was used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia circa 3000 BC.[21] and then in ancient Egyptian technology circa 2000 BC.[22] The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC.[23]
The screw, the last of the simple machines to be invented,[24] first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911-609) BC.[23] The Assyrian King Sennacherib (704–681 BC) claims to have invented automatic sluices and to have been the first to use water screw pumps, of up to 30 tons weight, which were cast using two-part clay molds rather than by the 'lost wax' process.[17] The Jerwan Aqueduct (c. 688 BC) is made with stone arches and lined with waterproof concrete.[25]
The Babylonian astronomical diaries spanned 800 years. They enabled meticulous astronomers to plot the motions of the planets and to predict eclipses.[26]

 The compartmented water wheel, here its overshot version.
The earliest evidence of water wheels and watermills date back to the ancient Near East in the 4th century BC,[27] specifically in the Persian Empire before 350 BC, in the regions of Mesopotamia (Iraq) and Persia (Iran).[28] This pioneering use of water power constituted the first human-devised motive force not to rely on muscle power (besides the sail).

Egypt[edit]
The Egyptians, known for building pyramids centuries before the creation of modern tools, invented and used many simple machines, such as the ramp to aid construction processes. Historians and archaeologists have found evidence that the pyramids were built using three of what is called the Six Simple Machines, from which all machines are based. These machines are the inclined plane, the wedge, and the lever, which allowed the ancient Egyptians to move millions of limestone blocks which weighed approximately 3.5 tons (7,000 lbs.) each into place to create structures like the Great Pyramid of Giza, which is 481 feet (146.7 meters) high.[29]
They also made writing medium similar to paper from papyrus, which Joshua Mark states is the foundation for modern paper. Papyrus is a plant (cyperus papyrus) which grew in plentiful amounts in the Egyptian Delta and throughout the Nile River Valley during ancient times. The papyrus was harvested by field workers and brought to processing centers where it was cut into thin strips. The strips were then laid out side by side perpendicularly then covered in plant resin and the second layer of strips was laid on horizontally, then pressed together until the sheet was dry. The sheets were then joined to form a roll and later used for writing.[30]
Egyptian society made several significant advances during dynastic periods in many areas of technology. According to Hossam Elanzeery, they were the first civilization to use timekeeping devices such as sundials, shadow clocks, and obelisks and successfully leveraged their knowledge of astronomy to create a calendar model that society still uses today. They developed shipbuilding technology that saw them progress from papyrus reed vessels to cedar wood ships while also pioneering the use of rope trusses and stem-mounted rudders. The Egyptians also used their knowledge of anatomy to lay the foundation for many modern medical techniques and practiced the earliest known version of neuroscience. Elanzeery also states that they used and furthered mathematical science, as evidenced in the building of the pyramids.[31]
Ancient Egyptians also invented and pioneered many food technologies that have become the basis of modern food technology processes. Based on paintings and reliefs found in tombs, as well as archaeological artifacts, scholars like Paul T Nicholson believe that the Ancient Egyptians established systematic farming practices, engaged in cereal processing, brewed beer and baked bread, processed meat, practiced viticulture and created the basis for modern wine production, and created condiments to complement, preserve and mask the flavors of their food.[32]

Indus Valley[edit]
The Indus Valley civilization, situated in a resource-rich area (in modern Pakistan and northwestern India), is notable for its early application of city planning, sanitation technologies, and plumbing.[33] Indus Valley construction and architecture, called 'Vaastu Shastra', suggests a thorough understanding of materials engineering, hydrology, and sanitation.

China[edit]
The Chinese made many first-known discoveries and developments. Major technological contributions from China include early seismological detectors, matches, paper, Helicopter rotor, Raised-relief map, the double-action piston pump, cast iron, water powered blast furnace bellows, the iron plough, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the parachute, the compass, the rudder, the crossbow, the South Pointing Chariot and gunpowder.  China also developed deep well drilling, which they used to extract brine for making salt.  Some of these wells, which were as deep as 900 meters, produced natural gas which was used for evaporating brine.[34]
Other Chinese discoveries and inventions from the Medieval period include block printing, movable type printing, phosphorescent paint, endless power chain drive and the clock escapement mechanism. The solid-fuel rocket was invented in China about 1150, nearly 200 years after the invention of gunpowder (which acted as the rocket's fuel). Decades before the West's age of exploration, the Chinese emperors of the Ming Dynasty also sent large fleets on maritime voyages, some reaching Africa.

Hellenistic Mediterranean[edit]
The Hellenistic period of Mediterranean history began in the 4th century BC with Alexander's conquests, which led to the emergence of a Hellenistic civilization representing a synthesis of Greek and Near-Eastern cultures in the Eastern Mediterranean region, including the Balkans, Levant and Egypt.[35] With Ptolemaic Egypt as its intellectual center and Greek as the lingua franca, the Hellenistic civilization included Greek, Egyptian, Jewish, Persian and Phoenician scholars and engineers who wrote in Greek.[36]
Hellenistic engineers of the Eastern Mediterranean were responsible for a number of inventions and improvements to existing technology. The Hellenistic period saw a sharp increase in technological advancement, fostered by a climate of openness to new ideas, the blossoming of a mechanistic philosophy, and the establishment of the Library of Alexandria in Ptolemaic Egypt and its close association with the adjacent museion. In contrast to the typically anonymous inventors of earlier ages, ingenious minds such as Archimedes, Philo of Byzantium, Heron, Ctesibius, and Archytas remain known by name to posterity.
Ancient agriculture, as in any period prior to the modern age the primary mode of production and subsistence, and its irrigation methods, were considerably advanced by the invention and widespread application of a number of previously unknown water-lifting devices, such as the vertical water-wheel, the compartmented wheel, the water turbine, Archimedes' screw, the bucket-chain and pot-garland, the force pump, the suction pump, the double-action piston pump and quite possibly the chain pump.[37]
In music, the water organ, invented by Ctesibius and subsequently improved, constituted the earliest instance of a keyboard instrument. In time-keeping, the introduction of the inflow clepsydra and its mechanization by the dial and pointer, the application of a feedback system and the escapement mechanism far superseded the earlier outflow clepsydra.
Innovations in mechanical technology included the newly devised right-angled gear, which would become particularly important to the operation of mechanical devices. Hellenistic engineers also devised automata such as suspended ink pots, automatic washstands, and doors, primarily as toys, which however featured new useful mechanisms such as the cam and gimbals.
The Antikythera mechanism, a kind of analogous computer working with a differential gear, and the astrolabe both show great refinement in astronomical science.
In other fields, ancient Greek innovations include the catapult and the gastraphetes crossbow in warfare, hollow bronze-casting in metallurgy, the dioptra for surveying, in infrastructure the lighthouse, central heating, a tunnel excavated from both ends by scientific calculations, and the ship trackway. In transport, great progress resulted from the invention of the winch and the odometer.
Further newly created techniques and items were spiral staircases, the chain drive, sliding calipers and showers.

Roman Empire[edit]
 Pont du Gard in France, a Roman aqueduct
The Roman Empire expanded from Italia across the entire Mediterranean region between the 1st century BC and 1st century AD. Its most advanced and economically productive provinces outside of Italia were the Eastern Roman provinces in the Balkans, Asia Minor, Egypt, and the Levant, with Roman Egypt in particular being the wealthiest Roman province outside of Italia.[38][39]
The Roman Empire developed an intensive and sophisticated agriculture, expanded upon existing iron working technology, created laws providing for individual ownership, advanced stone masonry technology, advanced road-building (exceeded only in the 19th century), military engineering, civil engineering, spinning and weaving and several different machines like the Gallic reaper that helped to increase productivity in many sectors of the Roman economy. Roman engineers were the first to build monumental arches, amphitheatres, aqueducts, public baths, true arch bridges, harbours, reservoirs and dams, vaults and domes on a very large scale across their Empire. Notable Roman inventions include the book (Codex), glass blowing and concrete. Because Rome was located on a volcanic peninsula, with sand which contained suitable crystalline grains, the concrete which the Romans formulated was especially durable. Some of their buildings have lasted 2000 years, to the present day.
In Roman Egypt, the inventor Hero of Alexandria was the first to experiment with a wind-powered mechanical device (see Heron's windwheel) and even created the earliest steam-powered device (the aeolipile), opening up new possibilities in harnessing natural forces. He also devised a vending machine. However, his inventions were primarily toys, rather than practical machines.

Inca, Maya, and Aztec[edit]
 Walls at Sacsayhuaman
The engineering skills of the Inca and Maya were great, even by today's standards. An example of this exceptional engineering is the use of pieces weighing upwards of one ton in their stonework placed together so that not even a blade can fit into the cracks. Inca villages used irrigation canals and drainage systems, making agriculture very efficient. While some claim that the Incas were the first inventors of hydroponics, their agricultural technology was still soil based, if advanced.
Though the Maya civilization did not incorporate metallurgy or wheel technology in their architectural constructions, they developed complex writing and astronomical systems, and created beautiful sculptural works in stone and flint. Like the Inca, the Maya also had command of fairly advanced agricultural and construction technology. The Maya are also responsible for creating the first pressurized water system in Mesoamerica, located in the Maya site of Palenque.[40]
The main contribution of the Aztec rule was a system of communications between the conquered cities and the ubiquity of the ingenious agricultural technology of chinampas. In Mesoamerica, without draft animals for transport (nor, as a result, wheeled vehicles), the roads were designed for travel on foot, just as in the Inca and Mayan civilizations. The Aztec, subsequently to the Maya, inherited many of the technologies and intellectual advancements of their predecessors: the Olmec (see Native American inventions and innovations).

Medieval to early modern[edit]
One of the most significant developments of the Medieval were economies in which water and wind power were more significant than animal and human muscle power.[41]: 38  Most water and wind power was used for milling grain. Water power was also used for blowing air in blast furnace, pulping rags for paper making and for felting wool.  The Domesday Book recorded 5,624 water mills in Great Britain in 1086, being about one per thirty families.[41]

East Asia[edit]
Main articles: History of science and technology in China, History of science and technology in Korea, and Science and technology in Japan
See also: Science and technology of the Song dynasty, List of Chinese inventions, and List of Japanese inventions
Indian subcontinent[edit]
Main article: History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent
See also: List of Indian inventions and discoveries
Islamic world[edit]
Main articles: List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world, Arab Agricultural Revolution, and Science in the medieval Islamic world
See also: Science and technology in Iran, Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire, and Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe
The Muslim caliphates united in trade large areas that had previously traded little, including the Middle East, North Africa, Central Asia, the Iberian Peninsula, and parts of the Indian subcontinent. The science and technology of previous empires in the region, including the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Persian, Hellenistic and Roman empires, were inherited by the Muslim world, where Arabic replaced Syriac, Persian and Greek as the lingua franca of the region. Significant advances were made in the region during the Islamic Golden Age (8th-16th centuries).
The Arab Agricultural Revolution occurred during this period. It was a transformation in agriculture from the 8th to the 13th century in the Islamic region of the Old World. The economy established by Arab and other Muslim traders across the Old World enabled the diffusion of many crops and farming techniques throughout the Islamic world, as well as the adaptation of crops and techniques from and to regions outside it.[42] Advances were made in animal husbandry, irrigation, and farming, with the help of new technology such as the windmill. These changes made agriculture much more productive, supporting population growth, urbanisation, and increased stratification of society.
Muslim engineers in the Islamic world made wide use of hydropower, along with early uses of tidal power, wind power,[43] fossil fuels such as petroleum, and large factory complexes (tiraz in Arabic).[44] A variety of industrial mills were employed in the Islamic world, including fulling mills, gristmills, hullers, sawmills, ship mills, stamp mills, steel mills, and tide mills. By the 11th century, every province throughout the Islamic world had these industrial mills in operation.[45] Muslim engineers also employed water turbines and gears in mills and water-raising machines, and pioneered the use of dams as a source of water power, used to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines.[46] Many of these technologies were transferred to medieval Europe.[47]
Wind-powered machines used to grind grain and pump water, the windmill and wind pump, first appeared in what are now Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan by the 9th century.[48][49][50][51] They were used to grind grains and draw up water, and used in the gristmilling and sugarcane industries.[52] Sugar mills first appeared in the medieval Islamic world.[53] They were first driven by watermills, and then windmills from the 9th and 10th centuries in what are today Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.[54] Crops such as almonds and citrus fruit were brought to Europe through Al-Andalus, and sugar cultivation was gradually adopted across Europe. Arab merchants dominated trade in the Indian Ocean until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 16th century.
The Muslim world adopted papermaking from China.[45] The earliest paper mills appeared in Abbasid-era Baghdad during 794–795.[55] The knowledge of gunpowder was also transmitted from China via predominantly Islamic countries,[56] where formulas for pure potassium nitrate were developed.[57][58]
The spinning wheel was invented in the Islamic world by the early 11th century.[59] It was later widely adopted in Europe, where it was adapted into the spinning jenny, a key device during the Industrial Revolution.[60] The crankshaft was invented by Al-Jazari in 1206,[61][62] and is central to modern machinery such as the steam engine, internal combustion engine and automatic controls.[63][64] The camshaft was also first described by Al-Jazari in 1206.[65]
Early programmable machines were also invented in the Muslim world. The first music sequencer, a programmable musical instrument, was an automated flute player invented by the Banu Musa brothers, described in their Book of Ingenious Devices, in the 9th century.[66][67] In 1206, Al-Jazari invented programmable automata/robots. He described four automaton musicians, including two drummers operated by a programmable drum machine, where the drummer could be made to play different rhythms and different drum patterns.[68] The castle clock, a hydropowered mechanical astronomical clock invented by Al-Jazari, was an early programmable analog computer.[69][70][71]
In the Ottoman Empire, a practical impulse steam turbine was invented in 1551 by Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in Ottoman Egypt. He described a method for rotating a spit by means of a jet of steam playing on rotary vanes around the periphery of a wheel. Known as a steam jack, a similar device for rotating a spit was also later described by John Wilkins in 1648.[72][73]

Medieval Europe[edit]
Main article: Medieval technology
 Clock from Salisbury Cathedral ca. 1386
While medieval technology has been long depicted as a step backwards in the evolution of Western technology, a generation of medievalists (like the American historian of science Lynn White) stressed from the 1940s onwards the innovative character of many medieval techniques. Genuine medieval contributions include for example mechanical clocks, spectacles and vertical windmills. Medieval ingenuity was also displayed in the invention of seemingly inconspicuous items like the watermark or the functional button. In navigation, the foundation to the subsequent age of exploration was laid by the introduction of pintle-and-gudgeon rudders, lateen sails, the dry compass, the horseshoe and the astrolabe.
Significant advances were also made in military technology with the development of plate armour, steel crossbows and cannon. The Middle Ages are perhaps best known for their architectural heritage: While the invention of the rib vault and pointed arch gave rise to the high rising Gothic style, the ubiquitous medieval fortifications gave the era the almost proverbial title of the 'age of castles'.
Papermaking, a 2nd-century Chinese technology, was carried to the Middle East when a group of Chinese papermakers were captured in the 8th century.[74] Papermaking technology was spread to Europe by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania.[75] A paper mill was established in Sicily in the 12th century. In Europe the fiber to make pulp for making paper was obtained from linen and cotton rags. Lynn Townsend White Jr. credited the spinning wheel with increasing the supply of rags, which led to cheap paper, which was a factor in the development of printing.[76]

Renaissance technology[edit]
Main article: Renaissance technology
 A water-powered mine hoist used for raising ore, ca. 1556
Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights, clock makers, instrument makers and surveyors.  Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology.[77]: 32 
A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise De re metallica (1556), which also contains sections on geology, mining and chemistry.  De re metallica was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years.[77]  Among the water powered mechanical devices in use were ore stamping mills, forge hammers, blast bellows, and suction pumps.







Dome of Florence Cathedral






Design for a flying machine (c.1488) by da Vinci





Due to the casting of cannon, the blast furnace came into widespread use in France in the mid 15th century.  The blast furnace had been used in China since the 4th century BC.[13][78]
The invention of the movable cast metal type printing press, whose pressing mechanism was adapted from an olive screw press, (c. 1441) lead to a tremendous increase in the number of books and the number of titles published.  Movable ceramic type had been used in China for a few centuries and woodblock printing dated back even further.[79]
The era is marked by such profound technical advancements like linear perceptivity, double shell domes or Bastion fortresses. Note books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied. Architects and engineers were inspired by the structures of Ancient Rome, and men like Brunelleschi created the large dome of Florence Cathedral as a result. He was awarded one of the first patents ever issued in order to protect an ingenious crane he designed to raise the large masonry stones to the top of the structure. Military technology developed rapidly with the widespread use of the cross-bow and ever more powerful artillery, as the city-states of Italy were usually in conflict with one another. Powerful families like the Medici were strong patrons of the arts and sciences. Renaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement.

Age of Exploration[edit]
Main article: Age of Exploration
An improved sailing ship, the nau or carrack, enabled the Age of Exploration with the European colonization of the Americas, epitomized by Francis Bacon's New Atlantis. Pioneers like Vasco da Gama, Cabral, Magellan and Christopher Columbus explored the world in search of new trade routes for their goods and contacts with Africa, India and China to shorten the journey compared with traditional routes overland. They produced new maps and charts which enabled following mariners to explore further with greater confidence. Navigation was generally difficult, however, owing to the problem of longitude and the absence of accurate chronometers. European powers rediscovered the idea of the civil code, lost since the time of the Ancient Greeks.

Pre-Industrial Revolution[edit]
 Newcomen steam engine for pumping mines
The stocking frame, which was invented in 1598, increased a knitter's number of knots per minute from 100 to 1000.[80]
Mines were becoming increasingly deep and were expensive to drain with horse powered bucket and chain pumps and wooden piston pumps. Some mines used as many as 500 horses. Horse-powered pumps were replaced by the Savery steam pump (1698) and the Newcomen steam engine (1712).[81]

Industrial Revolution (1760–1830s)[edit]
Main article: Industrial Revolution
The revolution was driven by cheap energy in the form of coal, produced in ever-increasing amounts from the abundant resources of Britain. The British Industrial Revolution is characterized by developments in the areas of textile machinery, mining, metallurgy and transport the steam engine and the invention of machine tools.

 A Watt steam engine
Before invention of machinery to spin yarn and weave cloth, spinning was done using the spinning wheel and weaving was done on a hand-and-foot-operated loom. It took from three to five spinners to supply one weaver.[82][83] The invention of the flying shuttle in 1733 doubled the output of a weaver, creating a shortage of spinners. The spinning frame for wool was invented in 1738. The spinning jenny, invented in 1764, was a machine that used multiple spinning wheels; however, it produced low quality thread. The water frame patented by Richard Arkwright in 1767, produced a better quality thread than the spinning jenny. The spinning mule, patented in 1779 by Samuel Crompton, produced a high quality thread.[82][83] The power loom was invented by Edmund Cartwright in 1787.[82]

 The Iron Bridge
In the mid 1750s, the steam engine was applied to the water power-constrained iron, copper and lead industries for powering blast bellows. These industries were located near the mines, some of which were using steam engines for mine pumping. Steam engines were too powerful for leather bellows, so cast iron blowing cylinders were developed in 1768. Steam powered blast furnaces achieved higher temperatures, allowing the use of more lime in iron blast furnace feed. (Lime rich slag was not free-flowing at the previously used temperatures.) With a sufficient lime ratio, sulfur from coal or coke fuel reacts with the slag so that the sulfur does not contaminate the iron. Coal and coke were cheaper and more abundant fuel. As a result, iron production rose significantly during the last decades of the 18th century.[13] Coal converted to coke fueled higher temperature blast furnaces and produced cast iron in much larger amounts than before, allowing the creation of a  range of structures such as The Iron Bridge. Cheap coal meant that industry was no longer constrained by water resources driving the mills, although it continued as a valuable source of power.

 The preserved Rocket
The steam engine helped drain the mines, so more coal reserves could be accessed, and the output of coal increased. The development of the high-pressure steam engine made locomotives possible, and a transport revolution followed.[84] The steam engine which had existed since the early 18th century, was practically applied to both steamboat and railway transportation. The Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the first purpose built railway line, opened in 1830, the Rocket locomotive of Robert Stephenson being one of its first working locomotives used.
Manufacture of ships' pulley blocks by all-metal machines at the Portsmouth Block Mills in 1803 instigated the age of sustained mass production. Machine tools used by engineers to manufacture parts began in the first decade of the century, notably by Richard Roberts and Joseph Whitworth. The development of interchangeable parts through what is now called the American system of manufacturing began in the firearms industry at the U.S Federal arsenals in the early 19th century, and became widely used by the end of the century.

Second Industrial Revolution (1860s–1914)[edit]
Main article: Second Industrial Revolution
 Edison electric light bulbs 1879–80.
The 19th century saw astonishing developments in transportation, construction, manufacturing and communication technologies originating in Europe. After a recession at the end of the 1830s and a general slowdown in major inventions, the Second Industrial Revolution was a period of rapid innovation and industrialization that began in the 1860s or around 1870 and lasted until World War I. It included rapid development of chemical, electrical, petroleum, and steel technologies connected with highly structured technology research.
Telegraphy developed into a practical technology in the 19th century to help run the railways safely.[85] Along with the development of telegraphy was the patenting of the first telephone. March 1876 marks the date that Alexander Graham Bell officially patented his version of an "electric telegraph". Although Bell is noted with the creation of the telephone, it is still debated about who actually developed the first working model.[86]
Building on improvements in vacuum pumps and materials research, incandescent light bulbs became practical for general use in the late 1870s. Edison Electric Illuminating Company, a company founded by Thomas Edison with financial backing from Spencer Trask, built and managed the first electricity network. Electrification was rated the most important technical development of the 20th century as the foundational infrastructure for modern civilization.[87] This invention had a profound effect on the workplace because factories could now have second and third shift workers.[88]
Shoe production was mechanized during the mid 19th century.[89] Mass production of sewing machines and agricultural machinery such as reapers occurred in the mid to late 19th century.[90] Bicycles were mass-produced beginning in the 1880s.[90]
Steam-powered factories became widespread, although the conversion from water power to steam occurred in England earlier than in the U.S.[91] Ironclad warships were found in battle starting in the 1860s, and played a role in the opening of Japan and China to trade with the West.

20th century[edit]
 Ford assembly line, 1913. The magneto assembly line was the first.[clarification needed][92]
Mass production brought automobiles and other high-tech goods to masses of consumers. Military research and development sped advances including electronic computing and jet engines. Radio and telephony greatly improved and spread to larger populations of users, though near-universal access would not be possible until mobile phones became affordable to developing world residents in the late 2000s and early 2010s.
Energy and engine technology improvements included nuclear power, developed after the Manhattan project which heralded the new Atomic Age. Rocket development led to long range missiles and the first space age that lasted from the 1950s with the launch of Sputnik to the mid-1980s.
Electrification spread rapidly in the 20th century. At the beginning of the century electric power was for the most part only available to wealthy people in a few major cities. By 2019, an estimated 87 percent of the world's population had access to electricity.[93]
Birth control also became widespread during the 20th century. Electron microscopes were very powerful by the late 1970s and genetic theory and knowledge were expanding, leading to developments in genetic engineering.
The first "test tube baby" Louise Brown was born in 1978, which led to the first successful gestational surrogacy pregnancy in 1985 and the first pregnancy by ICSI in 1991, which is the implanting of a single sperm into an egg. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis was first performed in late 1989 and led to successful births in July 1990. These procedures have become relatively common.
Computers were connected by means of local area, telecom and fiber optic networks, powered by the optical amplifier that ushered in the Information Age.[94][95] This optical networking technology exploded the capacity of the Internet beginning in 1996 with the launch of the first high-capacity wave division multiplexing (WDM) system by Ciena Corp.[96] WDM, as the common basis for telecom backbone networks,[97] increased transmission capacity by orders of magnitude, thus enabling the mass commercialization and popularization of the Internet and its widespread impact on culture, economics, business, and society.
The commercial availability of the first portable cell phone in 1981 and the first pocket-sized phone in 1985,[98] both developed by Comvik in Sweden, coupled with the first transmission of data over a cellular network by Vodafone (formerly Racal-Millicom) in 1992 were the breakthroughs that led directly to the form and function of smartphones today.  By 2014, there were more cell phones in use than people on Earth[99] and The Supreme Court has ruled that a mobile phone was a private part of a person.[100]  Providing consumers wireless access to each other and to the Internet, the mobile phone stimulated one of the most important technology revolutions in human history.[101]
The Human Genome Project sequenced and identified all three billion chemical units in human DNA with a goal of finding the genetic roots of disease and developing treatments. The project became feasible due to two technical advances made during the late 1970s: gene mapping by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) markers and DNA sequencing. Sequencing was invented by Frederick Sanger and, separately, by Dr. Walter Gilbert. Gilbert also conceived of the Human Genome Project on May 27, 1985, and first publicly advocated it in August 1985 at the first International Conference on Genes and Computers in August 1985.[102]  The U.S. Federal Government sponsored Human Genome Project began October 1, 1990, and was declared complete in 2003.[102]
The massive data analysis resources necessary for running transatlantic research programs such as the Human Genome Project and the Large Electron–Positron Collider led to a necessity for distributed communications, causing Internet protocols to be more widely adopted by researchers and also creating a justification for Tim Berners-Lee to create the World Wide Web.
Vaccination spread rapidly to the developing world from the 1980s onward due to many successful humanitarian initiatives, greatly reducing childhood mortality in many poor countries with limited medical resources.
The US National Academy of Engineering, by expert vote, established the following ranking of the most important technological developments of the 20th century:[103]


Electrification
Automobile
Airplane
Water supply and Distribution
Electronics
Radio and Television
Mechanized agriculture
Computers
Telephone
Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Highways
Spacecraft
Internet
Imaging technology
Household appliances
Health technology
Petroleum and Petrochemical technologies
Laser and Fiber Optics
Nuclear technology
Materials science

21st century[edit]
 The Mars Exploration Rovers provided huge amounts of information by functioning well beyond NASA's original lifespan estimates.
Main article: 2000s in science and technology
In the early 21st century, research is ongoing into quantum computers, gene therapy (introduced 1990), 3D printing (introduced 1981), nanotechnology (introduced 1985), bioengineering/biotechnology, nuclear technology, advanced materials (e.g., graphene), the scramjet and drones (along with railguns and high-energy laser beams for military uses), superconductivity, the memristor, and green technologies such as alternative fuels (e.g., fuel cells, self-driving electric and plug-in hybrid cars), augmented reality devices and wearable electronics, artificial intelligence, and more efficient and powerful LEDs, solar cells, integrated circuits, wireless power devices, engines, and batteries.
Large Hadron Collider, the largest single machine ever built, was constructed between 1998 and 2008. The understanding of particle physics is expected to expand with better instruments including larger particle accelerators such as the LHC[104] and better neutrino detectors. Dark matter is sought via underground detectors and observatories like LIGO have started to detect gravitational waves.
Genetic engineering technology continues to improve, and the importance of epigenetics on development and inheritance has also become increasingly recognized.[105]
New spaceflight technology and spacecraft are also being developed, like the Boeing's Orion and SpaceX's Dragon 2. New, more capable space telescopes, such as the James Webb Space Telescope which was launched to orbit in December, 2021, and the Colossus Telescope, have been designed. The International Space Station was completed in the 2000s, and NASA and ESA plan a human mission to Mars in the 2030s. The Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) is an electro-magnetic thruster for spacecraft propulsion and is expected to be tested in 2015.[needs update]
Breakthrough Initiatives, together with famed physicist Stephen Hawking, plan to send the first ever spacecraft to visit another star, which will consist of numerous super-light chips driven by Electric propulsion in the 2030s, and receive images of the Proxima Centauri system, along with, possibly, the potentially habitable planet Proxima Centauri b, by midcentury.[106]
2004 saw the first crewed commercial spaceflight when Mike Melvill crossed the boundary of space on June 21, 2004.

By type[edit]
Biotechnology[edit]
Main article: History of biotechnology
Timeline of agriculture and food technology
Timeline of biotechnology
Civil engineering[edit]
Main articles: History of civil engineering and History of construction
Civil engineering
Architecture and building construction
Bridges, harbors, tunnels, dams
Surveying, instruments and maps, cartography, urban engineering, water supply and sewerage
Communication[edit]
Main article: History of communication

Communications
Writing systems
Telecommunications
History of mobile phones
History of animation
History of broadcasting
History of radar
History of radio
Printing
Cinema
Radio
Television
Internet

Computing[edit]
Main article: History of computing

Timeline of computing
History of computing hardware before 1960
History of computing hardware (1960s–present)
History of computer hardware in Eastern Bloc countries
History of computer science
History of operating systems
History of software engineering
History of programming languages
History of artificial intelligence
History of the graphical user interface
History of the Internet
History of the World Wide Web
Timeline of free and open-source software
History of computer and video games
Timeline of quantum computing and communication

Consumer technology[edit]

Timeline of lighting technology
History of textiles and clothing
History of materials science
Family and consumer science
History of knitting
History of lensmaking
History of the chair
History of the umbrella
Manufacturing

Electrical engineering[edit]
Main article: History of electrical engineering
Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering
Energy[edit]
Main article: History of energy

Energy (History, Use by humans, See also)
History of coal mining
History of perpetual motion machines
Timeline of heat engine technology
Timeline of steam power
Timeline of solar cells
Timeline of hydrogen technologies
Timeline of alcohol fuel
Timeline of nuclear fusion

Materials science[edit]
Main article: History of materials science
Timeline of materials technology
Metallurgy
Measurement[edit]
Main article: History of measurement
History of time in the United States
Timeline of time measurement technology
Medicine[edit]
Main article: History of medicine
Military[edit]
Main article: History of military technology
Military history#Technological evolution
Category:Military history – articles on history of specific technologies
Nuclear[edit]
Main article: Nuclear technology § History
Manhattan Project
Atomic Age
Nuclear testing
Nuclear arms race
Science and technology[edit]
Main article: History of science and technology

List of years in science
History of telescopes
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology
Timeline of microscope technology
Timeline of particle physics technology
Timeline of low-temperature technology
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Timeline of spaceflight

Transport[edit]
Main articles: History of transport and Timeline of transportation technology

History of the automobile
History of the bicycle
Timeline of aviation
Timeline of jet power
Maritime timeline
Timeline of motor and engine technology
Timeline of motorized bicycle history
Timeline of photography technology
Timeline of railway history
Timeline of rocket and missile technology
Timeline of spaceflight
Timeline of communication technology

See also[edit]


Science portal
Technology portal
Related history

History of mathematics
History of philosophy
History of science
Outline of prehistoric technology
Science tourism
Timeline of historic inventions

Related disciplines

Critique of technology
History of ideas (field of study)
History of science and technology (field of study)
List of independent discoveries
Philosophy of technology
Technical education
Technology
Technology Dynamics (field of study)

Related subjects

High technology
Deindustrialization
Disruptive innovation
List of technologies
Simple machine

References[edit]


^ "history of technology – Summary & Facts". Retrieved 22 January 2018.

^ Knight, Elliot; Smith, Karen. "American Materialism". The University of Alabama – Department of Anthropology. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ Bjork, Gordon J. (1999). The Way It Worked and Why It Won't: Structural Change and the Slowdown of U.S. Economic Growth. Westport, CT; London: Praeger. pp. 2, 67. ISBN 978-0-275-96532-7.

^ Daniele Archibugi,  and Mario Planta. "Measuring technological change through patents and innovation surveys." Technovation 16.9 (1996): 451-519.

^ "Human Ancestors Hall: Homo sapiens". Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2007.

^ Heinzelin, Jean de; Clark, JD; White, T; Hart, W; Renne, P; Woldegabriel, G; Beyene, Y; Vrba, E (April 1999). "Environment and Behavior of 2.5-Million-Year-Old Bouri Hominids". Science. 284 (5414): 625–629. Bibcode:1999Sci...284..625D. doi:10.1126/science.284.5414.625. PMID 10213682.

^ "Ancient 'tool factory' uncovered". BBC News. 6 May 1999. Retrieved 18 February 2007.

^ a b Burke, Ariane. "Archaeology". Encyclopedia Americana. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Retrieved 17 May 2008.

^ Plummer, Thomas (2004). "Flaked Stones and Old Bones: Biological and Cultural Evolution at the Dawn of Technology". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology. Suppl 39 (47): 118–64. doi:10.1002/ajpa.20157. PMID 15605391.

^ Haviland, William A. (2004). Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge. The Thomson Corporation. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-534-62487-3.

^ Tóth, Zsuzsanna (2012). "The First Neolithic Sites in Central/South-East European Transect, Volume III: The Körös Culture in Eastern Hungary".  In Anders, Alexandra; Siklósi, Zsuzsanna (eds.). Bone, Antler, and Tusk tools of the Early Neolithic Körös Culture. Oxford: BAR International Series 2334.

^ Lovgren, Stefan. "Ancient Tools Unearthed in Siberian Arctic". National Geographic News. National Geographic. Retrieved 7 April 2015.

^ a b c d Tylecote, R. F. (1992). A History of Metallurgy, Second Edition. London: Maney Publishing, for the Institute of Materials. ISBN 978-0-901462-88-6.

^ Paine, Lincoln (2013). The Sea and Civilization: A Maritime History of the World. New York: Random House, LLC.

^ JN Postgate, Early Mesopotamia, Routledge (1992)

^ See entries under Nineveh and Babylon

^ a b S Dalley, The Mystery of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, Oxford University Press(2013)

^ Moorey, Peter Roger Stuart (1999). Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575060422.

^ D.T. Potts (2012). A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East. p. 285.

^ Attema, P. A. J.; Los-Weijns, Ma; Pers, N. D. Maring-Van der (December 2006). "Bronocice, Flintbek, Uruk, JEbel Aruda and Arslantepe: The Earliest Evidence Of Wheeled Vehicles In Europe And The Near East". Palaeohistoria. University of Groningen. 47/48: 10–28 (11).

^ Paipetis, S. A.; Ceccarelli, Marco (2010). The Genius of Archimedes -- 23 Centuries of Influence on Mathematics, Science and Engineering: Proceedings of an International Conference held at Syracuse, Italy, June 8-10, 2010. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 416. ISBN 9789048190911.

^ Faiella, Graham (2006). The Technology of Mesopotamia. The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 27. ISBN 9781404205604.

^ a b Moorey, Peter Roger Stuart (1999). Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence. Eisenbrauns. p. 4. ISBN 9781575060422.

^ Woods, Michael; Mary B. Woods (2000). Ancient Machines: From Wedges to Waterwheels. USA: Twenty-First Century Books. p. 58. ISBN 0-8225-2994-7.

^ T Jacobsen and S Lloyd, Sennacherib's Aqueduct at Jerwan, Chicago University Press, (1935)

^ CBF Walker, Astronomy before the telescope, British Museum Press, (1996)

^ Terry S. Reynolds, Stronger than a Hundred Men: A History of the Vertical Water Wheel, JHU Press, 2002 ISBN 0-8018-7248-0, p. 14

^ Selin, Helaine (2013). Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Westen Cultures. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 282. ISBN 9789401714167.

^ Wood, Michael (2000). Ancient Machines: From Grunts to Graffiti. Minneapolis, MN: Runestone Press. pp. 35, 36. ISBN 0-8225-2996-3.

^ Mark, Joshua J. (8 November 2016). "Egyptian Papyrus". World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2019-07-29.

^ Elanzeery, Hossam (13 June 2016). "Science in Ancient Egypt & Today: Connecting Eras". The Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings. Retrieved 2019-07-29.

^ Nicholson, Paul T. (2000). Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 505–650. ISBN 0-521-45257-0.

^ Teresi, Dick (2002). Lost Discoveries: The Ancient Roots of Modern Science--from the Babylonians to the Maya. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 351–352. ISBN 0-684-83718-8.

^ Temple, Robert; Needham, Joseph (1986). The Genius of China: 3000 years of science, discovery and invention. New York: Simon and Schuster<Based on the works of Joseph Needham>{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: postscript (link)

^ Green, Peter. Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

^ George G. Joseph (2000). The Crest of the Peacock, p. 7-8. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-00659-8.

^ Oleson, John Peter Oleson (2000). "Water-Lifting".  In Wikander, Örjan (ed.). Handbook of Ancient Water Technology. Technology and Change in History. Vol. 2. Leiden. pp. 217–302. ISBN 978-90-04-11123-3.

^ Maddison, Angus (2007), Contours of the World Economy, 1–2030 AD: Essays in Macro-Economic History, p. 55, table 1.14, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-922721-1

^ Hero (1899). "Pneumatika, Book ΙΙ, Chapter XI". Herons von Alexandria Druckwerke und Automatentheater (in Greek and German). Wilhelm Schmidt (translator). Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. pp. 228–232.

^ "Ancient Mayans Likely Had Fountains and Toilets". Live Science. December 23, 2009.

^ a b Stark, Rodney (2005). The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism and Western Success. New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks. ISBN 0-8129-7233-3.

^ Watson 1974, pp. 8–35. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWatson1974 (help)

^ Ahmad Y. al-Hassan (1976). Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering, pp. 34–35. Institute for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo.

^ Maya Shatzmiller, p. 36.

^ a b Adam Robert Lucas (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds: A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture 46 (1), pp. 1–30 [10].

^ Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, Transfer Of Islamic Technology To The West, Part II: Transmission Of Islamic Engineering Archived 18 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine

^ Adam Robert Lucas (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds: A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture 46 (1), pp. 1–30.

^ Ahmad Y Hassan, Donald Routledge Hill (1986). Islamic Technology: An illustrated history, p. 54. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-42239-6.

^ Lucas, Adam (2006), Wind, Water, Work: Ancient and Medieval Milling Technology, Brill Publishers, p. 65, ISBN 90-04-14649-0

^ Eldridge, Frank (1980). Wind Machines (2nd ed.). New York: Litton Educational Publishing, Inc. p. 15. ISBN 0-442-26134-9.

^ Shepherd, William (2011). Electricity Generation Using Wind Power (1 ed.). Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. p. 4. ISBN 978-981-4304-13-9.

^ Donald Routledge Hill, "Mechanical Engineering in the Medieval Near East", Scientific American, May 1991, pp. 64-9 (cf. Donald Routledge Hill, Mechanical Engineering Archived 25 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine)

^ Adam Robert Lucas (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds: A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture 46 (1): 1-30 [10-1 & 27]

^ Adam Lucas (2006), Wind, Water, Work: Ancient and Medieval Milling Technology, p. 65, Brill Publishers, ISBN 9004146490

^ Burns, Robert I. (1996), "Paper comes to the West, 800−1400",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.), Europäische Technik im Mittelalter. 800 bis 1400. Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.), Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag, pp. 413–422 (414), ISBN 3-7861-1748-9

^ Arming the Periphery. Emrys Chew, 2012. p. 1823.

^ Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, Potassium Nitrate in Arabic and Latin Sources Archived 26 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, History of Science and Technology in Islam.

^ Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, Gunpowder Composition for Rockets and Cannon in Arabic Military Treatises In Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries Archived 26 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, History of Science and Technology in Islam.

^ Pacey, Arnold (1991) [1990]. Technology in World Civilization: A Thousand-Year History (First MIT Press paperback ed.). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press. pp. 23–24.

^ Žmolek, Michael Andrew (2013). Rethinking the Industrial Revolution: Five Centuries of Transition from Agrarian to Industrial Capitalism in England. BRILL. p. 328. ISBN 9789004251793. The spinning jenny was basically an adaptation of its precursor the spinning wheel

^ Banu Musa (authors), Donald Routledge Hill (translator) (1979), The book of ingenious devices (Kitāb al-ḥiyal), Springer, pp. 23–4, ISBN 90-277-0833-9 {{citation}}: |author= has generic name (help)

^ Sally Ganchy, Sarah Gancher (2009), Islam and Science, Medicine, and Technology, The Rosen Publishing Group, p. 41, ISBN 978-1-4358-5066-8

^ Paul Vallely, How Islamic Inventors Changed the World, The Independent, 11 March 2006.

^ Hill 1998, p. 231–232. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHill1998 (help)

^ Georges Ifrah (2001). The Universal History of Computing: From the Abacus to the Quatum Computer, p. 171, Trans. E.F. Harding, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (See [1])

^ Koetsier, Teun (2001), "On the prehistory of programmable machines: musical automata, looms, calculators", Mechanism and Machine Theory, Elsevier, 36 (5): 589–603, doi:10.1016/S0094-114X(01)00005-2.

^ Kapur, Ajay; Carnegie, Dale; Murphy, Jim; Long, Jason (2017). "Loudspeakers Optional: A history of non-loudspeaker-based electroacoustic music". Organised Sound. Cambridge University Press. 22 (2): 195–205. doi:10.1017/S1355771817000103. ISSN 1355-7718.

^ Professor Noel Sharkey, A 13th Century Programmable Robot (Archive), University of Sheffield.

^ "Episode 11: Ancient Robots", Ancient Discoveries, History Channel, retrieved 2008-09-06

^ Howard R. Turner (1997), Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated Introduction, p. 184, University of Texas Press, ISBN 0-292-78149-0

^ Donald Routledge Hill, "Mechanical Engineering in the Medieval Near East", Scientific American, May 1991, pp. 64–9 (cf. Donald Routledge Hill, Mechanical Engineering)

^ Taqi al-Din and the First Steam Turbine, 1551 A.D. Archived 2008-02-18 at the Wayback Machine, web page, accessed on line 23 October 2009; this web page refers to Ahmad Y Hassan (1976), Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering, pp. 34-5, Institute for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo.

^ Ahmad Y. Hassan (1976), Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering, p. 34-35, Institute for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo

^ "Timeline: 8th century". Oxford reference. HistoryWorld. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ de Safita, Neathery (July 2002). "A Brief History Of Paper". Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ Marchetti, Cesare (1978). "A Postmortem Technology Assessment of the Spinning Wheel: The Last 1000 Years, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 13; pp. 91–93" (PDF). {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ a b Musson; Robinson (1969). Science and Technology in the Industrial Revolution. University of Toronto Press. p. 506. ISBN 9780802016379.

^ Merson, John (1990). The Genius That Was China: East and West in the Making of the Modern World. Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-87951-397-9A companion to the PBS Series “The Genius That Was China”{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: postscript (link)

^ Temple, Robert (1986). The Genius of China: 3000 years of science, discovery and invention. New York: Simon and Schuster.Based on the works of Joseph Needham

^ Rosen, William (2012). The Most Powerful Idea in the World: A Story of Steam, Industry and Invention. University Of Chicago Press. p. 237. ISBN 978-0-226-72634-2.

^ Hunter, Louis C. (1985). A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930, Vol. 2: Steam Power. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

^ a b c Landes, David. S. (1969). The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge, NY: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. ISBN 978-0-521-09418-4.

^ a b Ayres, Robert (1989). "Technological Transformations and Long Waves" (PDF). {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Griffin, Emma. "'The Mechanical Age': technology, innovation and industrialisation". Short History of the British Industrial Revolution. Palgrave. Retrieved 6 February 2013.

^ Chandler, Alfred D. Jr. (1993). The Visible Hand: The Management Revolution in American Business. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-94052-9.

^ "Top 10 Greatest Inventions of the 19th Century". Toptenz.net. 2010-08-09. Retrieved 2017-10-04.

^ "National Academy Of Engineering Reveals Top Engineering Impacts Of The 20th Century: Electrification Cited As Most Important". March 3, 2000.

^ Nye, David E. (1990). Electrifying America: Social Meanings of a New Technology. Cambridge, MA, USA and London, England: The MIT Press.

^ Thomson, Ross (1989). The Path to Mechanized Shoe Production in the United States. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-1867-1.

^ a b Hounshell, David A. (1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States, Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-2975-8, LCCN 83016269, OCLC 1104810110

^ Hunter, Louis C. (1985). A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930, Vol. 2: Steam Power. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

^ Swan, Tony (April 2013). "Ford's Assembly Line Turns 100: How It Really Put the World on Wheels". Car and Driver. Retrieved 26 March 2017.

^ "Statista Electricity Access Keeps Climbing Globally". OECD. January 7, 2019.

^ Gilder, George (May 16, 1997). "Fiber Keeps its Promise". Forbes.

^ Sudo, Shoichi. “Optical Fiber Amplifiers: Materials, Devices and Applications.” Artech House 1997. P 601

^ Markoff, John (March 3, 1997). "Fiber-Optic Technology Draws Record Stock Value". The New York Times.

^ Grobe, Klaus and Eiselt, Michael. “Wavelength Division Multiplexing: A Practical Engineering Guide.” John T Wiley & Sons. p. 2. October 2013.

^ Agar, Jon. Constant Touch: a Global History of the Mobile Phone. Totem Books. December 2004.

^ "United Nations International Telecommunication Union Statistics". ITU.

^ Carpenter v. United States. No. 16–402. Argued November 29, 2017—Decided June 22, 2018  (Supreme Court of the United States). October term, 2017. https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/16-402_h315.pdf

^ Cooper, Martin and Harris, Arleen. Human Behavior & Emerging Technologies. Wiley Online. February 18, 2019.

^ a b Cook-Deegan, Robert M. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human Genome. New York: W.W. Norton, 1994.

^ "Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century". greatachievements.org. Retrieved 7 April 2015.

^ "World's Largest Science Experiment comes to Northern Ireland". Science & Technology Facilities Council. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ "DNA Is Not Destiny: The New Science of Epigenetics". DiscoverMagazine.com. Retrieved 22 January 2018.

^ "Breakthrough Initiatives". breakthroughinitiatives.org. Retrieved 22 January 2018.


Further reading[edit]

Archibugi, Daniele, and Mario Planta. "Measuring technological change through patents and innovation surveys." Technovation 16.9 (1996): 451–519. online[dead link]
Brush, S.G. (1988). The History of Modern Science: A Guide to the Second Scientific Revolution 1800–1950. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Bunch, Bryan and Hellemans, Alexander, (1993) The Timetables of Technology, New York, Simon & Schuster.
Castro, J. Justin. "History of technology in nineteenth and twentieth century Latin America," History Compass 18#3 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1111/hic3.12609
Derry, Thomas Kingston and Williams, Trevor I., (1993) A Short History of Technology: From the Earliest Times to A.D. 1900  New York: Dover Publications.
Greenwood, Jeremy (1997) The Third Industrial Revolution: Technology, Productivity and Income Inequality AEI Press.
Kranzberg, Melvin and Pursell, Carroll W. Jr., eds. (1967) Technology in Western Civilization: Technology in the Twentieth Century  New York: Oxford University Press.
Landa, Manuel de, War in the Age of Intelligent Machines, 2001.
McNeil, Ian (1990). An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-14792-7.
Olby, R.C. et al., eds. (1996). Companion to the History of Modern Science. New York, Routledge.
Pacey, Arnold, (1974, 2ed 1994), The Maze of Ingenuity, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass,
Popplow, Marcus, Technology, EGO - European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2017, retrieved: March 8, 2021 (pdf).
Singer, C., Holmyard, E.J., Hall, A.R. and Williams, T.I. (eds.), (1954–59 and 1978) A History of Technology, 7 vols., Oxford, Clarendon Press. (Vols 6 and 7, 1978, ed. T. I. Williams)
Wilson, George (1855). What is Technology?: an inaugural lecture delivered in the University of Edinburgh on November 7, 1855  (1 ed.). Edinburgh: Sutherland and Knox.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to History of technology.




Wikimedia Commons has media related to History of technology.

Electropaedia on the History of Technology
MIT 6.933J – The Structure of Engineering Revolutions. From MIT OpenCourseWare, course materials (graduate level) for a course on the history of technology through a Thomas Kuhn-ian lens.
Concept of Civilization Events. From Jaroslaw Kessler, a chronology of "civilizing events".
Ancient and Medieval City Technology
Society for the History of Technology
Giants of Science (website of the Institute of National Remembrance)
vteHistory of technology
History of technology cultures
Prehistoric technology
Neolithic
Ancient Egypt
Mayan
Ancient Greek
Roman
Chinese
Indian
Byzantine
Medieval Islam
Medieval Europe
Renaissance
Ottoman
Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
Modern

History of technology domains
History of biotechnology
History of communication
History of computing hardware
History of electrical engineering
History of materials science
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of nuclear technology
History of transport

vteInventions and discoveriesLists of inventions or discoveriesby country/region
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Britain
England
Scotland
Canada
China
inventions
discoveries
Croatia
Egypt
France
Germany
Greece
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
Inventions
discoveries
explorations
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
inventions
discoveries
Russia
Serbia
South Africa
Spain
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Vietnam
United States
inventions
before 1890
1890–1945
1946–1991
after 1991
discoveries
by topic
chemistry
cosmology
multiple discoveries
science
Historic inventions
Analog-to-digital
Byzantine Empire
Indus Valley
Medieval Islamic
Military
Native American
Lists of inventors or discoverersby country/region
Worldwide
African
American
African-American
Puerto Rican
Armenian
Austrian
British
English
Welsh
Bulgarian
German
Italian
New Zealand
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Serbian
Spanish
Swedish
Swiss

vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism

vteHistory of scienceBackground
Theories and sociology
Historiography
Pseudoscience
By era
Early cultures
Classical Antiquity
The Golden Age of Islam
Renaissance
Scientific Revolution
Romanticism
By culture
African
Byzantine
Medieval European
Chinese
Indian
Medieval Islamic
Korean
Natural sciences
Astronomy
Biology
Chemistry
Earth science
Physics
Mathematics
Algebra
Calculus
Combinatorics
Geometry
Logic
Probability
Statistics
Trigonometry
Social sciences
Anthropology
Archaeology
Economics
Political science
Psychology
Sociology
Technology
Agricultural science
Computer science
Materials science
Engineering
Medicine
Human medicine
Veterinary medicine
Anatomy
Neuroscience
Neurology and neurosurgery 
Nutrition
Pathology
Pharmacy

 Timelines
 Portal
 Category

vteScience and technology studiesEconomics
Economics of science
Economics of scientific knowledge
History
History and philosophy of science
History of science
and technology
History of technology
Philosophy
Anthropocene
Antipositivism
Empiricism
Fuzzy logic
Neo-Luddism
Philosophy of science
Philosophy of social science
Philosophy of technology
Positivism
Postpositivism
Religion and science
Scientism
Social constructivism
Social epistemology
Transhumanism
Sociology
Actor–network theory
Social
construction of technology
shaping of technology
Sociology of knowledge
scientific
Sociology of scientific ignorance
Sociology of the history of science
Sociotechnology
Strong programme
Sciencestudies
Antiscience
Bibliometrics
Boundary-work
Consilience
Criticism of science
Demarcation problem
Double hermeneutic
Logology
Mapping controversies
Metascience
Paradigm shift
black swan events
Pseudoscience
Psychology of science
Science
citizen
communication
education
normal
Neo-colonial
post-normal
rhetoric
wars
Scientific
community
consensus
controversy
dissent
enterprise
literacy
method
misconduct
priority
skepticism
Scientocracy
Scientometrics
Team science
Traditional knowledge
ecological
Unity of science
Women in science
STEM
Technologystudies
Co-production
Cyborg anthropology
Dematerialization
Digital anthropology
Digital media use and mental health
Early adopter
Hype cycle
Innovation
diffusion
disruptive
linear model
system
user
Leapfrogging
Normalization process theory
Reverse salient
Skunkworks project
Sociotechnical system
Technical change
Technocracy
Technoscience
feminist
Technological
change
convergence
determinism
revolution
transitions
Technology
and society
criticism of
dynamics
theories of
transfer
Engineering studies
Women in engineering
Financial technology
Policy
Academic freedom
Digital divide
Evidence-based policy
Factor 10
Funding of science
Horizon scanning
Science policy
history of
science of
Politicization of science
Regulation of science
Research ethics
Right to science
Socio-scientific issues
Technology assessment
Technology policy
Transition management

 Portals
Science
History of science
Technology
 Category
Associations
Journals
Scholars

vteSocial sciences
Outline
History
Index
Primary
Anthropology (archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social
physical/biological)
Economics (microeconomics
macroeconomics
econometrics
mathematical)
Geography (physical
human
integrated
geomatics
regional)
History
cultural
auxiliary sciences
economic
human
military
political
social
Law (jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems
public law
private law)
Political science (international relations
comparative
theory
public policy)
Psychology (abnormal
cognitive
developmental
personality
social)
Sociology (criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban)
Interdisciplinary
Administration (business
public)
Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
Historical sociology
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Linguistics
Media studies
Philosophy of science (economics
history
psychology
social science)
Planning (land use
regional
urban)
Political ecology
Political economy
Political sociology
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies
historical
Quantum social science
Social work
Vegan studies
List
List of social science journals
Other categorizations
Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science

 Category
 Commons
 Society portal
 Wikiversity

Authority control National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_technology&oldid=1114488449"
Categories: History of technologyHistory of science by disciplineHistory of industriesEngineering studiesHidden categories: CS1: long volume valueCS1 maint: postscriptCS1 Greek-language sources (el)CS1 German-language sources (de)Harv and Sfn no-target errorsWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: generic nameCS1 errors: missing periodicalArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2022Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2021All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2022Commons category link from WikidataArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAsturianuবাংলাБашҡортсаBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego贛語한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپښتوPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்ไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việtייִדיש中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 6 October 2022, at 19:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










