



History of architecture - Wikipedia










































History of architecture

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Field of history focused on architecture
"Architectural history" redirects here. For the journal, see Architectural History (journal).
This article describes the history of building types and styles—what things were built. See History of construction for the history of construction tools and techniques—how things were built.
This article's lead section may not adequately summarize its contents. To comply with Wikipedia's lead section guidelines, please consider modifying the lead to provide an accessible overview of the article's key points in such a way that it can stand on its own as a concise version of the article. (August 2021)
History of architectureThe Architect's Dream, by Thomas Cole, 1840, oil on canvas, in the Toledo Museum of Art (Toledo, Ohio, USA)
History of art
Periods
Prehistoric
Ancient
Medieval
Renaissance
Baroque
Rococo
Neoclassicism
Revivalism
Romanticism
Realism
Modern
Postmodern
Contemporary

RegionsArt of the Middle East
Mesopotamian
Egyptian
Hittite
Persian
Arabian
South Arabian
Phoenician
Ottoman
Art of Asia

Indian
Chinese
Central Asian
Japanese
Korean
Singaporean
Newa
Bhutanese
Tibetan
Vietnamese
Thai
Cambodian
Khmer
Indonesian
Filipino
Art of Europe

Minoan
Cycladic
Etruscan
Dacian
Celtic
Scythian
Greek
Hellenistic
Iberian
Roman
Byzantine
Anglo-Saxon
Ottonian
Viking
Romanesque
Gothic
Rus
Renaissance
Mannerism
Baroque
Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism
Realism
Impressionism
Symbolism
Decorative
Post-Impressionism
Art Nouveau
Fauvism
Expressionism
Cubism
Pop
Art of Africa

Igbo
Yoruba
Benin
Kuba
Luba
Art of the Americas

Pre-Columbian
Maya
Muisca
Native American
Inuit
Art of Australia

Art of Oceania

Religions
Buddhist
Christian
Catholic
Protestant
Hindu
Islamic
Jain
Manichaean
Taoist
Vodou
Vodun

Techniques
Sculpture
Painting
Pottery
Calligraphy
Architecture
Photography
Graphic arts
Digital art

Types
Abstract
Art history
Figurative
Funerary
Naïve
Narrative
Naturalist
Symbolic
vte
The history of architecture traces the changes in architecture through various traditions, regions, overarching stylistic trends, and dates. The beginnings of all these traditions is thought to be humans satisfying the very basic need of shelter and protection.[1] The term "architecture" generally refers to buildings, but in its essence is much broader, including fields we now consider specialized forms of practice, such as urbanism, civil engineering, naval, military,[2] and landscape architecture.
Trends in architecture were influenced, among other factors, by technological innovations, particularly in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries. The improvement and/or use of steel, cast iron, tile, reinforced concrete, and glass helped for example Art Nouveau appear and made Beaux Arts more grandiose.[3]

Contents

1 Neolithic
2 Antiquity

2.1 Mesopotamian
2.2 Ancient Egyptian
2.3 Harappan
2.4 Greek
2.5 Roman


3 Americas (Pre-Columbian)
4 South Asia

4.1 Ancient Buddhist
4.2 Ancient Hindu
4.3 Maru Gurjara
4.4 Himalayan
4.5 Dravidian
4.6 Kalinga


5 East and Southeast Asia

5.1 Sinosphere
5.2 Khmer


6 Sub-Saharan Africa

6.1 West African and Bantu styles
6.2 Sahelian
6.3 Ethiopian


7 Oceania
8 Islamic
9 European

9.1 Medieval

9.1.1 Byzantine
9.1.2 Romanesque
9.1.3 Gothic


9.2 Renaissance


10 Worldwide

10.1 Baroque
10.2 Rococo
10.3 Exoticism
10.4 Neoclassicism
10.5 Revivalism and Eclecticism
10.6 Beaux-Arts
10.7 Industry and new technologies
10.8 Art Nouveau
10.9 Modern

10.9.1 Art Deco
10.9.2 International Style
10.9.3 Brutalist


10.10 Postmodern

10.10.1 Deconstructivist




11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links


Neolithic[edit]
Main article: Neolithic architecture




Göbekli Tepe (Turkey), c.9500-8000 BC






Reconstructed wooden house (Hemudu, China), 5000-4500 BC[4]






Skara Brae (Scotland), 3200-2200 BC[5]






Decorated stone, Newgrange (Ireland), 3200-3100 BC




Architectural advances are an important part of the Neolithic period (10,000-2000 BC), during which some of the major innovations of human history occurred. The domestication of plants and animals, for example, led to both new economics and a new relationship between people and the world, an increase in community size and permanence, a massive development of material culture and new social and ritual solutions to enable people to live together in these communities. New styles of individual structures and their combination into settlements provided the buildings required for the new lifestyle and economy, and were also an essential element of change.[6]
Although many dwellings belonging to all prehistoric periods and also some clay models of dwellings have been uncovered enabling the creation of faithful reconstructions, they seldom included elements that may relate them to art. Some exceptions are provided by wall decorations and by finds that equally apply to Neolithic and Chalcolithic rites and art.
In South and Southwest Asia, Neolithic cultures appear soon after 10,000 BC, initially in the Levant (Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and Pre-Pottery Neolithic B) and from there spread eastwards and westwards. There are early Neolithic cultures in Southeast Anatolia, Syria and Iraq by 8000 BC, and food-producing societies first appear in southeast Europe by 7000 BC, and Central Europe by c. 5500 BC (of which the earliest cultural complexes include the Starčevo-Koros (Cris), Linearbandkeramic, and Vinča).[7][8][9][10]
Neolithic settlements and "cities" include:

Göbekli Tepe in Turkey, ca. 9,000 BC
Jericho in the Levant, Neolithic from around 8,350 BC, arising from the earlier Epipaleolithic Natufian culture
Nevali Cori in Turkey, ca. 8,000 BC
Çatalhöyük in Turkey, 7,500 BC
Mehrgarh in Pakistan, 7,000 BC
Knap of Howar and Skara Brae, the Orkney Islands, Scotland, from 3,500 BC
over 3,000 settlements of the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture, some with populations up to 15,000 residents, flourished in present-day Romania, Moldova and Ukraine from 5,400 to 2,800 BC.
Antiquity[edit]
Mesopotamian[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Mesopotamia
See also: Ziggurat




Columns with clay mosaic cones from the Eanna precinct in Uruk, in southern Mesopotamia (Pergamon Museum, Berlin, Germany), 3600-3200 BC[11]






The Ziggurat of Ur, 21st century BC, Tell el-Muqayyar (Dhi Qar Province, Iraq)[12]






Reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate (Babylonian); c. 605-539 BC; glazed bricks; Pergamon Museum (Berlin, Germany)[13]




Mesopotamia is most noted for its construction of mud-brick buildings and the construction of ziggurats, occupying a prominent place in each city and consisting of an artificial mound, often rising in huge steps, surmounted by a temple. The mound was no doubt to elevate the temple to a commanding position in what was otherwise a flat river valley. The great city of Uruk had a number of religious precincts, containing many temples larger and more ambitious than any buildings previously known.[14]
The word ziggurat is an anglicized form of the Akkadian word ziqqurratum, the name given to the solid stepped towers of mud brick. It derives from the verb zaqaru, ("to be high"). The buildings are described as being like mountains linking Earth and heaven. The Ziggurat of Ur, excavated by Leonard Woolley, is 64 by 46 meters at base and originally some 12 meters in height with three stories. It was built under Ur-Nammu (circa 2100 B.C.) and rebuilt under Nabonidus (555–539 B.C.), when it was increased in height to probably seven stories.[15]

Ancient Egyptian[edit]
Main articles: Ancient Egyptian architecture and Egyptian temple




The Pyramid of Djoser (Saqqara, Egypt), 2667–2648 BC, by Imhotep[16]






Great Pyramid of Giza (Giza, Egypt), c.2589-2566 BC, by Hemiunu[17]






Hypostyle Hall of the Karnak Temple Complex (Luxor, Egypt), c.1294–1213 BC[18]






Great Temple of Abu Simbel (Egypt), c.1264 BC[19]






Temple of Philae (Egypt), 380 BC–117 AD[20]






Illustrations from 1874 of ornaments and patterns used by ancient Egyptians




Modern imaginings of ancient Egypt are heavily influenced by the surviving traces of monumental architecture. Many formal styles and motifs were established at the dawn of the pharaonic state, around 3100 BC. The most iconic Ancient Egyptian buildings are the pyramids, built during the Old and Middle Kingdoms (c.2600–1800 BC) as tombs for the pharaoh. However, there are also impressive temples, like the Karnak Temple Complex.
The Ancient Egyptians believed in the afterlife. They also believed that in order for their soul (known as ka) to live eternally in their afterlife, their bodies would have to remain intact for eternity. So, they had to create a way to protect the deceased from damage and grave robbers. This way, the mastaba was born. These were adobe structures with flat roofs, which had underground rooms for the coffin, about 30 m down. Imhotep, an ancient Egyptian priest and architect, had to design a tomb for the Pharaoh Djoser. For this, he placed five mastabas, one above the next, this way creating the first Egyptian pyramid, the Pyramid of Djoser at Saqqara (c.2667–2648 BC), which is a step pyramid. The first smooth-sided one was built by Pharaoh Sneferu, who ruled between c.2613 and 2589 BC. The most imposing one is the Great Pyramid of Giza, made for Sneferu's son: Khufu (c.2589–2566 BC), being the last surviving wonder of the ancient world and the largest pyramid in Egypt. The stone blocks used for pyramids were held together by mortar, and the entire structure was covered with highly polished white limestone, with their tops topped in gold. What we see today is actually the core structure of the pyramid. Inside, narrow passages led to the royal burial chambers. Despite being highly associated with the Ancient Egypt, pyramids have been built by other civilisations to, like the Mayans.
Due to the lack of resources and a shift in power towards priesthood, ancient Egyptians stepped away from pyramids, and temples became the focal point of cult construction. Just like the pyramids, Ancient Egyptian temples were also spectacular and monumental. They evolved from small shrines made of perishable materials to large complexes, and by the New Kingdom (circa 1550–1070 BC) they have become massive stone structures consisting of halls and courtyards. The temple represented a sort of 'cosmos' in stone, a copy of the original mound of creation on which the god could rejuvenate himself and the world. The entrance consisted of a twin gateway (pylon), symbolizing the hills of the horizon. Inside there were columned halls symbolizing a primeval papyrus thicket. It was followed by a series of hallways of decreasing size, until the sanctuary was reached, where a god's cult statue was placed. Back in ancient times, temples were painted in bright colours, mainly red, blue, yellow, green, orange, and white. Because of the desert climate of Egypt, some parts of these painted surfaces were preserved well, especially in interiors.
An architectural element specific to ancient Egyptian architecture is the cavetto cornice (a concave moulding), introduced by the end of the Old Kingdom. It was widely used to accentuate the top of almost every formal pharaonic building. Because of how often it was used, it will later decorate many Egyptian Revival buildings and objects.[21][19]

Harappan[edit]
Main article: Harappan architecture




The ruins of Harappa (Punjab, present–day Pakistan), circa 2550 BC






The ruins of Mohenjo–daro (Sindh), circa 1700 BC




The first Urban Civilization in the Indian subcontinent is traceable originally to the Indus Valley civilisation mainly in Mohenjodaro and Harappa, now in modern-day Pakistan as well western states of the Republic of India. The earliest settlements are seen during the Neolithic period in Merhgarh, Balochistan. The civilization's cities were noted for their urban planning with baked brick buildings, elaborate drainage and water systems, and handicraft (carnelian products, seal carving). This civilisation transitioned from the Neolithic period into the Chalcolithic period and beyond with their expertise in metallurgy (copper, bronze, lead, and tin).[22] Their urban centres possibly grew to contain between 30,000 and 60,000 individuals,[23] and the civilisation itself may have contained between one and five million individuals.[24]

Greek[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek architecture




Temple of Hephaestus on the Agoraios Kolonos Hill (Athens, Greece), c.449 BC, unknown architect[25]






Temple of Segesta (Calatafimi-Segesta, present–day Italy), 5th century BC[26]






Erechtheion (Athens), with its Ionic columns and caryatid porch, 421–405 BC[26]






Parthenon (Athens, Greece), 447–432 BC, by Ictinus, Callicrates and Phidias[27]






Tholos of the Sanctuary of Athena Pronaia (Delphi, Greece), 380–360 BC, by Theodoros of Phocaea[28]






Facade of the Tomb of Philip II (Vergina, Greece), 336 BC[29]






Tomb of the Palmettes (Mieza, Greece), first half of the third century BC[30]






Ancient Theatre of Epidaurus (Epidaurus, Greece), 3rd century BC[31]






Illustration of Doric (left three), Ionic (middle three) and Corinthian (right two) columns and entablatures






Illustrations from 1874 of ornaments and patterns used by ancient Greeks and Romans




Without a doubt, ancient Greek architecture, together with Roman, is one of the most influential styles of all time[citation needed]. Since the advent of the Classical Age in Athens, in the 5th century BC, the Classical way of building has been deeply woven into Western understanding of architecture and, indeed, of civilization itself.[32] From circa circa 850 BC to circa 300 AD, ancient Greek culture flourished on the Greek mainland, on the Peloponnese, and on the Aegean islands. Five of the Wonders of the World were Greek: the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, the Statue of Zeus at Olympia, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Colossus of Rhodes, and the Lighthouse of Alexandria. However, Ancient Greek architecture is best known for its temples, many of which are found throughout the region, and the Parthenon is a prime example of this. Later, they will serve as inspiration for Neoclassical architects during the late 18th and the 19th century. The most well-known temples are the Parthenon and the Erechtheion, both on the Acropolis of Athens. Another type of important Ancient Greek buildings were the theatres. Both temples and theatres used a complex mix of optical illusions and balanced ratios.

Unlike how most of us see them today, all Egyptian, Greek and Roman sculptures and temples were initially painted in bright colours. They became white because of hundreds of years of neglect and vandalism provoked by Christians during the Early Middle Ages, who saw them as 'pagan' and believed that they promoted idolatry.[33]
Ancient Greek temples usually consist of a base with continuous stairs of a few steps at each edges (known as crepidoma), a cella (or naos) with a cult statue in it, columns, an entablature, and two pediments, one on the front side and another in the back. By the 4th century BC, Greek architects and stonemasons had developed a system of rules for all buildings known as the orders: the Doric, the Ionic, and the Corinthian. They are most easily recognised by their columns (especially by the capitals). The Doric column is stout and basic, the Ionic one is slimmer and has four scrolls (called volutes) at the corners of the capital, and the Corinthian column is just like the Ionic one, but the capital is completely different, being decorated with acanthus leafs and four scrolls.[25] Besides columns, the frieze was different based on order. While the Doric one has metopes and triglyphs with guttae, Ionic and Corinthian friezes consist of one big continuous band with reliefs.
Besides the columns, the temples were highly decorated with sculptures, in the pediments, on the friezes, metopes and triglyphs. Ornaments used by Ancient Greek architects and artists include palmettes, vegetal or wave-like scrolls, lion mascarons (mostly on lateral cornices), dentils, acanthus leafs, bucrania, festoons, egg-and-dart, rais-de-cœur, beads, meanders, and acroteria at the corners of the pediments. Pretty often, ancient Greek ornaments are used continuously, as bands. They will later be used in Etruscan, Roman and in the post-medieval styles that tried to revive Greco-Roman art and architecture, like Renaissance, Baroque, Neoclassical etc.
Looking at the archaeological remains of ancient and medieval buildings it is easy to perceive them as limestone and concrete in a grey taupe tone and make the assumption that ancient buildings were monochromatic. However, architecture was polychromed in much of the Ancient and Medieval world. One of the most iconic Ancient buildings, the Parthenon (c. 447–432 BC) in Athens, had details painted with vibrant reds, blues and greens. Besides ancient temples, Medieval cathedrals were never completely white. Most had colored highlights on capitals and columns.[34] This practice of coloring buildings and artworks was abandoned during the early Renaissance. This is because Leonardo da Vinci and other Renaissance artists, including Michelangelo, promoted a color palette inspired by the ancient Greco-Roman ruins, which because of neglect and constant decay during the Middle Ages, became white despite being initially colorful. The pigments used in the ancient world were delicate and especially susceptible to weathering. Without necessary care, the colors exposed to rain, snow, dirt, and other factors, vanished over time, and this way Ancient buildings and artworks became white, like they are today and were during the Renaissance.[35]

Roman[edit]
Main article: Ancient Roman architecture




Colosseum (Rome), 70–80 BC[36]






Pont du Gard (Vers-Pont-du-Gard, Gard, France), a Roman aqueduct, 40–60 AD[37]






Maison Carrée (Nîmes, France), 2nd century[38]






Pantheon (Rome), c.114-123[39]






Library of Celsus (Ephesus, Turkey), c.112–120[36]






Arch of Constantine (Rome), 316[40]




The architecture of ancient Rome has been one of the most influential in the world. Its legacy is evident throughout the medieval and early modern periods, and Roman buildings continue to be reused in the modern era in both New Classical and Postmodern architecture. It was particularly influenced by Greek and Etruscan styles. A range of temple types was developed during the republican years (509–27 BC), modified from Greek and Etruscan prototypes.
Wherever the Roman army conquered, they established towns and cities, spreading their empire and advancing their architectural and engineering achievements. While the most important works are to be found in Italy, Roman builders also found creative outlets in the western and eastern provinces, of which the best examples preserved are in modern-day North Africa, Turkey, Syria and Jordan. Extravagant projects appeared, like the Arch of Septimius Severus in Leptis Magna (present-day Libya, built in 216 AD), with broken pediments on all sides, or the Arch of Caracalla in Thebeste (present-day Algeria, built in c.214 AD), with paired columns on all sides, projecting entablatures and medallions with divine busts. Due to the fact that the empire was formed from multiple nations and cultures, some buildings were the product of combining the Roman style with the local tradition. An example is the Palmyra Arch (present-day Syria, built in c.212–220), some of its arches being embellished with a repeated band design consisting of four ovals within a circle around a rosette, which are of Eastern origin.
Surpassing most civilisations of their time[citation needed], the Romans developed new engineering skills, architectural techniques and materials[citation needed]. Among the many Roman architectural achievements were domes (which were created for temples), baths, villas, palaces and tombs. The most well known example is the one of the Pantheon in Rome, being the largest surviving Roman dome and having a large oculus at its centre. Another important innovation is the rounded stone arch, used in arcades, aqueducts and other structures. Besides the Greek orders (Doric, Ionic and Corinthian), the Romans invented two more. The Tuscan order was influenced by the Doric, but with un-fluted columns and a simpler entablature with no triglyphs or guttae, while the Composite was a mixed order, combining the volutes of the Ionic order capital with the acanthus leaves of the Corinthian order.
Between 30 and 15 BC, the architect and engineer Marcus Vitruvius Pollio published a major treatise, De architectura, which influenced architects around the world for centuries. As the only treatise on architecture to survive from antiquity, it has been regarded since the Renaissance as the first book on architectural theory, as well as a major source on the canon of classical architecture.[41]
Just like the Greeks, the Romans built amphiteatres too. The largest amphitheatre ever built, the Colosseum in Rome, could hold around 50,000 spectators. Another iconic Roman structure that demonstrates their precision and technological advancement is the Pont du Gard in southern France, the highest surviving Roman aqueduct.[42][37]

Americas (Pre-Columbian)[edit]
Main articles: Mesoamerican architecture, Aztec architecture, Maya architecture, and Inca architecture




Avenue of the Dead (Teotihuacan, Mexico), 1–600 AD[43]






The Palace of Palenque (Chiapas, Mexico), 7th–8th centuries[44]






Temple of the Great Jaguar (Tikal, Guatemala), c.732[45]






Nunnery Quadrangle (Uxmal, Yucatán, Mexico), 800–1000[45]






Temple of the Warriors (Chichén Itzá, Yucatán, Mexico), c.900–1200[46]




From over 3,000 years before the Europeans 'discovered' America, complex societies had already been established across North, Central and South America. The most complex ones were in Mesoamerica, notably the Mayans, the Olmecs and the Aztecs, but also Incas in South America. Although knowledge of astronomy and engineering was limited, structures and buildings were often aligned with astronomical features or with the cardinal directions. Much of the architecture developed through cultural exchange – for example the Aztecs learnt much from earlier Mayan architecture.
Many cultures built entire cities, with monolithic temples and pyramids decoratively carved with animals, gods and kings. Most of these cities had a central plaza with governmental buildings and temples, plus public ball courts, or tlachtli, on raised platforms. Just like in ancient Egypt, here were built pyramids too, being generally stepped. They were probably not used as burial chambers, but had important religious sites at the top.[44] They had few rooms, as interiors mattered less that the ritual presence of these imposing structures and the public ceremonies they hosted; so, platforms, altars, processional stairs, statuary, and carving were all important.[47]

South Asia[edit]
After the fall of the Indus Valley, South Asian architecture entered the Dharmic period which saw the development of Ancient Indian architectural styles which further developed into various unique forms in the Middle Ages, along with the combination of Islamic styles, and later, other global traditions.

Ancient Buddhist[edit]
Main article: Buddhist architecture




The Great Stupa of Sanchi (Madhya Pradesh, India), 3rd century-c.100 BC






Somapura Mahavihara (Bangladesh), circa 8th century AD






Cave 19 of the Ajanta Caves (Maharashtra), a chaitya hall, and also an example of Indian rock-cut architecture, 5th-century






Ruwanwelisaya (Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka), circa 140 BC (renovated early 20th century)




Buddhist architecture developed in the Indian subcontinent during the 4th and 2nd century BC, and spread first to China and then further across Asia. Three types of structures are associated with the religious architecture of early Buddhism: monasteries (viharas), places to venerate relics (stupas), and shrines or prayer halls (chaityas, also called chaitya grihas), which later came to be called temples in some places. The most iconic Buddhist type of building is the stupa, which consists of a domed structure containing relics, used as a place of meditation to commemorate Buddha. The dome symbolised the infinite space of the sky.[48]
Buddhism had a significant influence on Sri Lankan architecture after its introduction,[49] and ancient Sri Lankan architecture was mainly religious, with over 25 styles of Buddhist monasteries.[50] Monasteries were designed using the Manjusri Vasthu Vidya Sastra, which outlines the layout of the structure.
After the fall of the Gupta empire, Buddhism mainly survived in Bengal under the Palas,[51] and has had a significant impact on pre-Islamic Bengali architecture of that period.[52]

Ancient Hindu[edit]
Main article: Hindu temple architecture




Dashavatara Temple, Deogarh (Uttar Pradesh), circa 6th century AD






Mundeshwari Temple (Kaimur district, Bihar), circa 7th century AD






Ellora Caves (Aurangabad district, Maharashtra), circa 6th century AD




Across the Indian subcontinent, Hindu architecture evolved from simple rock-cut cave shrines to monumental temples. From the 4th to 5th centuries AD, Hindu temples were adapted to the worship of different deities and regional beliefs, and by the 6th or 7th centuries larger examples had evolved into towering brick or stone-built structures that symbolise the sacred five-peaked Mount Meru. Influenced by early Buddhist stupas, the architecture was not designed for collective worship, but had areas for worshippers to leave offerings and perform rituals.[53]
Many Indian architectural styles for structures such as temples, statues, homes, markets, gardens and planning are as described in Hindu texts.[54][55] The architectural guidelines survive in Sanskrit manuscripts and in some cases also in other regional languages. These include the Vastu shastras, Shilpa Shastras, the Brihat Samhita, architectural portions of the Puranas and the Agamas, and regional texts such as the Manasara among others.[56][57]
Since this architectural style emerged in the classical period, it has had a considerable influence on various medieval architectural styles like that of the Gurjaras, Dravidians, Deccan, Odias, Bengalis, and the Assamese.

Maru Gurjara[edit]
Main articles: Māru-Gurjara architecture, Architecture of Gujarat, and Architecture of Rajasthan




Hawa Mahal (Jaipur, Rajasthan), 1799






Navlakha Temple, Ghumli, Gujarat, 12th century






Interior of the Jain Vimal Vasahi Temple (Mount Abu), 1031[58]




This style of North Indian architecture has been observed in Hindu as well as Jain places of worship and congregation. It emerged in the 11th to 13th centuries under the Chaulukya (Solanki) period.[59] It eventually became more popular among the Jain communities who spread it in the greater region and across the world.[60] These structures have the unique features like a large number of projections on external walls with sharply carved statues, and several urushringa spirelets on the main shikhara.

Himalayan[edit]
Main articles: Architecture of Nepal and Architecture of Tibet




Nyatapola Temple (Bhaktapur, Nepal), 1702






Paro Taktsang (Paro, Bhutan), 1692






Potala Palace (Lhasa, Tibet), 1649






Jamia Masjid, Srinagar (Kashmir), 1394




The Himalayas are inhabited by various people groups including the Paharis, Sino-Tibetans, Kashmiris, and many more groups. Being from different religious and ethnic backgrounds, the architecture has also had multiple influences. Considering the logistical difficulties and slower pace of life in the Himalayas, artisans have that the time to make intricate wood carvings and paintings accompanied by ornamental metal work and stone sculptures that are reflected in religious as well as civic and military buildings. These styles exist in different forms from Tibet and Kashmir to Assam and Nagaland.[61] A common feature is observed in the slanted layered roofs on temples, mosques, and civic buildings.[62]

Dravidian[edit]
Main article: Dravidian architecture




Stone vel on a brick platform at the entrance to the Murugan Temple, Saluvankuppam, 300 BC[63][64]






Padmanabhaswamy Temple (Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala); local Dravidian worship site possibly as early as the 4th century AD, Vaishnavite worship site by the 8th century AD, with its gopuram built by the 16th century AD






Meenakshi Temple, Madurai (Tamil Nadu), circa 12th century






Vitthala Temple (Hampi, Karnataka), circa 16th century




See also: Architecture of Tamil Nadu, Architecture of Kerala, Architecture of Karnataka, Pallava art and architecture, Pandyan art and architecture, Chola art and architecture, Kadamba architecture, Badami Chalukya architecture, Hoysala architecture, Vijayanagara architecture, and Western Chalukya architecture
This is an architectural style that emerged in the southern part of the Indian subcontinent and in Sri Lanka. These include Hindu temples with a unique style that involves a shorter pyramidal tower over the garbhagriha or sanctuary called a vimana, where the north has taller towers, usually bending inwards as they rise, called shikharas. These also include secular buildings that may or may not have slanted roofs based on the geographical region. In the Tamil country, this style is influenced by the Sangam period as well as the styles of the great dynasties that ruled it. This style varies in the region to its west in Kerala that is influenced by geographic factors like western trade and the monsoons which result in sloped roofs.[65] Further north, the Karnata Dravida style varies based on the diversity of influences, often relaying much about the artistic trends of the rulers of twelve different dynasties.[66]

Kalinga[edit]
Main article: Kalinga architecture




The Jagannath Temple (Puri, Odisha, India), one of the four holiest places (Dhamas) of Hinduism,[67] 12th century






The Konark Sun Temple (Puri), circa 1250






Simplified schema of a Kalinga temple




The ancient Kalinga region corresponds to the present-day eastern Indian areas of Odisha, West Bengal and northern Andhra Pradesh. Its architecture reached a peak between the 9th and 12th centuries under the patronage of the Somavamsi dynasty of Odisha. Lavishly sculpted with hundreds of figures, Kalinga temples usually feature repeating forms such as horseshoes. Within the protective walls of the temple complex are three main buildings with distinctive curved towers called deul or deula and prayer halls called jagmohan.[68]

East and Southeast Asia[edit]
Sinosphere[edit]
Main article: Chinese architecture




The Giant Wild Goose Pagoda in southern Xi'an (Shaanxi province, China), 652 (during the Tang dynasty)






The main hall of the Nanchan Monastery (Wutai, Xinzhou, Shanxi, China), renovated in 782






The Guanyian Pavilion of the Dule Monastery (Jixian, China), 984






Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests, the main building of the Temple of Heaven (Beijing), 1703–1790






Temple of Literature, Hanoi (Vietnam), 1070






Gyeongbokgung Palace (Seoul, South Korea), 1395






The Mausoleum of Emperor Nintoku (Sakai, Osaka Prefecture, Japan), 4th century






Pagoda at Hōryū-ji, a Buddhist temple in Ikaruga (Nara Prefecture), 607






The garden of the Ninna-ji temple in Kyoto (Kyoto Prefecture), an example of a Japanese garden, 888






Kinkaku-ji (Kitayama, Kyoto), a Zen Buddhist temple in Kyoto, 1398




See also: Chinese garden, Korean architecture, and Japanese architecture
What is recognised today as Chinese culture has its roots in the Neolithic period (10,000–2000 BC), covering the cultural sites of Yangshao, Longshan, and Liangzhu in central China.  Sections of present-day north-east China also contain sites of the Neolithic Hongshan culture that manifested aspects of proto-Chinese culture. Native Chinese belief systems included naturalistic, animistic and hero worship. In general, open-air platforms (tan, or altar) were used for worshipping naturalistic deities, such as the gods of wind and earth, whereas formal buildings (miao, or temple) were for heroes and deceased ancestors.
Most early buildings in China were timber structures. Columns with sets of brackets on the face of the buildings, mostly in even numbers, made the central intercolumnal space the largest interior opening. Heavily tiled roofs sat squarely on the timber building with walls constructed in brick or pounded earth.
The transmission of Buddhism into China around the 1st century AD led to a new era of religious practices, and so to new building types. Places of worship in form of cave temples appeared in China, based on Indian rock-cut ones. Another new building type introduced by Buddhism was the Chinese form of stupa (ta) or pagoda. In India, stupas were erected to commemorate well-known people or teachers: consequently, the Buddhist tradition adapted the structure to remember the great teacher, the Buddha. In The Chinese pagoda shared a similar symbolism with the Indian stupa and was built with sponsorship mainly from imperial patrons who hoped to gain earthly merits for the next life. Buddhism reached its peak from the 6th to the 8th centuries when there was an unprecedented number of monasteries thought China. More than 4,600 official and 40,000 unofficial monasteries were built. They varies in size by the number of cloisters they conatined, ranging from 6 to 120. Each cloister consisted of a main stand-alone building – a hall, pagoda of pavilion – and was surrounded by a covered corridor in a rectangular compounded served by a gate building.[69]
Chinese and Confucian culture has had a significant influence on the art and architecture in the Sinosphere (mainly Vietnam, Korea, Japan).[70] Korean architecture, especially post Choson period showcases Ming-Qing influences.[71]
Traditionally, Japanese architecture was made of wood and fusuma (sliding doors) in place of walls, allowing internal space to be altered to suit different purposes. The introduction of Buddhism in the mid 6th century, via the neighbouring Korean kingdom of Paekche, initiated large-scale wooden temple building with an emphasis on simplicity, and much of the architecture was imported from China and other Asian cultures. By the end of this century, Japan was constructing Continental-style monasteries, notably the temple, known as Horyu-ji in Ikaruga.[72] In contrast with Western architecture, Japanese structures rarely use stone, except for specific elements such as foundations. Walls are light, thin, never load-bearing and often movable.[41]

Khmer[edit]
Main article: Khmer architecture




Bakong (Hariharalaya, Roluos, Cambodia), 9th century AD






Prasat Prang Ku (Sisaket, Thailand), 12th century AD[73]






Angkor Wat (Angkor, Cambodia), early 12th century AD






Champa Temples (Mỹ Sơn, Vietnam), circa 4th century AD




From the start of the 9th century to the early 15th century, Khmer kings rules over a vad Hindu-Buddhist empire in Southeast Asia. Angkor, in present-day Cambodia, was its capital city, and most of its surviving buildings are east-facing stone temples, many of them constructed in pyramidal, tiered form consisting of five square structures with towers, or prasats, that represent the sacred five-peaked Mount Meru of Hindu, Jain and Buddhist doctrine. As the residences of gods, temples were made of durable materials such as sandstone, brick or laterite, a clay-like substance that dries hard.[74]
Cham architecture in Vietnam also follows a similar style.[73]

Sub-Saharan Africa[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Africa
Traditional Sub-Saharan African architecture is diverse, varying significantly across regions. Included among traditional house types, are huts, sometimes consisting of one or two rooms, as well as various larger and more complex structures.

West African and Bantu styles[edit]




King's palace in Nyanza (Rwanda), unknown date






Illustration from 1854 of Lunda street and houses






Yoruba architecture depicted in a book by Anna Hinderer in the mid-1800s[75]






Traditional Bamileke architecture, main hall of the Bandjoun palace in Cameroon, with decoratively carved wooden columns and doorway, unknown date




In much of West Africa, rectangular houses with peaked roofs and courtyards, sometimes consisting of several rooms and courtyards, are also traditionally found (sometimes decorated, with adobe reliefs as among the Ashanti of Ghana,[76][77] or carved pillars as among the Yoruba people of Nigeria, especially in palaces and the dwellings of the wealthy)[78] Besides the regular rectangular type of dwelling with a sharp roof, widespread in West Africa and Madagascar, there also other types of houses: beehive houses made from a circle of stones topped with a domed roof, and the round one, with a cone-shaped roof. The first type, which also existed in America, is characteristic especially for Southern Africa. These were used by Bantu-speaking groups in southern and parts of east Africa, which was made with mud, poles, thatch, and cow dung (rectangular houses were more common among the Bantu-speaking peoples of the greater Congo region and central Africa). The round hut with a cone-shaped roof is widespread especially in Sudan and Eastern Africa, but is also present in Colombia and New Caledonia, as well as in the Western Sudan and Sahel regions of west Africa, where they are sometimes arranged into compounds.[79] A distinct style of traditional wooden architecture exists among the Grassland peoples of Cameroon, such as the Bamileke.
In several West African societies, including the kingdom of Benin (and of other Edo peoples), and the kingdoms of the Yoruba, Hausa, at sites like Jenne-Jeno (a pre-Islamic city in Mali),[80][81] and elsewhere, towns and cities were surrounded by large walls of mud brick or adobe,[82] and sometimes by monumental moats and earthworks, such as Sungbo's Eredo (in the Nigerian Yoruba kingdom of Ijebu) and the Walls of Benin (of the Nigerian Kingdom of Benin).[83][84] In medieval southern Africa, a tradition existed of fortified stone settlements such as Great Zimbabwe and Khami.
The famed Benin City of southwest Nigeria (capital of the Kingdom of Benin) destroyed by the Punitive Expedition, was a large complex of homes in coursed clay, with hipped roofs of shingles or palm leaves. The Palace had a sequence of ceremonial rooms, and was decorated with brass plaques. It was surrounded by a monumental complex of earthworks and walls whose construction is thought to have began by the early Middle Ages.[83][84][85][86]





Beehive-shaped houses of the Musgum ethnic group in Pouss (Cameroon), unknown date






A traditional house of the Tammari people in the Atakora Department of the northern Republic of Benin (not to be confused with the Nigerian Kingdom of Benin), unknown date






Palace of Ashanti Kwaku Dua of Kumasi, Ghana, 1896






A Dogon village in Mali, with walls made in the wattle and daub method, unknown date






The conical tower inside the Great Enclosure in Great Zimbabwe, a medieval city built by a prosperous culture, ca. 11th–14th century




Sahelian[edit]
Main article: Sudano-Sahelian architecture




The Great Mosque of Djenné (Djenné, Mali), an icon for the Sudano-Sahelian architecture, originally built in the 13th-14th centuries, rebuilt in 1907, adobe






The Larabanga Mosque (Larabanga, northern Ghana), possibly built in the 15th century






Hausa gate, the Gidan Rumfa in Kano, northern Nigeria, 15th century




In the Western Sahel region, Islamic influence was a major contributing factor to architectural development from the later ages of the Kingdom of Ghana. At Kumbi Saleh, locals lived in domed-shaped dwellings in the king's section of the city, surrounded by a great enclosure. Traders lived in stone houses in a section which possessed 12 beautiful mosques, as described by al-bakri, with one centered on Friday prayer.[87] The king is said to have owned several mansions, one of which was sixty-six feet long, forty-two feet wide, contained seven rooms, was two stories high, and had a staircase; with the walls and chambers filled with sculpture and painting.[88]
Sahelian architecture initially grew from the two cities of Djenné and Timbuktu. The Sankore Mosque in Timbuktu, constructed from mud on timber, was similar in style to the Great Mosque of Djenné. The rise of kingdoms in the West African coastal region produced architecture which drew on indigenous traditions, utilizing wood, mud-brick and adobe. Though later acquiring Islamic influences, the style also had roots in local pre-Islamic building styles, such as those found in ancient settlements like Jenne-Jeno, Dia, Mali, and Dhar Tichitt,[89] some of which employed a traditional sahelian style of cylindrical mud brick.[80]

Ethiopian[edit]




Large, monolithic churches such as the Church of Saint George (Lalibela), were hewn out of the ground in Ethiopia, late 12th or early 13th century




Ethiopian architecture (including modern-day Eritrea) expanded from the Aksumite style and incorporated new traditions with the expansion of the Ethiopian state. Styles incorporated more wood and rounder structures in domestic architecture in the center of the country and the south, and these stylistic influences were manifested in the construction of churches and monasteries. Throughout the medieval period, Aksumite architecture and influences and its monolithic tradition persisted, with its influence strongest in the early medieval (Late Aksumite) and Zagwe periods (when the rock-cut monolithic churches of Lalibela were carved). Throughout the medieval period, and especially from the 10th to 12th centuries, churches were hewn out of rock throughout Ethiopia, especially during the northernmost region of Tigray, which was the heart of the Aksumite Empire. The most famous example of Ethiopian rock-hewn architecture are the eleven monolithic churches of Lalibela, carved out of the red volcanic tuff found around the town.[90] During the early modern period in Ethiopia, the absorption of new diverse influences such as Baroque, Arab, Turkish and Gujarati style began with the arrival of Portuguese Jesuit missionaries in the 16th and 17th centuries.

Oceania[edit]
Main article: Oceanic art and architecture




Ruins of Nan Madol (Pohnpei island, Federated States of Micronesia), circa 8th-13th centuries






Men's club house, 1907, from Palau, now in Ethnological Museum of Berlin






Detail of a ceremonial supply house, from Papua New Guinea, now in Ethnological Museum of Berlin






Traditional house in Micronesia, unknown date




Most Oceanic buildings consist of huts, made of wood and other vegetal materials. Art and architecture have often been closely connected—for example, storehouses and meetinghouses are often decorated with elaborate carvings—and so they are presented together in this discussion. The architecture of the Pacific Islands was varied and sometimes large in scale. Buildings reflected the structure and preoccupations of the societies that constructed them, with considerable symbolic detail. Technically, most buildings in Oceania were no more than simple assemblages of poles held together with cane lashings; only in the Caroline Islands were complex methods of joining and pegging known. Fakhua shen, Taboa shen and Kuhua shen (the shen triplets) designed the first oceanian architecture.
An important Oceanic archaeological site is Nan Madol from the Federated States of Micronesia. Nan Madol was the ceremonial and political seat of the Saudeleur Dynasty, which united Pohnpei's estimated 25,000 people until about 1628.[91] Set apart between the main island of Pohnpei and Temwen Island, it was a scene of human activity as early as the first or second century AD. By the 8th or 9th century, islet construction had started, with construction of the distinctive megalithic architecture beginning 1180–1200 AD.[92]

Islamic[edit]
Main article: Islamic architecture




Dome of the Rock (Jerusalem), 691[93]






Great Mosque of Samarra (Samarra, Iraq), c.851[93]






Tomb of Shah Rukn-e-Alam (Multan, Pakistan), 1320-1324[94]






Court of the Lions (Alhambra, Granada, Spain), 1362-1391[95]






Taj Mahal (Agra, India), c.1649, by Ustad Ahmad Lahori[96]




Due to the extent of the Islamic conquests, Islamic architecture encompasses a wide range of architectural styles from the foundation of Islam (7th century) to the present day. Early Islamic architecture was influenced by Roman, Byzantine, Persian, Mesopotamian architecture and all other lands which the Early Muslim conquests conquered in the 7th and 8th centuries.[97][98] Further east, it was also influenced by Chinese and Indian architecture as Islam spread to Southeast Asia. This wide and long history has given rise to many local architectural styles, including but not limited to: Umayyad, Abbasid, Persian, Moorish, Fatimid, Mamluk, Ottoman, Indo-Islamic (particularly Mughal), Medieval Bengali, Sino-Islamic and Sahelian architecture.
Some distinctive structures in Islamic architecture are mosques, madrasas, tombs, palaces, baths, and forts. Notable types of Islamic religious architecture include hypostyle mosques, domed mosques and mausoleums, structures with vaulted iwans, and madrasas built around central courtyards. In secular architecture, major examples of preserved historic palaces include the Alhambra and the Topkapi Palace. Islam does not encourage the worship of idols; therefore the architecture tends to be decorated with Arabic calligraphy (including Qur'anic verses or other poetry) and with more abstract motifs such as geometric patterns, muqarnas, and arabesques, as opposed to illustrations of scenes and stories.[99][100][101][102]

European[edit]
Medieval[edit]
Main article: Medieval architecture
See also: Norse architecture and Architecture of the Tarnovo Artistic School
Surviving examples of medieval secular architecture mainly served for defense across various parts of Europe. Castles and fortified walls provide the most notable remaining non-religious examples of medieval architecture. New types of civic, military, as well as religious buildings of new styles begin to pop up in this region during this period.

Byzantine[edit]
Main article: Byzantine architecture




Basilica of Saint Sabina (Aventine Hill, Rome), 422-432[103]






Hagia Irene (Istanbul, Turkey), 6th century[103]






Basilica of San Vitale (Ravenna, Italy), 527-548[104]






Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe (Ravenna), 549[105]






Kapnikarea (Athens), 1050[106]




Byzantine architects built city walls, palaces, hippodromes, bridges, aqueducts, and churches. They built many types of churches, including the basilica (the most widespread type, and the one that reached the greatest development). After the early period, the most common layout was the cross-in-square with five domes, also found in Moscow, Novgorod or Kiev, as well as in Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia, North Macedonia and Albania. Through modifications and adaptations of local inspiration, the Byzantine style will be used as the main source of inspiration for architectural styles in all Eastern Orthodox countries.[107] For example, in Romania, the Brâncovenesc style is highly based on Byzantine architecture, but also has individual Romanian characteristics.

The Hagia Sophia (Istanbul, Turkey), 537, by Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus[108]
Just as the Parthenon is the most famous building of Ancient Greek architecture, Hagia Sophia remains the iconic church of Orthodox Christianity.  In Greek and Roman temples, the exterior was the most important part of the temple, where sacrifices were made; the interior, where the cult statue of the deity to whom the temple was built was kept, often had limited access by the general public. But Christian liturgies are held in the interior of the churches, Byzantine exteriors usually having little if any ornamentation.[109]
Byzantine architecture often featured marble columns, coffered ceilings and sumptuous decoration, including the extensive use of mosaics with golden backgrounds.[110] The building material used by Byzantine architects was no longer marble, which was very appreciated by the Ancient Greeks. They used mostly stone and brick, and also thin alabaster sheets for windows.[111] Mosaics were used to cover brick walls, and any other surface where fresco wouldn't resist. Good examples of mosaics from the proto-Byzantine era are in Hagios Demetrios in Thessaloniki (Greece), the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo and the Basilica of San Vitale, both in Ravenna (Italy), and Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.

Romanesque[edit]
Main article: Romanesque architecture




St. Michael's Church (Hildesheim, Germany), 1010-1031[112]






Abbey Church of Sainte-Foy (Conques, France), 1087-1107[113]






Interior of the Durham Cathedral (Durham, UK), 1093-1133[114]






Maria Laach Abbey (Germany), 1093-1230[115]






Périgueux Cathedral (Périgueux, France), early 12th century[116]






Munsterkerk (Roermond, The Netherlands), 1220




The term 'Romanesque' is rooted in the 19th century, when it was coined to describe medieval churches built from the 10th to 12th century, before the rise of steeply pointed arches, flying buttresses and other Gothic elements. For 19th-century critics, the Romanesque reflected the architecture of stonemasons who evidently admired the heavy barrel vaults and intricate carved capitals of the ancient Romans, but whose own architecture was considered derivative and degenerate, lacking the sophistication of their classical models.
Scholars in the 21st century are less inclined to understand the architecture of this period as a 'failure' to reproduce the achievements of the past, and are far more likely to recognise its profusion of experimental forms, as a series of creative new inventions. At the time, however, research has questioned the value of Romanesque as a stylistic term. On the surface, it provides a convenient designation for buildings that share a common vocabulary of rounded arches and thick stone masonry, and appear in between the Carolingian revival of classical antiquity in the 9th century and the swift evolution of Gothic architecture after the second half of the 12th century. One problem, however, is that the term encompasses a broad array of regional variations, some with closer links to Rome than others. It should also be noted that the distinction between Romanesque architecture and its immediate predecessors and followers is not at all clear. There is little evidence that medieval viewers were concerned with the stylistic distinctions that we observe today, making the slow evolution of medieval architecture difficult to separate into neat chronological categories. Nevertheless, Romanesque remains a useful word despite its limitations, because it reflects a period of intensive building activity that maintained some continuity with the classical past, but freely reinterpreted ancient forms in a new distinctive manner.[6]
Romanesque cathedrals can be differentiated pretty easy from Gothic and Byzantine ones, since they are characterized by the wide use of thick piers and columns, round arches and severity. Here, the possibilities of the round-arch arcade in both a structural and a spatial sense were once again exploited to the full. Unlike the sharp pointed arch of the later Gothic, the Romanesque round arch required the support of massive piers and columns. In comparison to Byzantine churches, Romanesque ones tend to lack complex ornamentation both on the exterior and interior. An example of this is the Périgueux Cathedral (Périgueux, France), built in the early 12th century and designed on the model of St. Mark's Basilica in Venice, but lacking mosaics, leaving its interior very austere and minimalistic.[117]

Gothic[edit]
Main article: Gothic architecture




Notre-Dame Cathedral (Paris), begun in 1163, by various architects[118]






Canterbury Cathedral (Canterbury, Kent, the UK), c.1174–1184, by William of Sens[118]






Chartres Cathedral (Chartres, France), 1194-1250[119]






Town Hall (Bruges, Belgium), 1376-1420[120]






Hôtel de Sens (Paris), 1475-1519[121]






Town Hall (1459), (Gouda, The Netherlands)






Königsberg Cathedral, Kaliningrad, Russia (c.1330-1380)






Ridderzaal (1288), (The Hague, The Netherlands)




Gothic architecture began with a series of experiments, which were conducted to fulfil specific requests by patrons and to accommodate the ever-growing number of pilgrims visiting sites that housed precious relics. Pilgrims in the high Middle Ages (circa 1000 to 1250 AD) increasingly travelled to well-known pilgrimage sites, but also to local sites where local and national saints were reputed to have performed miracles. The churches and monasteries housing important relics therefore wanted to heighten the popularity of their respective saints and build appropriate shrines for them. These shrines were not merely gem-encrusted reliquaries, but more importantly took the form of powerful architectural settings characterised by coloured light emitting from the large areas of stained glass. The use of stained glass, however, is not the only defining element of Gothic architecture and neither are the pointed arch, the ribbed vault, the rose window or the flying buttress, as many of these elements were used in one way or another in preceding architectural traditions. It was rather the combination and constant refinement of these elements, along with the quick response to the rapidly changing building techniques of the time, that fuelled the Gothic movement in architecture.

The Sainte-Chapelle (Paris) and a few details, 1243-1248, by Pierre de Montreuil[122]
Consequently, it is difficult to point to one element or the exact place where Gothic first emerged; however, it is traditional to initiate a discussion of Gothic architecture with the Basilica of St Denis (circa 1135–1344) and its patrons, Abbot Suger, who began to rebuild the west front and the choir of the church. As he wrote in his De Administratione, the old building could no longer accommodate the large volumes of pilgrims who were coming to venerate the relics of St Denis, and the solution for this twofold: a west façade with three large portals and the innovative new choir, which combined an ambulatory with radiating chapels that were unique as they were not separated by walls. Instead a row of slim columns was inserted between the chapels and the choir arcade to support the rib vaults. The result enabled visitors to circulate around the altar and come within reach of the relics without actually disrupting the altar space, while also experiencing the large stained-glass windows within the chapels. As confirmed by Suger, the desire for more stained-glass was not necessarily to bring more daylight into the building but rather to fill the space with a continuous ray of colorful light, rather like mosaics or precious stones, which would make the wall vanish. The demand for ever more stained-glass windows and the search for techniques that would support them are constant throughout the development of Gothic architecture, as is evident in the writings of Suger, who was fascinated by the mystical quality of such lighting.[6]

Renaissance[edit]
Main article: Renaissance architecture
See also: Henry II style and Henry IV style




Early Renaissance - Florence Cathedral (Florence, Italy), 1294–1436, by Arnolfo di Cambio, Filippo Brunelleschi and Emilio De Fabris[123]






Early Renaissance - Basilica of Sant'Andrea (Mantua, Italy), begun 1470, by Leon Battista Alberti[124]






High Renaissance - The Tempietto (San Pietro in Montorio, Rome), 1502, by Donato Bramante[125]






High Renaissance - Villa Madama (outside Rome), 1518-1525, begun by Raphael[126]






Northern Renaissance - Château d'Azay-le-Rideau (Loire, France), 1518-1527[127]






Northern Renaissance - Château de Chambord (Loire, France), 1519-1547, by Domenico da Cortona[128]






High Renaissance - Palazzo Farnese (Rome), 1534-1546, by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger[129]






Mannerism - Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne (Rome), begun 1535, by Baldassare Peruzzi[130]






Northern Renaissance - East facade of the Cour Carrée (Louvre, Paris), 1549-1555, by Pierre Lescot[131]






Mannerism - El Escorial (outside Madrid, Spain), 1559-1584, by Juan Bautista de Toledo and Juan de Herrera[132]






Northern Renaissance - City Hall (Delft) (Delft, The Netherlands), 1618-1620, by Hendrick de Keyser




During the Renaissance, Italy consisted of many states, and intense rivalry between them generated an increase in technical and artistic developments. The Medici Family, an Italian banking family and political dynasty, is famous for its financial support of Renaissance art and architecture.
The period began in around 1452, when the architect and humanist Leon Battista Alberti (1404-1472) completed his treatise De Re Aedificatoria (On the Art of Building) after studying the ancient ruins of Rome and Vitruvius's De Architectura. His writings covered numerous subjects, including history, town planning, engineering, sacred geometry, humanism and philosophies of beauty, and set out the key elements of architecture and its ideal proportions. In the last decades of the 15th century, artists and architects began to visit Rome to study the ruins, especially the Colosseum and the Pantheon. They left behind precious records of their studies in the form of drawings. While humanist interest in Rome had been building up over more than a century (dating back at least to Petrarch in the 14th century), antiquarian considerations of monuments had focused on literary, epigraphic and historical information rather than on the physical remains. Although some artists and architects, such as Filippo Brunelleschi (1377-1446), Donatello (circa 1386–1466) and Leon Battista Alberti, are reported to have made studies of Roman sculpture and ruins, almost no direct evidence of this work survives. By the 1480s, prominent architects, such as Francesco di Giorgio (1439-1502) and Giuliano da Sabgallo (circa 1445–1516), were making numerous studies of ancient monuments, undertaken in ways that demonstrated that the process of transforming the model into a new design had already begun. In many cases, drawing ruins in their fragmentary state necessitated a leap of imagination, as Francesco himself readily admitted in his annotation to his reconstruction of the Campidoglio, noting 'largely imagined by me, since very little can be understood from the ruins.[133]
Soon, grand buildings were constructed in Florence using the new style, like the Pazzi Chapel (1441-1478) or the Palazzo Pitti (1458-1464). The Renaissance begun in Italy, but slowly spread to other parts of Europe, with varying interpretations.[125]
Since Renaissance art is an attempt of reviving Ancient Rome's culture, it uses pretty much the same ornaments as the Ancient Greek and Roman. However, because most if not all resources that Renaissance artists had were Roman, Renaissance architecture and applied arts widely use certain motifs and ornaments that are specific to Ancient Rome. The most iconic one is the margent, a vertical arrangement of flowers, leaves or hanging vines, used at pilasters. Another ornament associated with the Renaissance is the round medallion, containing a profile of a person, similar with Ancient cameos. Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, and other post-medieval styles use putti (chubby baby angels) much more often compared to Greco-Roman art and architecture. An ornament reintroduced during the Renaissance, that was of Ancient Roman descent, that will also be used in later styles, is the cartouche, an oval or oblong design with a slightly convex surface, typically edged with ornamental scrollwork.

Worldwide[edit]
Baroque[edit]
Main article: Baroque architecture
See also: Louis XIV style and Baroque garden




Temple du Marais (Paris), c. 1632, by François Mansart[134]






San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane (Rome), 1638-1677, by Francesco Borromini[135]






St. Peter's Square (Rome), 1656-1667, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini[136]






Gardens at Vaux-le-Vicomte (France), 1657-1661, by André Le Nôtre[137]






Dôme des Invalides (Paris), 1677-1706, by Jules Hardouin-Mansart[138]






Plague Column (Vienna), 1682 and 1694, by Matthias Rauchmiller and Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach[139]






Gardens at Het Loo Palace (the Netherlands), 1689[140]






Royal Naval Hospital (Greenwich, London), 1695-1715, by Christopher Wren[141]






Church of Saint Nicholas (Prague, Czech Republic), 1703-1711, by Christoph Dientzenhofer[142]






Karlskirche (Vienna, Austria), 1715-1737, by Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach[143]






Royal Palace of Amsterdam (Amsterdam, The Netherlands), 1648-1665, by Jacob van Campen




The Baroque emerged from the Counter Reformation as an attempt by the Catholic Church in Rome to convey its power and to emphasize the magnificence of God. The Baroque and its late variant the Rococo were the first truly global styles in the arts. Dominating more than two centuries of art and architecture in Europe, Latin America and beyond from circa 1580 to circa 1800. Born in the painting studios of Bologna and Rome in the 1580s and 1590s, and in Roman sculptural and architectural ateliers in the second and third decades of the 17th century, the Baroque spread swiftly throughout Italy, Spain and Portugal, Flanders, France, the Netherlands, England, Scandinavia, and Russia, as well as to central and eastern European centres from Munich (Germany) to Vilnius (Lithuania). The Portuguese, Spanish and French empires and the Dutch treading network had a leading role in spreading the two styles into the Americas and colonial Africa and Asia, to places such as Lima, Mozambique, Goa and the Philippines.[144] Due to its spread in regions with different architectural traditions, multiple kinds of Baroque appeared based on location, different in some aspects, but similar overall. For example, French Baroque appeared severe and detached by comparison, preempting Neoclassicism and the architecture of the Age of Enlightenment.[134] Hybrid Native American/European Baroque architecture first appeared in South America (as opposed to Mexico) in the late 17th century, after the indigenous symbols and styles that characterize this unusual variant of Baroque had been kept alive over the preceding century in other media, a very good example of this being the Jesuir Church in Arequipa (Peru).[145]

The Palace of Versailles (Versailles, France), one of the most iconic Baroque buildings, c. 1660 - 1715, by Louis Le Vau and Jules Hardouin-Mansart[146]The Marble CourtThe Salon d'HerculeThe Royal ChapelThe Hall of MirrorsThe gardens
The first Baroque buildings were cathedrals, churches and monasteries, soon joined by civic buildings, mansions, and palaces. Being characterized by dynamism, for the first time walls, façades and interiors curved,[147] a good example being San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane in Rome. Baroque architects took the basic elements of Renaissance architecture, including domes and colonnades, and made them higher, grander, more decorated, and more dramatic. The interior effects were often achieved with the use of quadratura,  or trompe-l'œil painting combined with sculpture: the eye is drawn upward, giving the illusion that one is looking into the heavens. Clusters of sculpted angels and painted figures crowd the ceiling. Light was also used for dramatic effect; it streamed down from cupolas and was reflected from an abundance of gilding. Solomonic columns were often used, to give an illusion of upwards motion and other decorative elements occupied every available space. In Baroque palaces, grand stairways became a central element.[148] Besides architecture, Baroque painting and sculpture are characterized by dynamism too. This is in contrast with how static and peaceful Renaissance art is.
Besides the building itself, the space where it was placed had a role too. Both Baroque and Rococo buildings try to seize viewers' attention and to dominate their surroundings, whether on a small scale such as the San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane in Rome, or on a massive one, like the new facade of the Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, designed to tower over the city. A manifestation of power and authority on the grandest scale, Baroque urban planing and renewal was promoted by the church and the state alike. It was the first era since antiquity to experience mass migration into cities, and urban planners took idealistic measures to regulate them. The most notable early example was Domenico Fontana's restructuring of Rome's street plan of Pope Sixtus V. Architects had experimented with idealized city schemes since the early Renaissance, examples being Leon Battista Alberti (1404-1472) planning a centralized model city, with streets leading to a central piazza, or Filarete (Antonio di Pietro Aver(u)lino, c. 1400-c. 1469) designing a round city named Sforzinda (1451-1456) that he based on parts of the human body in the idea that a healthy city should reflect the physiognomy of its inhabitants. However, none of these idealistic cities has ever been built. In fact, few such projects were put into practice in Europe as new cities were prohibitively costly and existing urban areas, with existing churches and palaces, could not be demolished. Only in the Americas, where architects often had a clean space to work with, were such cities possible, as in Lima (Peru) or Buenos Aires (Argentina). The earliest Baroque ideal city is Zamość, built north-east of Krakow (Poland) by the Italian architect Bernardo Morando (c. 1540-1600), being a centralized town focusing on a square with radiating streets. Where entire cities could not be rebuilt, patrons and architects compensated by creating spacious and symmetrical squares, often with avenues and radiating out at perpendicular angles and focusing on a fountain, statue or obelisk. A good example of this is the Place des Vosges (formerly Place Royale), commissioned by Henry IV probably after plans by Baptiste du Cerceau (1545-1590). The most famous Baroque space in the world is Gianlorenzo Bernini's St. Peter's Square in Rome.[149] Similar with ideal urban planning, Baroque gardens are characterized by straight and readapting avenues, with geometric spaces.

Rococo[edit]
Main articles: Rococo and Rocaille
See also: Style Louis XV




Zwinger (Dresden, Germany), 1719, by Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann[150]






Château St. Gerlach (Valkenburg aan de Geul, The Netherlands), 1735, by Laurenz Mefferdatis






Door of the Hôtel de Chenizot (Paris), 1719, by Pierre Vigné de Vigny






The ceiling of the oval Salon of the Princesse in Hôtel de Soubise (Paris), 1740, by Germain Boffrand[151]






Palace of Queluz (Lisbon, Portugal), 1752, by Mateus Vicente de Oliveira[152]






Pilgrimage Church of Wies (Steingaden, Germany), 1754, by Dominikus and Johann Baptist Zimmermann[152]




The name Rococo derives from the French word rocaille, which describes shell-covered rock-work, and coquille, meaning seashell. Rococo architecture is fancy and fluid, accentuating asymmetry, with an abundant use of curves, scrolls, gilding and ornaments. The style enjoyed great popularity with the ruling elite of Europe during the first half of the 18th century. It developed in France out of a new fashion in interior decoration, and spread across Europe.[153] Domestic Rococo abandoned Baroque's high moral tone, its weighty allegories and its obsession with legitimacy: in fact, its abstract forms and carefree, pastoral subjects related more to notions of refuge and joy that created a more forgiving atmosphere for polite conversations. Rococo rooms are typically smaller than their Baroque counterparts, reflecting a movement towards domestic intimacy. Even the grander salons used for entertaining were more modest in scale, as social events involved smaller numbers of guests.
Characteristic of the style were Rocaille motifs derived from the shells, icicles and rock-work or grotto decoration. Rocaille arabesques were mostly abstract forms, laid out symmetrically over and around architectural frames. A favourite motif was the scallop shell, whose top scrolls echoed the basic S and C framework scrolls of the arabesques and whose sinuous ridges echoed the general curvilinearity of the room decoration. While few Rococo exteriors were built in France, a number of Rococo churches are found in southern Germany.[154] Other widely-user motifs in decorative arts and interior architecture include: acanthus and other leaves, birds, bouquets of flowers, fruits, elements associated with love (putti, quivers with arrows ans arrowed hearts) trophies of arms, putti, medallions with faces, many many flowers, and Far Eastern elements (pagodes, dragons, monkeys, bizarre flowers, bamboo, and Chinese people).[155] Pastel colours were widely used, like light blue, mint green or pink. Rococo designers also loved mirrors (the more the better), an example being the Hall of Mirrors of the Amalienburg (Munich, Germany), by Johann Baptist Zimmermann. Generally, mirrors are also featured above fireplaces.

Exoticism[edit]
Main article: Exoticism




Chinese inspiration/Chinoiserie - Chinese House, (Sanssouci Park, Potsdam, Germany), 1755-1764, by Johann Gottfried Büring[156]






Chinese inspiration/Chinoiserie - Chinese Pavilion (Ekerö Municipality, Sweden), 1763–1769, by Carl Fredrik Adelcrantz[157]






Islamic inspiration - Garden Mosque of the Schwetzingen Palace (Germany), 1779-1795, by Nicolas de Pigage[158]






Islamic inspiration - Turkish Tent (Hagaparken, Stockholm, Sweden), 1787, by Louis Jean Desprez[159]






Islamic inspiration - Royal Pavilion (Brighton, the UK), 1787-1823, by John Nash[160]






Egyptian inspiration/Egyptian Revival - portico of the Hôtel Beauharnais (Paris), c.1804, L.E.N. Bataille[161]






Egyptian inspiration/Egyptian Revival - Egyptian Building, part of the Virginia Commonwealth University (Richmond, Virginia, USA), 1845, by Thomas Stewart[162]






Pre-Columbian inspiration/Mayan Revival - facade detail of the Mayan Theater (Los Angeles, USA), 1927, by Stiles O. Clements






Egyptian inspiration/mix of Egyptian Revival and Art Deco - Le Louxor Cinema (Paris), 1919-1921, by Henri Zipcy[163]






Pre-Columbian inspiration/mix of Mayan Revival and Art Deco - interior detail of 450 Sutter Street (San Francisco, California), 1929, by Timothy L. Pflueger




The interactions between East and West brought on by colonialist exploration have had a long impact on architecture. Because of being something rare and new to Westerners, some non-European styles were really appreciated during the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Some nobles and kings built little structures inspired by these styles in the gardens of their palaces, or fully decorated a handful of rooms of palaces in these styles. Because of not fully understanding the origins and principles that govern these exotic ways of building, Europeans sometimes created hybrids of the style which they tried to replicate and what were the trends at that time. A good example of this is chinoiserie, a Western decorative style, popular during the 18 the century, that was heavily inspired by Chinese arts, but also by Rococo at the same time. Because traveling to China or other Far Eastern countries was something hard at that time and so remained mysterious to most Westerners, European imaginations were fuelled by perceptions of Asia as a place of wealth and luxury, and consequently patrons from emperors to merchants vied with each other in adorning their living quarters with Asian goods and decorating them in Asian styles. Where Asian objects were hard to obtain, European craftsmen and painters stepped up to fill the breach, creating a blend of Rococo forms and authentic Asian figures, motifs and techniques.
Chinese art wasn't the only foreign style with which Europeans experimented. Another was the Islamic one. Examples of this include the Garden Mosque of the Schwetzingen Palace in Germany (the only surviving example of an 18th century European garden mosque), the Royal Pavilion in Brighton, or the Moorish Revival buildings from the 19th and early 20th centuries, with horseshoe arches and brick patterns. When it come to the Orient, Europeans also had an interest for the culture of Ancient Egypt. Compared to other cases of exoticism, the one with the land of pharaohs is the oldest one, since Ancient Greeks and Romans had this interest during Antiquity. The main periods when Egyptian Revival monuments were erected were the early 19th century, with Napoleon's military campaigns in Egypt, and the 1920s, when the Tomb of Tutankhamun was discovered in 1922, which caused an Egyptomania that lead to Art Deco sometimes using motifs inspired by Ancient Egypt. During the late 18th and early 19th century, Neoclassicism sometimes mixed Greco-Roman elements with Egyptian ones. Because of its association with pharaohs, death and eternity, multiple Egyptian Revival tombs or cemetery entry gates were built in this style. Besides mortuary structures, other buildings in this style include certain synagogues, like the Karlsruhe Synagogue or some Empire monuments built during the reign of Nepoleon, such as the Egyptian portico of the Hôtel Beauharnais or the Fontaine du Fellah. During the 1920s and 1930s, Pre-Columbian Mesoamerican architecture was of great interest for some American architects, particularly what the Mayans built. Several of Frank Lloyd Wright's California houses were erected in a Mayan Revival style, while other architects combined  Mayan motifs with Art Deco ones.[164]

Neoclassicism[edit]
Main article: Neoclassical architecture
See also: Palladian architecture, Louis XVI style, Adam style, and Empire style




English landscape garden at Stourhead (the UK), the 1740s, by Henry Hoare[165]






Panthéon (Paris), 1758–1790, by Jacques-Germain Soufflot (1713-1780) and Jean-Baptiste Rondelet (1743-1829)[166]






Hôtel de la Marine (Paris), 1761-1770, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel[167]






The Hall (Osterley Park, London), 1767, by Robert Adam[168]






Stairway of the Grand Theater of Bordeaux (Bordeaux, France), 1777-1780, by Victor Louis[169]






The Cabinet Doré of Marie-Antoinette at the Palace of Versailles (Versailles, France), 1783, by the Rousseau brothers[170]






Villa Welgelegen, 1789 (Haarlem, The Netherlands)






Empress Joséphine's Bedroom in Château de Malmaison (Rueil-Malmaison, France), 1800-1802, by Charles Percier and Pierre-François-Léonard Fontaine[171]






Napoleon's bath of the Château de Rambouillet (Rambouillet, France), 1806, painted by Godard and Jean Vasserot






Neue Wache (Berlin), 1816, by Karl Friedrich Schinkel and Salomo Sachs[172]






Burns Monument (Edinburgh, the UK) 1820-1831, by Thomas Hamilton[173]




Neoclassical architecture focused on Ancient Greek and Roman details, plain, white walls and grandeur of scale. Compared to the previous styles, Baroque and Rococo, Neoclassical exteriors tended to be more minimalist, featuring straight and angular lines, but being still ornamented. The style's clean lines and sense of balance and proportion worked well for grand buildings (such as the Panthéon in Paris) and for smaller structures alike (such as the Petit Trianon).
Excavations during the 18th century at Pompeii and Herculaneum, which had both been buried under volcanic ash during the 79 AD eruption of Mount Vesuvius, inspired a return to order amd rationality.[174] In the mid-18th century, antiquity was upheld as a standard for architecture as never before. Neoclassicism was a fundamental investigation of the very bases of architectural form and meaning. In the 1750s, an alliance between archaeological exploration and architectural theory started, which will continue in the 19th century. Marc-Antoine Laugier wrote in 1753 that 'Architecture owes all that is perfect to the Greeks'.[175]

The Petit Trianon (Versailles, France), 1764, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel[176]
The Cenotaph of Newton, c. 1784 (never built), by Étienne-Louis Boullée[171]
The style was adopted by progressive circles in other countries such as Sweden and Russia. Federal-style architecture is the name for the classicizing architecture built in North America between c. 1780 and 1830, and particularly from 1785 to 1815. This style shares its name with its era, the Federal Period. The term is also used in association with furniture design in the United States of the same time period. The style broadly corresponds to the middle-class classicism of Biedermeier style in the German-speaking lands, Regency style in Britain and to the French Empire style. In Central and Eastern Europe, the style is usually referred to as Classicism (German: Klassizismus, Russian: Классицизм), while the newer Revival styles of the 19th century until today are called neoclassical.
Étienne-Louis Boullée (1728–1799) was a visionary architect of the period. His utopian projects, never built, included a monument to Isaac Newton (1784) in the form of an immense dome, with an oculus allowing the light to enter, giving the impression of a sky full of stars. His project for an enlargement of the Royal Library (1785) was even more dramatic, with a gigantic arch sheltering the collection of books. While none of his projects were ever built, the images were widely published and inspired architects of the period to look outside the traditional forms.[177]
Similarly with the Renaissance and Baroque periods, during the Neoclassical one urban theories of how a good city should be appeared too. Enlightenment writers of the 18th century decried the problems of Paris at that time, the biggest one being the big number of narrow medieval streets crowded with modest houses. Voltaire openly criticized the failure of the French Royal administration to initiate public works, improve the quality of life in towns, and stimulate the economy. 'It is time for those who rule the most opulent capital in Europe to make it the most comfortable and the most magnificent of cities. There must be public markets, fountains which actually provide water and regular pavements. The narrow and infected streets must be widened, monuments that cannot be seen must be revealed and new ones built for all to see', Voltaire insisted in a polemical essay on 'The Embellishments of Paris' in 1749. In the same year, La Font de Saint-Yenne, criticized how Louis XIV's great east façade of the Louvre, was all but hidden from views by a dense quarter of modest houses. Voltaire also said that in order to transform Paris into a city that could rival ancient Rome, it was necessary to demolish more than it was to built. 'Our towns are still what they were, a mass of houses crowded together haphazardly without system, planning or design', Marc-Antoine Laugier complained in 1753. Writing a decade later, Pierre Patte promoted an urban reform in quest of health, social order, and security, launching at the same time a medical and organic metaphor which compared the operations of urban design to those of the surgeons. With bad air and lack of fresh water its current state was pathological, Patte asserted, calling for fountains to be placed at principal intersections and markets. Squares are recommended promote the circulation of air, and for the same reason houses on the city's bridges should be demolished. He also criticized the location of hospitals next to markets and protested continued burials in overcrowded city churchyards.[178] Besides cities, new ideas of how a garden should be appeared in 18th century England, making place for the English landscape garden (aka jardin à l'anglaise), characterized by an idealized view of nature, and the use of Greco-Roman or Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape. It was the opposite of the symmetrical and geometrically planned Baroque garden (aka jardin à la française).

Revivalism and Eclecticism[edit]
Main article: Revivalism (architecture)
See also: Eclecticism in architecture, Victorian architecture, and Napoleon III style § Architecture




Gothic Revival - Interior of the All Saints (London), 1850–1859, by William Butterfield






Eclectic - The Église Saint-Augustin de Paris, 1860–1868, by Victor Baltard






Indo-Saracenic - The Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus, previously Victoria Terminus (Mumbai, India), 1878–88, a mixture of Romanesque, Gothic and Indian elements






Byzantine Revival - The Alexander Nevsky Cathedral (Sofia, Bulgaria), 1882–1912, by Alexander Pomerantsev






Renaissance Revival - Apartment building no. 9 on Rue Galilée (Paris), 1883, by F. Jovrdain and H. Fivaz






Russian Revival - Cathedral of Christ the Saviour (Moscow, Russia)






Tudor Revival architecture - The Beaney House of Art and Knowledge (Canterbury, England), 1899, by A.H. Campbell






Rococo Revival - Apartment building no. 8 on Rue de Miromesnil (Paris), 1900, by P. Lobrot






Louis XVI Revival - Hôtel Camondo, 1911, by René Sergent[179]






Romanian Revival - The C.N. Câmpeanu House on Bulevardul Dacia (Bucharest, Romania), c. 1923, by Constantin Nănescu[180]






First national movement - Ziraat Bank Museum (Ankara, Turkey), 1929, by Giulio Mongeri




The 19th century was dominated by a wide variety of stylistic revivals, variations, and interpretations. Revivalism in architecture is the use of visual styles that consciously echo the style of a previous architectural era. Modern-day Revival styles can be summarized within New Classical architecture, and sometimes under the umbrella term traditional architecture.
The idea that architecture might represent the glory of kingdoms can be traced to the dawn of civilisation, but the notion that architecture can bear the stamp of national character is a modern idea, that appeared in the 18th century historical thinking and given political currency in the wake of the French Revolution. As the map of Europe was repeatedly changing, architecture was used to grant the aura of a glorious past to even the most recent nations. In addition to the credo of universal Classicism, two new, and often contradictory, attitudes on historical styles existed in the early 19th century. Pluralism promoted the simultaneous use of the expanded range of style, while Revivalism held that a single historical model was appropriate for modern architecture. Associations between styles and building types appeared, for example: Egyptian for prisons, Gothic for churches, or Renaissance Revival for banks and exchanges. These choices were the result of other associations: the pharaohs with death and eternity, the Middle Ages with Christianity, or the Medici family with the rise of banking and modern commerce.

 View of Devonpart, near Plymouth (the UK), by John Foulston, 1820s, including an 'Egyptian' library, a 'Hindoo' nonconformist chapel, a 'primitive Doric' town hall, and a street of houses with a Roman Corinthian order
Whether their choice was Classical, medieval, or Renaissance, all revivalists shared the strategy of advocating a particular style based on national history, one of the great enterprises of historians in the early 19th century. Only one historic period was claimed to be the only one capable of providing models grounded in national traditions, institutions, or values. Issues of style became matters of state.[181]
The most well-known Revivalist style is the Gothic Revival one, that appeared in the mid-18th century in the houses of a number of wealthy antiquarians in England, a notable example being the Strawberry Hill House. German Romantic writers and architects were the first to promote Gothic as a powerful expression of national character, and in turn use it as a symbol of national identity in territories still divided. Johann Gottfried Herder posed the question 'Why should we always imitate foreigners, as if we were Greeks or Romans?'.[182]
In art and architecture history, the term Orientalism refers to the works of the Western artists who specialized in Oriental subjects, produced from their travels in Western Asia, during the 19th century. In that time, artists and scholars were described as Orientalists, especially in France.
In India, during the British Raj, a new style, Indo-Saracenic, (also known as Indo-Gothic, Mughal-Gothic, Neo-Mughal, or Hindoo style) was getting developed, which incorporated varying degrees of Indian elements into the Western European style. The Churches and convents of Goa are another example of the blending of traditional Indian styles with western European architectural styles. Most Indo-Saracenic public buildings were constructed between 1858 and 1947, with the peaking at 1880.[183]  The style has been described as "part of a 19th-century movement to project themselves as the natural successors of the Mughals".[184]  They were often built for modern functions such as transport stations, government offices, and law courts. It is much more evident in British power centres in the subcontinent like Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata.[185]

Beaux-Arts[edit]
Main article: Beaux-Arts architecture




Exterior of the Palais Garnier (Paris), 1860–1875, by Charles Garnier[186]






Grand stairs of the Palais Garnier, 1860–1875, by Charles Garnier[186]






The CEC Palace on Victory Avenue (Bucharest, Romania), 1897-1900, by Paul Gottereau[187]






Cantacuzino Palace (Bucharest, Romania), 1898-1906, by Ion D. Berindey[188]






Petit Palais (Paris), 1900, by Charles Giraud[189]






Grand Central Terminal (New York City), 1903, by Reed and Stem and Warren and Wetmore[190]






Beaux-Arts villa (Antwerp, Belgium), 1913, by Michel de Braey[191]




The Beaux-Arts style takes its name from the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, where it developed and where many of the main exponents of the style studied. Due to the fact that international students studied here, there are buildings from the second half of the 19th century and the early 20th century of this type all over the world, designed by architects like Charles Girault, Thomas Hastings, Ion D. Berindey or Petre Antonescu. Today, from Bucharest to Buenos Aires and from San Francisco to Brussels, the Beaux-Arts style survives in opera houses, civic structures, university campuses commemorative monuments, luxury hotels and townhouses. The style was heavily influenced by the Paris Opéra House (1860-1875), designed by Charles Garnier, the masterpiece of the 19th century renovation of Paris, dominating its entire neighbourhood and continuing to astonish visitors with its majestic staircase and reception halls. The Opéra was an aesthetic and societal turning point in French architecture. Here, Garnier showed what he called a style actuel, which was influenced by the spirit of the time, aka Zeitgeist, and reflected the designer's personal taste.
Beaux-Arts façades were usually imbricated, or layered with overlapping classical elements or sculpture. Often façades consisted of a high rusticated basement level, after it a few floors high level, usually decorated with pilasters or columns, and at the top an attic level and/or the roof. Beaux-Arts architects were often commissioned to design monumental civic buildings symbolic of the self-confidence of the town or city. The style aimed for a Baroque opulence through lavishly decorated monumental structures that evoked Louis XIV's Versailles. However, it wasn't just a revival of the Baroque, being more of a synthesis of Classicist styles, like Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism etc.[192][193][194]

Industry and new technologies[edit]




Palm house (London), 1848, by Richard Turner and Decimus Burton[195]






Les Halles (Paris), 1852-1855, by Victor Baltard[196]






Plan and elevation for the Crystal Palace (London), 1854, by Joseph Paxton[195]






Le Bon Marché (Paris), 1872, by Louis-Charles Boileau in collaboration with the engineering firm of Gustave Eiffel[197]






Antwerpen-Centraal railway station, 1895–1905, by Louis Delacenserie[198]




Because of the Industrial Revolution and the new technologies it brought, new types of buildings have appeared. By 1850 iron was quite present in dailylife at every scale, from mass-produced decorative architectural details and objects of apartment buildings and commercial buildings to train sheds. A well-known 19th century glass and iron building is the Crystal Palace from Hyde Park (London), built in 1851 to house the Great Exhibition, having an appearance similar with a greenhouse. Its scale was daunting.
The marketplace pioneered novel uses of iron and glass to create an architecture of display and consumption that made the temporary display of the world fairs a permanent feature of modern urban life. Just after a year after the Crystal Palace was dismantaled, Aristide Boucicaut opened what historians of mass consumption have labelled the first department store, Le Bon Marché in Paris. As the store expanded, its exterior took on the form of a public monument, being highly decorated with French Renaissance Revival motifs. The entrances advanced subtly onto the pavemenet, hoping to captivate the attention of potential customers. Between 1872 and 1874, the interior was remodelled by Louis-Charles Boileau, in collaboration with the young engineering firm of Gustave Eiffel. In place of the open courtyard required to permit more daylight into the interior, the new building focused around three skylight atria.[199]

Art Nouveau[edit]
Main article: Art Nouveau § Architecture and ornamentation
See also: Art Nouveau religious buildings




Hôtel Tassel (Brussels, Belgium), 1894, by Victor Horta[200]






Entrance of the Castel Béranger (Paris), 1895–1898, by Hector Guimard[201]






Secession Building (Vienna, Austria), 1897, by Joseph Maria Olbrich[202]






La Fermette Marbeuf (Paris), 1898, by Émile Hurtré[203]






Leonardo da Vinci Highschool (Paris), 1899, by Jules Lavirotte[204]






Bijouterie Fouquet (Musée Carnavalet, Paris), c. 1900, by Alphonse Mucha[205]






The Porte Dauphine Métro Station (Paris), by Hector Guimard, 1900[206]






Maison Huot (Nancy, France), 1903, by Émile André[207]






Casa Batlló (Barcelona, Spain), 1904–1906, by Antoni Gaudí[208]






Mița the Cyclist House (Bucharest, Romania), 1910, by Nicolae C. Mihăescu[209]




Popular in many countries from the early 1890s until the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Art Nouveau was an influential although relatively brief art and design movement and philosophy. Despite being a short-lived fashion, it paved the way for the modern architecture of the 20th century. Between c. 1870 and 1900, a crisis of historicism occurred, during which the historicist culture was critiqued, one of the voices being Friedrich Nietzsche in 1874, who diagnosed 'a malignant historical fervour' as one of the crippling symptoms of a modern culture burdened by archaeological study and faith in the laws of historical progression.

Les Chardons Building (Paris), 1903, by Charles Klein[210]
Focusing on natural forms, asymmetry, sinuous lines and whiplash curves, architects and designers aimed to escape the excessively ornamental styles and historical replications, popular during the 19th century. However, the style wasn't completely new, since Art Nouveau artists drew on a huge range of influences, particularly Beaux-Arts architecture, the Arts and Crafts movement, aestheticism and Japanese art. Buildings used materials associated in the 19th century with modernity, such as cast-iron and glass. A good example of this is the Paris Metro entrance at Porte Dauphine by Hector Guimard (1900). Its cast-iron and glass canopy is as much sculpture as it is architecture. In Paris, Art Nouveau was even called Le Style Métro by some. The interest for stylized organic forms of ornamentation originated in the mid 19th century, when it was promoted in The Grammar of Ornament (1854), a pattern book by British architect Owen Jones (architect) (1809-1874).
Whiplash curves and sinuous organic lines are its most familiar hallmarks, however the style can not be summarized only to them, since its forms are much more varied and complex. The movement displayed many national interpretations. Depending on where it manifested, it was inspired by Celtic art, Gothic Revival, Rococo Revival, and Baroque Revival. In Hungary, Romania and Poland, for example, Art Nouveau incorporated folkloric elements. This is true especially in Romania, because it facilitated the appearance of the Romanian Revival style, which draws inspiration from Brâncovenesc architecture and traditional peasant houses and objects. The style also had different names, depending on countries. In Britain it was known as Modern Style, in the Netherlands as Nieuwe Kunst, in Germany and Austria as Jugendstil, in Italy as Liberty style, in Romania as Arta 1900, and in Japan as Shiro-Uma. It would be wrong to credit any particular place as the only one where the movement appeared, since it seems to have arisen in multiple locations.[211][212][213][214]

Modern[edit]
Main article: Modern architecture




Steiner House (Vienna, Austria), 1910, by Adolf Loos[215]






Fagus Factory (Alfeld, Germany), 1911, by Walter Gropius[216]






Villa Tugendhat (Brno, the Czech Republic), 1930, by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Lilly Reich[217]






Bergpolderflat (Rotterdam, the Netherlands), 1935, by Willem van Tijen, Johannes Brinkman and Leendert van der Vlugt[217]






Stuyvesant Town–Peter Cooper Village (New York City), 1947, by Irwin Clavan and Gilmore David Clarke[217]




Rejecting ornament and embracing minimalism and modern materials, Modernist architecture appeared across the world from the early 20th century. Art Nouveau paved the way for it, promoting the idea of non-historicist styles. It developed initially in Europe, focusing on functionalism and the avoidance of decoration. Modernism reached its peak during the 1920s and 1930s with the Bauhaus and the International Style, both characterised by asymmetry, flat roofs, large windows, metal, glass, white rendering and open-plan interiors.[218]

Art Deco[edit]
Main articles: Art Deco and Streamline Moderne




The boudoir of fashion designer Jeanne Lanvin (now in the Museum of Decorative Arts, Paris), before 1925, by Armand-Albert Rateau






Pavilion of the Galeries Lafayette at the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts (Paris), 1925, by Jean Hiriart, Georges Tribout and Georges Beau[219]






La Samaritaine (Paris), 1926–1928, by Henri Sauvage[220]






Chrysler Building (New York City), 1930, by William Van Allen[221]






Musée de la Mer (Biarritz, France), 1933, by Joseph Hiriart[222]






Radio Kootwijk in Kootwijk, The Netherlands (1927), by Julius Luthmann




Art Deco, named retrospectively after an exhibition held in Paris in 1925, originated in France as a luxurious, highly decorated style. It then spread quickly throughout the world - most dramatically in the United States - becoming more streamlined and modernistic through the 1930s. The style was pervasive and popular, finding its way into the design of everything from jewellery to film sets, from the interiors of ordinary homes to cinemas, luxury streamliners and hotels. Its exuberance and fantasy captured the spirit of the 'roaring 20s' and provided an escape from the realities of the Great Depression during the 1930s.[223]
Although it ended with the start of World War II, its appeal has endured. Despite that it is an example of modern architecture, elements of the style drew on ancient Egyptian, Greek, Roman, African, Aztec and Japanese influences, but also on Futurism, Cubism and the Bauhaus. Bold colours were often applied on low-reliefs. Predominant materials include chrome plating, brass, polished steel and aluminium, inlaid wood, stone and stained glass.

International Style[edit]
Main article: International Style (architecture)




Barcelona Pavilion (Barcelona, Spain), 1929, by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe[224]






Villa Savoye (Poissy, France), 1929-1930, by Le Corbusier[225]






Lever House (New York City), 1952, by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill[226]






Seagram Building (New York City), 1958, by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe[227]






United States Air Force Academy Cadet Chapel (near Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA), 1963, by Walter Netsch[228]




The International Style emerged in Europe after World War I, influenced by recent movements, including De Stijl and Streamline Moderne, and had a close relationship to the Bauhaus. The antithesis of nearly every other architectural movement that preceded it, the International Style eliminated extraneous ornament and used modern industrial materials such as steel, glass, reinforced concrete and chrome plating. Rectilinear, flat-roofed, asymmetrical and white, it became a symbol of modernity across the world. It seemed to offer a crisp, clean, rational future after the horrors of war. Named by the architect Philip Johnson and historian Henry-Russell Hitchcock (1903-1987) in 1932, the movement was epitomized by Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, or Le Corbusier and was clearly expressed in his statement that 'a house is a machine for living in'.[229]

Brutalist[edit]
Main article: Brutalist architecture




Rudolph Hall (New Haven, Connecticut, USA), 1963, by Paul Rudolph[230]






Habitat 67 (Montreal, Canada), 1966–1967, by Moshe Safdie[231]






Geisel Library (San Diego, California, USA), 1970, by William Pereira[232]






Robarts Library (Toronto, Canada), 1973, by Mathers & Halden Architects[233]






Freeway Park Fountain (Seattle, Washington, USA), 1976, by Lawrence Halprin[234]




Based on social equality, Brutalism was inspired by Le Corbusier's 1947-1952 Unité d'habitation in Marseilles. It seems the term was originally coined by Swedish architect Hans Asplund (1921-1994), but Le Corbusier's use of the description béton brut, meaning raw concrete, for his choice of material for the Unité d'habitation was particularly influential. The style flourished from the 1950s to the mid-1970s, mainly using concrete, which although new in itself, was unconventional when exposed on facades. Before Brutalism, concrete was usually hidden beneath other materials.[235]

Postmodern[edit]
Main article: Postmodern architecture




Piazza d'Italia (New Orleans, USA), 1978, by Charles Moore[236]






Neue Staatsgalerie (Stuttgart, Germany), 1984, by James Stirling[237]






AT&T Headquarters (New York City), 1984, by Philip Johnson and John Burgee[238]






Team Disney Building (Los Angeles, USA), 1990, by Michael Graves[239]






Multicolour interior of the Cambridge Judge Business School (Cambridge, the UK), 1995, by John Outram






Bundeskanzleramt (Berlin, Germany), 1997-2001, by Axel Schultes and Charlotte Frank




No one definable style, Postmodernism is an eclectic mix of approaches that appeared in the late 20th century in reaction against Modernism, which was increasingly perceived as monotonous and conservative. As with many movements, a complete antithesis to Modernism developed. In 1966, the architect Robert Venturi (1925-2018) had published his book, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, which praised the originality and creativity of Mannerist and Baroque architecture of Rome, and encouraged more ambiguity and complexity in contemporary design. Complaining about the austerity and tedium of so many smooth steel and glass Modernist buildings, and in deliberate denunciation of the famous Modernist 'Less is more', Venturi stated 'Less is a bore'. His theories became a majore influence on the development of Postmodernism.[236]

Deconstructivist[edit]
Main article: Deconstructivism




Wexner Center for the Arts (Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, US), 1989, by Peter Eisenman[240]






Vitra Fire Station (Weil am Rhein, Germany), 1989–1993, by Zaha Hadid[241]






Jewish Museum (Berlin, Germany), 1992–1999, by Daniel Libeskind[242]






Guggenheim Museum (Bilbao, Spain), opened in 1997, by Frank Gehry[243]






Phaeno Science Center (Wolfsburg, Germany), 2005, by Zaha Hadid[244]




Deconstructivism in architecture is a development of postmodern architecture that began in the late 1980s. It is characterized by ideas of fragmentation, non-linear processes of design, an interest in manipulating ideas of a structure's surface or skin, and apparent non-Euclidean geometry,[245] (i.e., non-rectilinear shapes) which serve to distort and dislocate some of the elements of architecture, such as structure and envelope. The finished visual appearance of buildings that exhibit the many deconstructivist "styles" is characterised by a stimulating unpredictability and a controlled chaos.
Important events in the history of the Deconstructivist movement include the 1982 Parc de la Villette architectural design competition (especially the entry from the French philosopher Jacques Derrida and the American architect Peter Eisenman[246] and Bernard Tschumi's winning entry), the Museum of Modern Art's 1988 Deconstructivist Architecture exhibition in New York, organized by Philip Johnson and Mark Wigley, and the 1989 opening of the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, designed by Peter Eisenman. The New York exhibition featured works by Frank Gehry, Daniel Libeskind, Rem Koolhaas, Peter Eisenman, Zaha Hadid, Coop Himmelblau, and Bernard Tschumi. Since the exhibition, many of the architects who were associated with Deconstructivism have distanced themselves from the term. Nonetheless, the term has stuck and has now, in fact, come to embrace a general trend within contemporary architecture.

See also[edit]


Architecture portal
History of art
Outline of architecture
Timeline of architecture
Timeline of architectural styles
History of architectural engineering
Notes[edit]


^ Ching, Francis, D.K. and Eckler, James F. Introduction to Architecture. 2013. John Wiley & Sons. p13

^ Architecture. Def. 1. Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM (v. 4.0)
Oxford University Press 2009

^ Virginia McLeod, Belle Place, Sarah Kramer, Milena Harrison-Gray, and Cristopher Lacy (2019). HOUSES - Extraordinary Living. Phaidon. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-7148-7809-6.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Jones 2014, p. 18.

^ Jones 2014, p. 22.

^ a b c Jones 2014, pp. 148, 149.

^ "The Old Copper Complex: North America's First Miners & Metal Artisans". Retrieved 10 August 2015.

^ Song, Jeeun. "The History of Metallurgy and Mining in the Andean Region". World History at Korean Minjok Leadership Academy. Korean Minjok Leadership Academy. Retrieved 10 August 2015.

^ Choi, Charles Q. (18 April 2007). "Pre-Incan Metallurgy Discovered". Live Science. Live Science. Retrieved 10 August 2015.

^ Maldonado, Blanco D. (2003). "Tarascan Copper Metallurgy at the Site of Itziparátzico, Michoacán, México" (PDF). Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican Studies. Retrieved 22 January 2016.

^ van Lemmen, Hans (2013). 5000 Years of Tiles. The British Museum Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-7141-5099-4.

^ Weston, Richard (2011). 100 Ideas That Changed Architecture. Laurence King. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-78627-567-7.

^ Fortenberry 2017, p. 6.

^ Risebero, Bill (2018). The Story of Western Architecture. Bloomsbury. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-3500-9212-9.

^ "Gods and Goddesses". Mesopotamia.co.uk. Retrieved 9 November 2015.

^ Jones 2014, p. 28.

^ Jones 2014, p. 25.

^ Jones 2014, p. 27.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 12.

^ Jones 2014, p. 30.

^ Jones 2014, p. 24, 25, 26.

^ Wright 2009, pp. 115–125.

^ Dyson 2018, p. 29.

^ McIntosh 2008, p. 187.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 14.

^ a b Rogers, Gumuchdjian & Jones 2014, p. 32.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 57.

^ Rogers, Gumuchdjian & Jones 2014, p. 35.

^ Bernard Holtzmann, Alain Pasquier (2011). Historie de l'Art Antique - L'Art Grec (in French). Ecole du Louvre. p. 220. ISBN 978-2-7118-5905-4.

^ Psarra, I. "Ministry of Culture and Sports: Mieza, the so-called Macedonian Tomb of the Palmettes". odysseus.culture.gr. Retrieved 14 April 2019.

^ Rogers, Gumuchdjian & Jones 2014, p. 40.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 6.

^ Nixey, Catherine (2017). The Darkening Age: The Christian Destruction of the Classical World. Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 978-0544800885.

^ Zukowsky, John (2019). A Chronology of Architecture. Thames & Hudson. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-500-34356-2.

^ Vinzenz Brinkmann, Renée Dreyfus and Ulrike Koch-Brinkmanny (2017). Gods in Color - polychromy in the ancient world. p. 13. ISBN 978-3-7913-5707-2.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 48.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 16.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 60.

^ Jones 2014, p. 52.

^ Irving 2019, p. 36.

^ a b Kruft, Hanno-Walter. A History of Architectural Theory from Vitruvius to the Present (New York, Princeton Architectural Press: 1994).

^ Jones 2014, p. 46, 73, 76, 77.

^ Jones 2014, p. 67.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 13.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 69.

^ Jones 2014, p. 112.

^ Jonathan, Glancey (2006). Architecture A Visual History. DK, Penguin Random House. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-2412-8843-6.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 15.

^ "Home and family in ancient and medieval Sri Lanka". Lankalibrary.com. 2008-12-21. Archived from the original on 2012-02-21. Retrieved 2010-09-20.

^ Pieris K (2006), Architecture and landscape in ancient and medieval Lanka

^ Reza, Mohammad Habib (2012). Early Buddhist Architecture of Bengal: Morphological study on the vihāras of c. 3rd to 8th centuries (PhD). Nottingham Trent University.

^ Reza, Mohammad Habib (2020). "Cultural continuity in the Sultanate Bengal: Adjacent ponds of the mosque as a traditional phenomenon". Esempi Di Architettura. 8 (10): 225–235. doi:10.4399/978882553987510. Retrieved September 19, 2022.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 19.

^ Acharya 1927, p. xviii-xx.

^ Sinha 1998, pp. 27–41

^ Acharya 1927, p. xviii-xx, Appendix I lists hundreds of Hindu architectural texts.

^ Shukla 1993.

^ Hall, William (2019). Stone. Phaidon. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-7148-7925-3.

^ Mitchell (1977), 123; Hegewald

^ Harle, 239–240; Hegewald

^ Bernier, Ronald M. (1997). Himalayan Architecture. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-61147-121-2.

^ Bernier, Ronald M. (1997). Himalayan Architecture. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. pp. 161, 162, & 163. ISBN 978-1-61147-121-2.

^ N. Subramanian (21 September 2005). "Remains of ancient temple found". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012.

^ N. Ramya (1 August 2010). "New finds of old temples enthuse archaeologists". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 15 September 2012.

^ Philip, Boney. "Traditional Kerala Architecture".

^ "Architectural Wonders of Karnataka". Retrieved 2009-09-26.[permanent dead link]

^ "Welcome to Odissi.com ¦ Orissa ¦ Sri Jagannath". Archived from the original on 1 August 2020.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 21.

^ Jones 2014, pp. 54, 55, 56 & 57.

^ Hung, Dinh M. (1966). "VIETNAM AND SOUTHEAST ASIA: An address delivered at the Rotary Club of Bristol, Rhode Island on 6 April 1966" (PDF). Naval War College Review. 18 (9): 28–33. JSTOR 44635438. Retrieved 3 September 2021.

^ Guo, Qinghua (2005). "TIMBER BUILDING STRUCTURES IN CHOSEN KOREA — A CASE STUDY ON GEUNJEONGJEON AND INJEONGJEON" (PDF). Journal of Architectural and Planning Research. 22 (1): 51–68. JSTOR 43030720. Retrieved 29 July 2021.

^ Jones 2014, p. 63.

^ a b "THE DESIGNS OF RELIGIOUS MONUMENTS OF THE DVARAVATI, KHMER, AND PENINSULAR REGION /CHAIYA SCHOOLS IN THAILAND". Retrieved 3 September 2021.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 23.

^ Hinderer, Anna; Hone, D; Hone, C A (27 August 2016). Seventeen Years in the Yoruba Country. Memorials of Anna Hinderer. Wentworth Press. ISBN 978-1371184360.

^ The Monthly Review, Or, Literary Journal. 1819. p. 291.

^ "Ghana Museums & Monuments Board". www.ghanamuseums.org. Retrieved 2020-02-24.

^ Osasona, Cordelia O., From traditional residential architecture to the vernacular: the Nigerian experience (PDF), Ile-Ife, Nigeria: Obafemi Awolowo University, retrieved 3 December 2019

^ Sobeski, Michal (1975). Arta Exotică (in Romanian). Editura Meridiane. p. 42 & 43.

^ a b Mcintosh, Susan Keech; Mcintosh, Roderick J. (February 1980). "Jenne-Jeno: An Ancient African City". Archaeology. 33 (1): 8–14.

^ Shaw, Thurstan. The Archaeology of Africa: Food, Metals and Towns. Routledge, 1993, pp. 632.

^ Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine (2005). The History of African Cities South of the Sahara From the Origins to Colonization. Markus Wiener Pub. pp. 123–126. ISBN 978-1-55876-303-6.

^ a b Patrick Darling (2015). "Conservation Management of the Benin Earthworks of Southern Nigeria: A critical review of past and present action plans".  In Korka, Elena (ed.). The Protection of Archaeological Heritage in Times of Economic Crisis. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. pp. 341–352. ISBN 9781443874113. Retrieved 9 March 2019.

^ a b Koutonin, Mawuna (March 18, 2016). "Story of cities #5: Benin City, the mighty medieval capital now lost without trace". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 August 2020.

^ Ogundiran, Akinwumi (June 2005). "Four Millennia of Cultural History in Nigeria (ca. 2000 B.C.–A.D. 1900): Archaeological Perspectives". Journal of World Prehistory. 19 (2): 133–168. doi:10.1007/s10963-006-9003-y. S2CID 144422848.

^ MacEachern, Scott (January 2005). "Two thousand years of West African history". African Archaeology: A Critical Introduction. Academia.

^ Historical Society of Ghana. Transactions3 of the Historical Society of Ghana, The Society, 1957, pp81

^ Davidson, Basil. The Lost Cities of Africa. Boston: Little Brown, 1959, pp86

^ Brass, Mike (1998), The Antiquity of Man: East & West African complex societies

^ David Keys: Medieval Houses of God, or Ancient Fortresses?

^ Nan Madol, Madolenihmw, Pohnpei Archived 2010-06-13 at the Wayback Machine William Ayres, Department of Anthropology University Of Oregon, Accessed 26 September 2007

^ McCoy, Mark D.; Alderson, Helen A.; Hemi, Richard; Cheng, Hai; Edwards, R. Lawrence (November 2016). "Earliest direct evidence of monument building at the archaeological site of Nan Madol (Pohnpei, Micronesia) identified using 230Th/U coral dating and geochemical sourcing of megalithic architectural stone" (PDF). Quaternary Research. 86 (3): 295–303. Bibcode:2016QuRes..86..295M. doi:10.1016/j.yqres.2016.08.002. Retrieved 30 October 2017.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 95.

^ Jones 2014, p. 130.

^ Jones 2014, p. 120.

^ Jones 2014, p. 212.

^ Krautheimer, Richard. Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture Yale University Press Pelican History of Art, Penguin Books Ltd., 1965, p. 285.

^ Fletcher, Banister A History of Architecture on the Comparative Method 4th Edition, London, p. 476.

^ Ettinghausen, Richard; Grabar, Oleg; Jenkins, Marilyn (2001). Islamic Art and Architecture: 650–1250. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300088670.

^ Blair, Sheila S.; Bloom, Jonathan M. (1995). The Art and Architecture of Islam 1250-1800. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300064650.

^ Hattstein, Markus; Delius, Peter, eds. (2011). Islam: Art and Architecture. h.f.ullmann. ISBN 9783848003808.

^ M. Bloom, Jonathan; S. Blair, Sheila, eds. (2009). The Grove Encyclopedia of Islamic Art and Architecture. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195309911.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 83.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 19.

^ Jones 2014, p. 88.

^ Jones 2014, p. 90.

^ George D. Hurmuziadis (1979). Cultura Greciei (in Romanian). Editura științifică și enciclopedică. p. 89 & 90.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 62.

^ George D. Hurmuziadis (1979). Cultura Greciei (in Romanian). Editura științifică și enciclopedică. p. 92.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 17.

^ George D. Hurmuziadis (1979). Cultura Greciei (in Romanian). Editura științifică și enciclopedică. p. 93.

^ Jones 2014, p. 136.

^ Jones 2014, p. 138.

^ Jones 2014, p. 133.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 24.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 25.

^ Hopkins 2014, pp. 23, 25.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 149.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 25.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 46.

^ "L'historie de l'Hôtel de Sens". sab.fr. Retrieved 19 June 2022.

^ Melvin, Jeremy (2006). …isme Să Înțelegem Stilurile Arhitecturale (in Romanian). p. 39. ISBN 973-717-075-X.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 82.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 55.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 26.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 60.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 47.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 64.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 61.

^ Jones 2014, p. 205.

^ Laneyrie-Dagen, Nadeije (2021). Historie de l'art pour tous (in French). Hazan. p. 208. ISBN 978-2-7541-1230-7.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 67.

^ Jones 2014, p. 196.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 223.

^ Jones 2014, p. 226.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 211.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 328.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 238.

^ Bailey 2012, p. 216.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 334.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 233.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 188.

^ Jones 2014, p. 230.

^ Bailey 2012, p. 4.

^ Bailey 2012, p. 364.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 102.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 29.

^ Ducher (1988), Flammarion, pg. 102

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 205, 206, 207 & 208.

^ Hall, William (2019). Stone. Phaidon. p. 185. ISBN 978-0-7148-7925-3.

^ Jones 2014, p. 241.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 238.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 30.

^ Cole 2002, p. 270.

^ Graur, Neaga (1970). Stiluri în arta decorativă (in Romanian). Cerces. p. 193 & 194.

^ Sund 2019, p. 104.

^ "Kina slott, Drottningholm". www.sfv.se. National Property Board of Sweden. Archived from the original on 6 August 2014. Retrieved 2 August 2014.

^ Jones 2014, p. 264.

^ Sund 2019, p. 151.

^ Jones 2014, p. 262.

^ Sund 2019, p. 216.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 130.

^ Texier, Simon (2022). Architectures Art Déco - Paris et Environs - 100 Bâtiments Remarquable. Parigramme. p. 37. ISBN 978-2-37395-136-3.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 117, 130, 225; Bailey 2012, pp. 279, 281; Jones 2014, p. 265; Sund 2019, pp. 208, 216, 217, 224, 225.

^ Weston, Richard (2011). 100 Ideas That Changed Architecture. Laurence King. p. 84. ISBN 978-1-78627-567-7.

^ Jones 2014, p. 276.

^ de Martin 1925, p. 13.

^ Fortenberry 2017, p. 274.

^ de Martin 1925, p. 17.

^ de Martin 1925, p. 61.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 275.

^ Hall, William (2019). Stone. Phaidon. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-7148-7925-3.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 109.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 31.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 9, 14.

^ Jones 2014, p. 273.

^ Prina and Demartini (2006), pg. 250-51

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 48, 49, 50.

^ Nissim De Camondo Museum

^ Woinaroski, Cristina (2013). Istorie urbană, Lotizarea și Parcul Ioanid din București în context european (in Romanian). SIMETRIA. ISBN 978-973-1872-30-8.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 139, 140, 141.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 139–142, 145.

^ Jayewardene-Pillai, 6, 14

^ Das, xi

^ Das, xi, xiv, 98, 101

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 296.

^ Marinache, Oana (2017). Paul Gottereau - Un Regal în Arhitectură (in Romanian). Editura Istoria Artei. p. 184. ISBN 978-606-8839-09-7.

^ Mariana Celac, Octavian Carabela and Marius Marcu-Lapadat (2017). Bucharest Architecture - an annotated guide. Ordinul Arhitecților din România. p. 90. ISBN 978-973-0-23884-6.

^ Jones 2014, p. 294.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 135.

^ "Villa in neorégencestijl". inventaris.onroerenderfgoed.be. Retrieved 8 April 2022.

^ Jones 2014, p. 292, 295, 296.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 132, 133, 134, 135.

^ Bailey 2012, pp. 413.

^ a b Jones 2014, p. 267.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 248.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 236.

^ Irving 2019, p. 339.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 207, 237, 238.

^ Jones 2014, p. 321.

^ Madsen, S. Tschudi (1977). Art Nouveau (in Romanian). Editura Meridiane.

^ Jones 2014, p. 323.

^ "Paris et l'Art Nouveau". Nº281 Dossier de l'Art (in French). Éditions Faton. 2020.

^ Madsen, S. Tschudi (1977). Art Nouveau (in Romanian). Editura Meridiane.

^ Duncan 1994, p. 43.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 141.

^ Duncan 1994, p. 44.

^ Duncan 1994, p. 52.

^ Mariana Celac, Octavian Carabela and Marius Marcu-Lapadat (2017). Bucharest Architecture - an annotated guide. Ordinul Arhitecților din România. p. 85. ISBN 978-973-0-23884-6.

^ "Immeuble Les Chardons". pop.culture.gouv.fr. Retrieved 10 April 2022.

^ Bergdoll 2000, pp. 269, 279.

^ Jones 2014, p. 320, 321, 322.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 36.

^ Madsen, S. Tschudi (1977). Art Nouveau (in Romanian). Editura Meridiane. p. 7.

^ Virginia McLeod, Belle Place, Sarah Kramer, Milena Harrison-Gray, and Cristopher Lacy (2019). HOUSES - Extraordinary Living. Phaidon. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-7148-7809-6.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ Jones 2014, p. 347.

^ a b c Jones 2014, p. 348.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 37.

^ van Lemmen, Hans (2013). 5000 Years of Tiles. The British Museum Press. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-7141-5099-4.

^ L., Clausen, Meredith (1987). Frantz Jourdain and the Samaritaine : art nouveau theory and criticism. Leiden: E.J Brill. ISBN 9789004078796. OCLC 27266259.

^ Jones 2014, p. 359.

^ Jones 2014, p. 360.

^ Dempsey, Amy (2018). Modern Art. Thames & Hudson. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-500-29322-5.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 164.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 134.

^ Jones 2014, p. 416.

^ Jones 2014, p. 418.

^ Jones 2014, p. 420.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 42.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 425.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 146.

^ Jones 2014, p. 426.

^ Jones 2014, p. 425.

^ Jones 2014, p. 428.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 46.

^ a b Hodge 2019, p. 47.

^ Hall, William (2019). Stone. Phaidon. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-7148-7925-3.

^ Jones 2014, p. 502.

^ Jones 2014, p. 510.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 531.

^ Hodge 2019, p. 154.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 205.

^ Hopkins 2014, p. 206.

^ Melvin, Jeremy (2006). …isme Să Înțelegem Stilurile Arhitecturale (in Romanian). p. 137. ISBN 973-717-075-X.

^ Husserl, Origins of Geometry, Introduction by Jacques Derrida

^ Jacques Derrida and Peter Eisenman, Chora L Works (New York: Monacelli Press, 1997)


References[edit]

Acharya, P. K. (1927). Indian Architecture according to the Manasara Shilpa Shastra. London: Oxford University Press (Republished by Motilal Banarsidass). ISBN 0300062176.
Bailey, Gauvin Alexander (2012). Baroque & Rococo. Phaidon. ISBN 978-0-7148-5742-8.
Benton, Janetta Rebold; DiYanni, Robert (1998). Arts and Culture: An Introduction to the Humanities. Vol. 1. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Bergdoll, Barry (2000). European Architecture 1750-1890. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-284222-0.
Bourbon, F (1998). Lost Civilizations. New York: Barnes and Noble, Inc.
Braun, Hugh (1951). An Introduction to English Mediaeval Architecture. London: Faber and Faber.
Ching, Francis; Jarzombek, Mark; Prakash, Vikram (2006). A Global History of Architecture. Wiley.
Cole, Emily (2002). Architectural Details. Ivy Press. ISBN 978-1-78240-169-8.
Copplestone, Trewin, ed. (1963). World architecture – An illustrated history. London: Hamlyn.
de Martin, Henry (1925). Le Style Louis XV (in French). Flammarion.
Duncan, Alastair (1988). Art déco. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 2-87811-003-X.
Duncan, Alastair (1994). Art Nouveau. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-20273-9.
Duncan, Alastair (2009). Art Deco Complete: The Definitive Guide to the Decorative Arts of the 1920s and 1930s. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-8046-4.
Dyson, Tim (2018). A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-882905-8.
Fortenberry, Diane (2017). The Art Museum (Revised ed.). London: Phaidon Press. ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6. Archived from the original on 2021-04-23. Retrieved 2021-04-23.
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell (1958). The Pelican History of Art: Architecture : Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Penguin Books.
Hodge, Susie (2019). The Short Story of Architecture. Laurence King Publishing. ISBN 978-1-7862-7370-3.
Hopkins, Owen (2014). Architectural Styles: A Visual Guide. Laurence King. ISBN 978-178067-163-5.
Irving, Mark (2019). 1001 Buildings You Must See Before You Die. Cassell Illustrated. ISBN 978-1-78840-176-0.
Jarzombek, Mark (2013). Architecture of First Societies: a Global History. Wiley Press.
Jones, Denna, ed. (2014). Architecture The Whole Story. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-29148-1.
McIntosh, Jane (2008). The Ancient Indus Valley: New Perspectives. ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-1-57607-907-2.
Nuttgens, Patrick (1983). The Story of Architecture. Prentice Hall.
Renault, Christophe; Lazé, Christophe (2006). les Styles de l'architecture et du mobliier (in French). Editions Jean-Paul Gisserot. ISBN 978-2-87747-465-8.
Rogers, Richard; Gumuchdjian, Philip; Jones, Denna (2014). Architecture The Whole Story. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-29148-1.
Shukla, D. N. (1993). Vastu-Sastra: Hindu Science of Architecture. Munshiram Manoharial Publishers. ISBN 978-81-215-0611-3.
Sinha, Amita (1998). "Design of Settlements in the Vaastu Shastras". Journal of Cultural Geography. Taylor & Francis. 17 (2): 27–41. doi:10.1080/08873639809478319.
Sund, July (2019). Exotic: A Fetish for the Foreign. Phaidon. ISBN 978-0-7148-7637-5.
Texier, Simon (2012). Paris: Panorama de l'architecture (in French). Parigramme. ISBN 978-2-84096-667-8.
Watkin, David (September 2005). A History of Western Architecture. Hali Publications.
Wright, Rita P. (2009). The Ancient Indus: Urbanism, Economy, and Society. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-57219-4. Retrieved 29 September 2013.

Modernism

Banham, Reyner (1 Dec 1980). Theory and Design in the First Machine Age. Architectural Press.
Curl, James Stevens (2006). A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture (Paperback) (Second ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 880. ISBN 978-0-19-280630-7. ISBN.
Curtis, William J. R. (1987). Modern Architecture Since 1900. Phaidon Press.
Frampton, Kenneth (1992). Modern Architecture, a critical history (Third ed.). Thames & Hudson.
Jencks, Charles (1993). Modern Movements in Architecture (second ed.). Penguin Books Ltd.
Pevsner, Nikolaus (28 Mar 1991). Pioneers of Modern Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius. Penguin Books Ltd.

Further reading[edit]
Sir Banister Fletcher's a History of Architecture Fletcher, Banister; Cruickshank, Dan, Architectural Press, 20th edition, 1996. ISBN 0-7506-2267-9
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to History of architecture.

History of architecture at Curlie
The Society of Architectural Historians web site 
The Society of Architectural Historians of Great Britain web site 
The Society of Architectural Historians, Australia and New Zealand web site 
European Architectural History Network web site  Archived 2018-12-12 at the Wayback Machine
Western Architecture Timeline 
Extensive collection of source documents in the history, theory and criticism of 20th-century architecture
vteHistory of architecture
Architectural timeline
History of construction

Neolithic
Mesopotamian
Ancient Egyptian
Chinese
Indian
Dravidian
Hindu
Mesoamerican
Maya
Aztec
Achaemenid Persia
Etruscan
Classical
Ancient Greek
Ancient Roman
Herodian
Incan
Sasanian
Byzantine
Islamic
Umayyad
Abbasid
Moorish
Fatimid
Russian
Newari
Medieval Scandinavian
Buddhist
Somali
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Carolingian
Hoysala
Pre-Romanesque
Romanesque
Norman
Romano-Gothic
Gothic
Sondergotik
Indo-Islamic
Seljuk
Mamluk
Plateresque
Manueline
Vijayanagara
Western Chalukya
Ottoman
Renaissance
Palladian
Spanish
Spanish Colonial
Portuguese
Portuguese Colonial
Mughal
Sikh
Baroque
Andean
Czech
Dutch
Edwardian
English
French
Italian
Maltese
Petrine
Portuguese
Siberian
Ukrainian
Industrial
British
Revivalism
Byzantine
Colonial
Egyptian
Gothic
Mayan
Mediterranean
Mission
Monumentalism
Baroque
Neoclassical
Moorish
Mycenaean
Neo-Manueline
Pueblo
Queen Anne
Britain
America and Australia
Renaissance
Romanian
Russian
Spanish Colonial
Territorial
Tudor
Rationalism
Modern
Art Nouveau
Jugendstil
Liberty style
Modern Style
Modernisme
Prairie School
Expressionism
Cubism
De Stijl
Bauhaus
Constructivism
New Objectivity
Streamline Moderne
Nazi
Rationalist-Fascist
International style
Functionalism
Futurism
Organicism
Art Deco
Stripped Classicism
Postconstructivism
PWA Moderne
Stalinist
Googie
Brutalism
Structuralism
Postmodern
Blobitecture
High-tech
Critical regionalism
Deconstructivism
Neomodern
New Classical
Contemporary
Neo-futurism

vteArchitecture by regionArchitecture of Africa
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini (Swaziland)
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Dependencies and other territories

British Indian Ocean Territory
Mayotte
Réunion
St. Helena
Western Sahara (SADR)
Architecture of Asia
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma
Cambodia
China
Hong Kong
Macau
Cyprus
East Timor
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
See also Palestinian territories
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Korea
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Architecture of Europe
Albania
Andorra
Austria
Azerbaijan1
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia1
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia1
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom

Dependencies, autonomies and other territories
Abkhazia1
Adjara1
Åland
Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Crimea
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Nagorno-Karabakh1
Nakhichevan1
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus1
1 Has significant territory in Asia.Architecture of North America
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Puerto Rico
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Dependencies and other territories

Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Netherlands Antilles
Puerto Rico
Saint-Pierre and Miquelon
Turks and Caicos Islands
U.S. Virgin Islands
Architecture of Oceania Australia
Australia
Norfolk Island
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
 Melanesia
East Timor
Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
 Micronesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
Palau
 Polynesia
American Samoa
Cook Islands
French Polynesia
New Zealand
Niue
Pitcairn
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna
Architecture of South America
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
Territories

Aruba
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

vteGenres of modern architectureAlphabetically
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Bauhaus
Blobitecture
Brutalism
Bowellism
Constructivism
Contemporary
Critical regionalism
De Stijl
Deconstructivism
Expressionism
Functionalism
Futurism
Googie
High-tech
International style
Metabolism
Mid-Century modern
Modernisme
Monumentalism
Neo-Futurism
Neomodern
New Classical
New Objectivity
Organicism
Postconstructivism
Postmodernism
PWA Moderne
Prairie School
Rationalist-Fascist
Stalinist
Streamline Moderne
Stripped Classicism
Structuralism
By start year /decade
Modernisme (1888–1911)
Art Nouveau (1890–1910)
Prairie School (1890s–1920s)
Expressionism (1910–)
Stripped Classicism (1913–)
De Stijl (1917–1931)
Bauhaus (1919–1933)
Constructivism (1920–1932)
New Objectivity (1922–1933)
Streamline Moderne (1925–1950)
Rationalist-Fascist (1920s–1930s)
International style (1920s–)
Functionalism (1920s–1970s)
Futurism (1920s–)
Organicism (1920s–)
Art Deco (1910–1939)
Postconstructivism (1930s)
PWA Moderne (1933–1944)
Stalinist (1930s–1950s)
Googie (1930s–1970)
Mid-century modern (1933–1969)
Brutalism (1940s–late 1970s)
Structuralism (1959–)
Metabolism (1959–)
Postmodernism (1960s–)
Blobitecture (1960s–)
Neo-futurism (1960s–)
High-tech (1970s–)
Critical regionalism (1980s–)
Deconstructivism (1980s–)
Neomodern (1990s–)
New Classical (1990s–)
Contemporary (2000s–)

 Architecture portal
Related articles

vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism

Authority control: National libraries 
Germany
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_architecture&oldid=1114641216"
Categories: Architectural historyArchitectural designArt history by mediumHidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors listCS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2019Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 Romanian-language sources (ro)Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2021All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2021All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2022Articles containing German-language textArticles containing Russian-language textCommons category link from WikidataArticles with Curlie linksArticles with GND identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiversity




Languages


العربيةAsturianuCatalàČeštinaCymraegDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենItalianoעבריתLatinaMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپښتوPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 14:35 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










