



Love - Wikipedia

































Love

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Emotion
For other uses, see Love (disambiguation).


Part of a series onLove
Types of love
Affection
Bonding
Broken heart
Compassionate love
Conjugal love
Courtly love
courtship
troubadours
Falling in love
Friendship
cross-sex
romantic
zone
Interpersonal relationship
Intimacy
Limerence
Love addiction
Love at first sight
Love triangle
Lovesickness
Lovestruck
Obsessive love
Passion
Platonic love
Puppy love
Relationship
Romance
Self-love
Amour de soi
Unconditional love
Unrequited love

Social views
Anarchist
Free love
Chinese
Ren
Yuanfen
French
Amour-propre
Greek
words for love
Agape
Eros
Ludus
Mania
Philautia
Philia
Philos
Pragma
Storge
Xenia
Indian
Kama
Bhakti
Maitrī
Islamic
Ishq
Jewish
Chesed
Latin
Amor
Charity
Portuguese
Saudade
Yaghan
Mamihlapinatapai

Concepts
Color wheel theory of love
Biological basis
Love letter
Love magic
Valentine's Day
Philosophy
Religious views
love deities
Mere-exposure effect
Similarity
Physical attractiveness
Triangular theory of love
vte
Part of a series onEmotions

Affect
Classification
In animals
Emotional intelligence
Mood
Regulation
Interpersonal
Dysregulation
Valence


Emotions
Acceptance
Admiration
Affection
Amusement
Anger
Angst
Anguish
Annoyance
Anticipation
Anxiety
Apathy
Arousal
Awe
Boredom
Confidence
Confusion
Contempt
Contentment
Courage
Curiosity
Depression
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Distrust
Doubt
Ecstasy
Elevation
Embarrassment
Empathy
Enthusiasm
Envy
Euphoria
Faith
Fear
Frustration
Gratification
Gratitude
Greed
Grief
Guilt
Happiness
Hatred
Hope
Horror
Hostility
Humiliation
Interest
Jealousy
Joy
Kindness
Loneliness
Love
Lust
Nostalgia
Outrage
Panic
Passion
Pity
Pleasure
Pride
Rage
Regret
Rejection
Relief
Remorse
Resentment
Sadness
Saudade
Schadenfreude
Self-pity
Shame
Shock
Shyness
Social connection
Sorrow
Suffering
Surprise
Suspicion
Trust
Wonder
Worry

vte


This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.

Love encompasses a range of strong and positive emotional and mental states, from the most sublime virtue or good habit, the deepest interpersonal affection, to the simplest pleasure.[1][2] An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse, which differs from the love for food. Most commonly, love refers to a feeling of a strong attraction and emotional attachment.[3][4][5]
Love is considered to be both positive and negative, with its virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection, as "the unselfish loyal and benevolent concern for the good of another" and its vice representing human moral flaw, akin to vanity, selfishness, amour-propre, and egotism, as potentially leading people into a type of mania, obsessiveness or codependency.[6][7] It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, one's self, or animals.[8] In its various forms, love acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships and, owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts.[9] Love has been postulated to be a function that keeps human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.[10]
Ancient Greek philosophers identified six forms of love: essentially, familial love (in Greek, Storge), friendly love or platonic love (Philia), romantic love (Eros), self-love (Philautia), guest love (Xenia), and divine love (Agape). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: unrequited love, empty love, companionate love, consummate love, infatuated love, self-love, and courtly love. Numerous cultures have also distinguished Ren, Yuanfen, Mamihlapinatapai, Cafuné, Kama, Bhakti, Mettā, Ishq, Chesed, Amore, Charity, Saudade (and other variants or symbioses of these states), as culturally unique words, definitions, or expressions of love in regards to a specified "moments" currently lacking in the English language.[11][12][13]
Scientific research on emotion has increased significantly over the past two decades. The color wheel theory of love defines three primary, three secondary and nine tertiary love styles, describing them in terms of the traditional color wheel. The triangular theory of love suggests "intimacy, passion and commitment" are core components of love. Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings combined with the complexity of the feelings involved makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.

Contents

1 Definitions
2 Impersonal
3 Interpersonal

3.1 Biological basis
3.2 Psychological basis
3.3 Evolutionary basis
3.4 Adaptive benefit
3.5 Comparison of scientific models


4 Cultural views

4.1 Ancient Greek
4.2 Ancient Roman (Latin)
4.3 Chinese and other Sinic
4.4 Japanese
4.5 Indian
4.6 Persian


5 Religious views

5.1 Abrahamic

5.1.1 Judaism
5.1.2 Christianity
5.1.3 Islam
5.1.4 Bahá'í Faith


5.2 Dharmic

5.2.1 Buddhism
5.2.2 Hinduism




6 Political views

6.1 Free love


7 Philosophical views
8 See also
9 References
10 Sources
11 Further reading
12 External links



Definitions
 Romeo and Juliet, depicted as they part on the balcony in Act III, 1867 by Ford Madox Brown
The word "love" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as "love"; one example is the plurality of Greek concepts for "love" (agape, eros, philia, storge) .[14] Cultural differences in conceptualizing love thus doubly impede the establishment of a universal definition.[15]
Although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what isn't love (antonyms of "love"). Love as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of like) is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy). As a less-sexual and more-emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust. As an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word love is often applied to close friendships or platonic love. (Further possible ambiguities come with usages "girlfriend", "boyfriend", "just good friends").

 Fraternal love (Prehispanic sculpture from 250 to 900 AD, of Huastec origin). Museum of Anthropology in Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico Abstractly discussed, love usually refers to an experience one person feels for another. Love often involves caring for, or identifying with, a person or thing (cf. vulnerability and care theory of love), including oneself (cf. narcissism). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.[16]
The complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating cliché. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's "Love conquers all" to The Beatles' "All You Need Is Love". St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as "to will the good of another."[17] Bertrand Russell describes love as a condition of "absolute value," as opposed to relative value.[citation needed] Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is "to be delighted by the happiness of another."[18] Meher Baba stated that in love there is a "feeling of unity" and an "active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love."[19] Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as "unconditional selflessness".[20]

Impersonal
People can be said to love an object, principle, or goal to which they are deeply committed and greatly value. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' "love" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions.[21] People can also "love" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia.[22]

Interpersonal
Relationships(Outline)
Types
Genetic or adoptive
Kinship
Family
Parent
father
mother
Grandparent
Sibling
Cousin

By marriage

Spouse
Husband
Wife
Open marriage


Polygamy
Polyandry
Polygyny

Group marriage
Mixed-orientation

Partner(s)

Significant other
Boyfriend
Girlfriend
Cohabitation
Same-sex
Life partner
Friendship (romantic / cross-sex / zone)

Intimate and sexual

Casual
Monogamy
Non-monogamy
Mutual monogamy
Polyamory
Polyfidelity


Cicisbeo
Concubinage
Courtesan
Mistress




Activities
Bonding
Courtship
Dating
Engagement
Bachelor's Day
Mating
Meet market
Romance
Singles event
Wedding

Endings
Breakup
Legal/marital separation
Annulment
Divorce
Widowhood

Emotions and feelings
Affinity
Attachment
Intimacy
Jealousy
Limerence
Love
Platonic
Unconditional
Passion
Sexuality

Practices
Bride price
dower
dowry
service
Hypergamy
Infidelity
Sexual activity
Transgression
Repression

Abuse
Child
Dating
Domestic
Elderly
Narcissistic parent
Power and control
Stalking
vte
Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than a simple liking for a person. Unrequited love refers to those feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with Interpersonal relationships.[21] Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are also a number of psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.
Throughout history, philosophy and religion have done the most speculation on the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has written a great deal on the subject. In recent years, the sciences of psychology, anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have added to the understanding of the concept of love.

Biological basis
Main article: Biological basis of love
Biological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst.[23] Helen Fisher, an anthropologist and human behavior researcher, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners mates find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security.[24] Three distinct neural circuitries, including neurotransmitters, and three behavioral patterns, are associated with these three romantic styles.[24]

 Pair of Lovers. 1480–1485
Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of chemicals such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate forms. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones, dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, loss of appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research has indicated that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.[25]
Since the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin to a greater degree than short-term relationships have.[25] Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.[26]


Psychological basis
Further information: Human bonding
 Grandmother and grandchild in Sri Lanka
Psychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon. Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love and argued that love has three different components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is a form in which two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment, on the other hand, is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. The last form of love is sexual attraction and passion. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Lastly, consummate love includes all three components.[27] American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define love by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work states that three factors constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.[28][29]
Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were developed, such as "opposites attract". Over the last century, research on the nature of human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality—people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), since this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds.[30] In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.
Some Western authorities disaggregate into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the "concern for the spiritual growth of another," and simple narcissism.[31] In combination, love is an activity, not simply a feeling.
Psychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book The Art of Loving that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact, the "feeling" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time.[21] In this sense, Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration.[21] Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.[21]

Evolutionary basis
 Wall of Love on Montmartre in Paris: "I love you" in 250 languages, by calligraphist Fédéric Baron and artist Claire Kito (2000)
Evolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Furthermore, researchers as early as Charles Darwin himself identified unique features of human love compared to other mammals and credit love as a major factor for creating social support systems that enabled the development and expansion of the human species.[32] Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy.[33]

Adaptive benefit
Interpersonal love between a male and a female is considered to provide an evolutionary adaptive benefit since it facilitates mating and sexual reproduction.[34] However, some organisms can reproduce asexually without mating.  Thus understanding the adaptive benefit of interpersonal love depends on understanding the adaptive benefit of sexual reproduction as opposed to asexual reproduction.  Michod[34] has reviewed evidence that love, and consequently sexual reproduction, provides two major adaptive advantages.  First, love leading to sexual reproduction facilitates repair of damages in the DNA that is passed from parent to progeny (during meiosis, a key stage of the sexual process).   Second, a gene in either parent may contain a harmful mutation, but in the progeny produced by sex reproduction, expression of a harmful mutation introduced by one parent is likely to be masked by expression of the unaffected homologous gene from the other parent.[34]

Comparison of scientific models
Biological models of love tend to see it as a mammalian drive, similar to hunger or thirst.[23] Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Certainly, love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.

Cultural views
Ancient Greek
See also: Greek words for love
 Roman copy of a Greek sculpture by Lysippus depicting Eros, the Greek personification of romantic love
Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word "love" is used. Ancient Greeks identified four forms of love: kinship or familiarity (in Greek, storge), friendship and/or platonic desire (philia), sexual and/or romantic desire (eros), and self-emptying or divine love (agape).[35][36] Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love.[37] However, with Greek (as with many other languages), it has been historically difficult to separate the meanings of these words totally. At the same time, the Ancient Greek text of the Bible has examples of the verb agapo having the same meaning as phileo.
Agape (ἀγάπη agápē) means love in modern-day Greek. The term s'agapo means I love you in Greek. The word agapo is the verb I love. It generally refers to a "pure," ideal type of love, rather than the physical attraction suggested by eros. However, there are some examples of agape used to mean the same as eros. It has also been translated as "love of the soul."[38]
Eros (ἔρως érōs) (from the Greek deity Eros) is passionate love, with sensual desire and longing. The Greek word erota means in love. Plato refined his own definition. Although eros is initially felt for a person, with contemplation it becomes an appreciation of the beauty within that person, or even becomes appreciation of beauty itself. Eros helps the soul recall knowledge of beauty and contributes to an understanding of spiritual truth. Lovers and philosophers are all inspired to seek truth by eros. Some translations list it as "love of the body".[38]
Philia (φιλία philía), a dispassionate virtuous love, was a concept addressed and developed by Aristotle in his Nicomachean Ethics Book VIII.[39] It includes loyalty to friends, family, and community, and requires virtue, equality, and familiarity. Philia is motivated by practical reasons; one or both of the parties benefit from the relationship. It can also mean "love of the mind."
Storge (στοργή storgē) is natural affection, like that felt by parents for offspring.
Xenia (ξενία xenía), hospitality, was an extremely important practice in ancient Greece. It was an almost ritualized friendship formed between a host and his guest, who could previously have been strangers. The host fed and provided quarters for the guest, who was expected to repay only with gratitude. The importance of this can be seen throughout Greek mythology—in particular, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.

Ancient Roman (Latin)
The Latin language has several different verbs corresponding to the English word "love." amō is the basic verb meaning I love, with the infinitive amare ("to love") as it still is in Italian today. The Romans used it both in an affectionate sense as well as in a romantic or sexual sense. From this verb come amans—a lover, amator, "professional lover," often with the accessory notion of lechery—and amica, "girlfriend" in the English sense, often being applied euphemistically to a prostitute. The corresponding noun is amor (the significance of this term for the Romans is well illustrated in the fact, that the name of the city, Rome—in Latin: Roma—can be viewed as an anagram for amor, which was used as the secret name of the City in wide circles in ancient times),[40] which is also used in the plural form to indicate love affairs or sexual adventures. This same root also produces amicus—"friend"—and amicitia, "friendship" (often based to mutual advantage, and corresponding sometimes more closely to "indebtedness" or "influence"). Cicero wrote a treatise called On Friendship (de Amicitia), which discusses the notion at some length. Ovid wrote a guide to dating called Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love), which addresses, in depth, everything from extramarital affairs to overprotective parents.
Latin sometimes uses amāre where English would simply say to like. This notion, however, is much more generally expressed in Latin by the terms placere or delectāre, which are used more colloquially, the latter used frequently in the love poetry of Catullus. Diligere often has the notion "to be affectionate for," "to esteem," and rarely if ever is used for romantic love. This word would be appropriate to describe the friendship of two men. The corresponding noun diligentia, however, has the meaning of "diligence" or "carefulness," and has little semantic overlap with the verb. Observare is a synonym for diligere; despite the cognate with English, this verb and its corresponding noun, observantia, often denote "esteem" or "affection." Caritas is used in Latin translations of the Christian Bible to mean "charitable love"; this meaning, however, is not found in Classical pagan Roman literature. As it arises from a conflation with a Greek word, there is no corresponding verb.

Chinese and other Sinic
 愛 (Mandarin: ài), the traditional Chinese character for love contains a heart (心) in the middle.
Two philosophical underpinnings of love exist in the Chinese tradition, one from Confucianism which emphasized actions and duty while the other came from Mohism which championed a universal love. A core concept to Confucianism is 仁 (Ren, "benevolent love"), which focuses on duty, action, and attitude in a relationship rather than love itself. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parents, loyalty to the king and so forth.
The concept of 愛 (Mandarin: ài) was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of "universal love" (兼愛, jiān'ài). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation; not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term Ai (愛) was adopted to refer to a passionate, caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, Ai was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.
In Mandarin Chinese, 愛 (ài) is often used as the equivalent of the Western concept of love. 愛 (ài) is used as both a verb (e.g. 我愛你, Wǒ ài nǐ, or "I love you") and a noun (such as 愛情 àiqíng, or "romantic love"). However, due to the influence of Confucian 仁 (rén), the phrase 我愛你 (Wǒ ài nǐ, I love you) carries with it a very specific sense of responsibility, commitment and loyalty. Instead of frequently saying "I love you" as in some Western societies, the Chinese are more likely to express feelings of affection in a more casual way. Consequently, "I like you" (我喜欢你, Wǒ xǐhuan nǐ) is a more common way of expressing affection in Mandarin; it is more playful and less serious.[41] This is also true in Japanese (suki da, 好きだ).

Japanese
The Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of "love". Because "love" covers a wide range of emotions and behavioral phenomena, there are nuances distinguishing the three terms.[42][43] The term ai (愛), which is often associated with maternal love[42] or selfless love,[43] originally referred to beauty and was often used in a religious context. Following the Meiji Restoration 1868, the term became associated with "love" in order to translate Western literature. Prior to Western influence, the term koi (恋 or 孤悲) generally represented romantic love, and was often the subject of the popular Man'yōshū Japanese poetry collection.[42] Koi describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typically interpreted as selfish and wanting.[43] The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of koi focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire.[42] The third term, ren'ai (恋愛), is a more modern construction that combines the kanji characters for both ai and koi, though its usage more closely resembles that of koi in the form of romantic love.[42][43] Amae (甘え), referring to the desire to be loved and cared for by an authority figure, is another important aspect of Japan's cultural perspective on love, and has been analysed in detail in Takeo Doi's The Anatomy of Dependence[44]

Indian
 The love stories of the Hindu deities Krishna and Radha have influenced the Indian culture and arts. Above: Radha Madhavam by Raja Ravi Varma.
In contemporary literature, the Sanskrit words for love is "sneha". Other terms such as Priya refers to innocent love, Prema refers to spiritual love, and Kama refers usually to sexual desire.[45][46] However, the term also refers to any sensory enjoyment, emotional attraction and aesthetic pleasure such as from arts, dance, music, painting, sculpture and nature.[47][48]
The concept of kama is found in some of the earliest known verses in Vedas. For example, Book 10 of Rig Veda describes the creation of the universe from nothing by the great heat. There in hymn 129, it states:


कामस्तदग्रे समवर्तताधि मनसो रेतः परथमं यदासीत |
सतो बन्धुमसति निरविन्दन हर्दि परतीष्याकवयो मनीषा ||[49]

Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire the primal seed and germ of Spirit,
Sages who searched with their heart's thought discovered the existent's kinship in the non-existent.

— Rig Veda, ~ 15th century BC[50]

Persian



The children of Adam are limbs of one body
Having been created of one essence.
When the calamity of time afflicts one limb
The other limbs cannot remain at rest.
If you have no sympathy for the troubles of others
You are not worthy to be called by the name of "man".



Sa'di, Gulistan   


Rumi, Hafiz, and Sa'di are icons of the passion and love that the Persian culture and language present.[citation needed] The Persian word for love is Ishq, which is derived from Arabic language; however, it is considered by most to be too stalwart a term for interpersonal love and is more commonly substituted for "doost dashtan" ("liking").[citation needed] In the Persian culture, everything is encompassed by love and all is for love, starting from loving friends and family, husbands and wives, and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life.[citation needed]

Religious views
Main article: Religious views on love
Abrahamic
 Robert Indiana's 1977 Love sculpture spelling ahava
Judaism
See also: Jewish views on love
In Hebrew, אהבה (ahava) is the most commonly used term for both interpersonal love and love between God and God's creations. Chesed, often translated as loving-kindness, is used to describe many forms of love between human beings.
The commandment to love other people is given in the Torah, which states, "Love your neighbor like yourself" (Leviticus 19:18). The Torah's commandment to love God "with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might" (Deuteronomy 6:5) is taken by the Mishnah (a central text of the Jewish oral law) to refer to good deeds, willingness to sacrifice one's life rather than commit certain serious transgressions, willingness to sacrifice all of one's possessions, and being grateful to the Lord despite adversity (tractate Berachoth 9:5). Rabbinic literature differs as to how this love can be developed, e.g., by contemplating divine deeds or witnessing the marvels of nature.
As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: "See life with the wife you love" (Ecclesiastes 9:9). Rabbi David Wolpe writes that "...love is not only about the feelings of the lover...It is when one person believes in another person and shows it." He further states that "...love...is a feeling that expresses itself in action. What we really feel is reflected in what we do."[51] The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading, reads like a love song. The 20th-century rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as "giving without expecting to take" (from his Michtav me-Eliyahu, Vol. 1).

Christianity
 Love and not a one-way street in romanticism
The Christian understanding is that love comes from God, who is himself Love (1 Jn 4:8). The love of man and woman—eros in Greek—and the unselfish love of others (agape), are often contrasted as "descending" and "ascending" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing.[52]
There are several Greek words for "love" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.

Agape: In the New Testament, agapē is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.[38]
Phileo: Also used in the New Testament, phileo is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as "brotherly love."
Two other words for love in the Greek language, eros (sexual love) and storge (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.[38]
Christians believe that to Love God with all your heart, mind, and strength and Love your neighbor as yourself are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark chapter 12, verses 28–34). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote "Love God, and do as thou wilt."
The Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, "Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres."[53]
The Apostle John wrote, "For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him." (John 3:16–17, NIV) John also wrote, "Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love."[54]
Saint Augustine wrote that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, "I was in love with love." Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God, because love with a human only allows for flaws such as "jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention." According to Saint Augustine, to love God is "to attain the peace which is yours." (Saint Augustine's Confessions)
Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of De Doctrina Christiana (1.22.21–1.40.44;).[55]
Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C. S. Lewis wrote a book called The Four Loves. Benedict XVI named his first encyclical God is love. He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others (agape) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and Mary, the mother of Jesus and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.[52]
Pope Francis taught that "True love is both loving and letting oneself be loved...what is important in love is not our loving, but allowing ourselves to be loved by God."[56] And so, in the analysis of a Catholic theologian, for Pope Francis, "the key to love...is not our activity. It is the activity of the greatest, and the source, of all the powers in the universe: God's."[57]
In Christianity the practical definition of love is summarised by Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as "to will the good of another," or to desire for another to succeed.[17] This is an explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. As Thomas Aquinas explains, Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.
Regarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew:
"You have heard that it was said, 'Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.' But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect."[58]
Do not forget to love with forgiveness, Christ saved an adulterous woman from those who would stone her. A world of wronged hypocrites needs forgiving love. Mosaic Law would hold Deuteronomy 22:22-24 "If a man is found lying with a woman married to a husband, then both of them shall die—the man that lay with the woman, and the woman; so you shall put away the evil from Israel. If a young woman who is a virgin is betrothed to a husband, and a man finds her in the city and lies with her, then you shall bring them both out to the gate of that city, and you shall stone them to death with stones, the young woman because she did not cry out in the city, and the man because he humbled his neighbor's wife; so you shall put away the evil from among you."
Tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: "Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians."[59]

Islam
 In Islam, one of the 99 names of God is Al-Wadūd, which means "The Loving"
Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Amongst the 99 names of God (Allah), there is the name Al-Wadud, or "the Loving One," which is found in Surah  [ 11:90] as well as Surah  [ 85:14]. God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim, or the "Most Compassionate" and the "Most Merciful", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being "full of loving kindness."
The Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them, with birr or "deep kindness" as stated in Surah  [ 6:8-9]. Birr is also used by the Qur'an in describing the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.
Ishq, or divine love, is the emphasis of Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God to the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God "looks" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices seeing  the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love.[60] God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms, which are the Lover, Loved, and Beloved, with the last of these terms being often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can get back to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being "drunk" due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.

Bahá'í Faith
In his Paris Talks, `Abdu'l-Bahá described four types of love: the love that flows from God to human beings; the love that flows from human beings to God; the love of God towards the Self or Identity of God; and the love of human beings for human beings.[61]

Dharmic
Buddhism
In Buddhism, Kāma is sensuous, sexual love. It is an obstacle on the path to enlightenment, since it is selfish. Karuṇā is compassion and mercy, which reduces the suffering of others. It is complementary to wisdom and is necessary for enlightenment. Adveṣa and mettā are benevolent love. This love is unconditional and requires considerable self-acceptance. This is quite different from ordinary love, which is usually about attachment and sex and which rarely occurs without self-interest. Instead, in Buddhism it refers to detachment and unselfish interest in others' welfare.
The Bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism involves the complete renunciation of oneself in order to take on the burden of a suffering world.

Hinduism
Main articles: Kama and Kama Sutra
 Kama (left) with Rati on a temple wall of Chennakesava Temple, Belur
In Hinduism, kāma is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end (Kama) in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava temple at Belur, in Karnataka, India. Maara is another name for kāma.
In contrast to kāma, prema – or prem – refers to elevated love. Karuna is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. Bhakti is a Sanskrit term, meaning "loving devotion to the supreme God." A person who practices bhakti is called a bhakta. Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of bhakti, which can be found in the Bhagavata Purana and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work Narada Bhakti Sutras, written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.
In certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unadulterated, unconditional and incessant love for Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes consider Love for Godhead (Prema) to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)—two opposites.[62]
In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union, there is supreme happiness and nectarean. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (Love for Godhead) is not fire but that it still burns away one's material desires. They consider that Kṛṣṇa-prema is not a weapon, but it still pierces the heart. It is not water, but it washes away everything—one's pride, religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of material realm as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India such as the Gita Govinda and Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.
In the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God (taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination (krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination. and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.[63]

Political views
Free love
Main article: Free love
The term "free love" has been used[64] to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage. The free love movement's initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery. It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.[65]
Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to "fulfill earthly human happiness." Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.[66]
Advocates of free love had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases.[67] These are also beliefs of feminism.[68]

Philosophical views
Main article: Philosophy of love
The philosophy of love is a field of social philosophy and ethics that attempts to explain the nature of love.[69] The philosophical investigation of love includes the tasks of distinguishing between the various kinds of personal love, asking if and how love is or can be justified, asking what the value of love is, and what impact love has on the autonomy of both the lover and the beloved.[68]

See also
Color wheel theory of love
Human bonding
Love at first sight
Love-in
Pair bond
Polyamory
Relationship science
Romance (love)
Self-love
Social connection
Traditional forms, Agape, Philia, Philautia, Storge, Eros: Greek terms for love
References


^ "Definition of Love in English". Oxford English Dictionary. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2018.

^ "Definition of "Love" - English Dictionary". Cambridge English Dictionary. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2018.

^ Oxford Illustrated American Dictionary (1998)

^ "Definition of LOVE". Definition of Love by Merriam-Webster. 27 December 1987. Retrieved 30 September 2021.

^ "Love Definitions | What does love mean? | Best 91 Definitions of Love". www.yourdictionary.com. Retrieved 12 July 2022.

^ Roget's Thesaurus (1998) p. 592 and p. 639

^ "Love – Definition of love by Merriam-Webster". merriam-webster.com. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 14 December 2011.

^ Fromm, Erich; The Art of Loving, Harper Perennial (1956), Original English Version, ISBN 978-0-06-095828-2

^ "Article On Love". Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011.

^ Helen Fisher. Why We Love: the nature and chemistry of romantic love. 2004.

^ "What Is Love? A Philosophy of Life". HuffPost. 5 December 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2020.

^ Liddell and Scott: φιλία Archived 3 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine

^ Mascaró, Juan (2003). The Bhagavad Gita. Penguin Classics. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-044918-1. (J. Mascaró, translator)

^ Anders Nygren, Agape and Eros.

^ Kay, Paul; Kempton, Willett (March 1984). "What is the Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis?". American Anthropologist. New Series. 86 (1): 65–79. doi:10.1525/aa.1984.86.1.02a00050.

^ "Ancient Love Poetry". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ a b "St. Thomas Aquinas, STh I–II, 26, 4, corp. art". Newadvent.org. Archived from the original on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2010.

^ Leibniz, Gottfried. "Confessio philosophi". Wikisource edition. Archived from the original on 27 April 2009. Retrieved 25 March 2009.

^ Baba, Meher (1995). Discourses. Myrtle Beach: Sheriar Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-1-880619-09-4.

^ What is love?. In The Book of Real Answers to Everything! Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Griffith, J. 2011. ISBN 978-1-74129-007-3.

^ a b c d e Fromm, Erich; The Art of Loving, Harper Perennial (5 September 2000), Original English Version, ISBN 978-0-06-095828-2

^ DiscoveryHealth. "Paraphilia". Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 16 December 2007.

^ a b Lewis, Thomas; Amini, F.; Lannon, R. (2000). A General Theory of Love. Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-70922-7.

^ a b 
"Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2011.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Defining the Brain Systems of Lust, Romantic Attraction,
and Attachment by Fisher et al.

^ a b Winston, Robert (2004). Human. Smithsonian Institution. ISBN 978-0-03-093780-4.

^ Emanuele, E.; Polliti, P.; Bianchi, M.; Minoretti, P.; Bertona, M.; Geroldi, D. (2005). "Raised plasma nerve growth factor levels associated with early-stage romantic love". Psychoneuroendocrinology. 31 (3): 288–294. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2005.09.002. PMID 16289361. S2CID 18497668. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 3 December 2006.

^ Sternberg, R.J. (1986). "A triangular theory of love". Psychological Review. 93 (2): 119–135. doi:10.1037/0033-295x.93.2.119.

^ Rubin, Zick (1970). "Measurement of Romantic Love". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 16 (2): 265–273. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.452.3207. doi:10.1037/h0029841. PMID 5479131.

^ Rubin, Zick (1973). Liking and Loving: an invitation to social psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. ISBN 9780030830037.

^ Berscheid, Ellen; Walster, Elaine H. (1969). Interpersonal Attraction. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. ISBN 978-0-201-00560-8. CCCN 69-17443.

^ Peck, Scott (1978). The Road Less Traveled. Simon & Schuster. p. 169. ISBN 978-0-671-25067-6.

^ Loye, David S. (2000). Darwin's Lost Theory of Love: A Healing Vision for the 21st Century. iUniverse. p. 332. ISBN 978-0-595-00131-6.

^ The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by David M. Buss, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005. Chapter 14, Commitment, Love, and Mate Retention by Lorne Campbell and Bruce J. Ellis.

^ a b c Michod, R.E. (1989). What’s love got to do with it? The solution to one of evolution’s greatest riddles. The Sciences, May/June, 22-27. DOI:10.1002/j.2326-1951.1989.tb02156.x

^ C. S. Lewis, The Four Loves, 1960.

^ Kristeller, Paul Oskar (1980). Renaissance Thought and the Arts: Collected Essays. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02010-5.

^ Stendhal, in his book On Love ("De l'amour"; Paris, 1822), distinguished carnal love, passionate love, a kind of uncommitted love that he called "taste-love", and love of vanity. Denis de Rougemont in his book Love in the Western World traced the story of passionate love (l'amour-passion) from its courtly to its romantic forms. Benjamin Péret, in the introduction to his Anthology of Sublime Love (Paris, 1956), further identified "sublime love", a state of realized idealisation perhaps equatable with the romantic form of passionate love.

^ a b c d Anders Theodor Samuel Nygren, Eros and Agape (first published in Swedish, 1930–1936).

^ "Philosophy of Love | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017.

^ Thomas Köves-Zulauf, Reden und Schweigen, Munich, 1972.

^ JFK Miller, "Why the Chinese Don't Say I Love You Archived 24 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine"

^ a b c d e Ryang, Sonia (2006). Love in Modern Japan: Its Estrangement from Self, Sex and Society. Routledge. pp. 13–14. ISBN 978-1-135-98863-0. Archived from the original on 11 July 2016. Retrieved 3 February 2016.

^ a b c d Abe, Namiko. "Japanese Words for "Love": The Difference between "Ai" and "Koi"". About.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 5 November 2014.

^ Herman W Smith & Takako Nomi (2000). "Is amae the Key to Understanding Japanese Culture?". Electronic Journal of Sociology. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014.

^ Monier Williams, काम, kāma Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine Monier-Williams Sanskrit English Dictionary, p. 271, see 3rd column

^ James Lochtefeld (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Volume 1, Rosen Publishing, New York, ISBN 0-8239-2287-1, p. 340

^ See:
Kate Morris (2011), The Illustrated Dictionary of History, ISBN 978-81-89093-37-2, p. 124;
Robert E. Van Voorst, RELG: World, Wadsworth, ISBN 978-1-111-72620-1, p. 78

^ R. Prasad (2008), History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization, Volume 12, Part 1, ISBN 978-81-8069-544-5, pp. 249–270

^ Rig Veda Book 10 Hymn 129 Archived 16 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine Verse 4

^ Ralph Griffith (Translator, 1895), The Hymns of the Rig veda Archived 10 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Book X, Hymn CXXIX, Verse 4, p. 575

^ Wolpe, David (16 February 2016). "We Are Defining Love the Wrong Way". Time. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 14 February 2019.

^ a b Pope Benedict XVI. "papal encyclical, Deus Caritas Est". Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2008.

^ 1 Corinthians 13:4–7

^ 1 John 4:7–8

^ Woo, B. Hoon (2013). "Augustine's Hermeneutics and Homiletics in De doctrina christiana". Journal of Christian Philosophy. 17: 97–117.

^ "Sri Lanka – Philippines: Meeting with the young people in the sports field of Santo Tomas University (Manila, 18 January 2015) – Francis". w2.vatican.va. Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018.

^ Nidoy, Raul (13 February 2015). "The key to love according to Pope Francis". Archived from the original on 24 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018.

^ Matthew 5: 43–48

^ Swartley, Willard M. (1992). The Love of Enemy and Nonretaliation in the New Testament, Studies in peace and scripture; (As Scapulam I) cited by Hans Haas, Idee und Ideal de Feindesliebe in der ausserchristlichen Welt (Leipzig: University of Leipzig, 1927). Westminster John Knox Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-664-25354-7.

^ Lewisohn, Leonard (2014). Cambridge Companions to Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 150–180.

^ "Bahá'í Reference Library – Paris Talks". reference.bahai.org. pp. 179–181. Archived from the original on 20 August 2014. Retrieved 4 September 2014.

^ Gour Govinda Swami. "Wonderful Characteristic of Krishna Prema, Gour Govinda Swami". Facebook. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2012.

^ A C Bhaktivedanta Swami. "Being Perfectly in Love". Archived from the original on 23 November 2014. Retrieved 7 January 2012.

^ The Handbook Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine of the Oneida Community claims to have coined the term around 1850, and laments that its use was appropriated by socialists to attack marriage, an institution that they felt protected women and children from abandonment

^ McElroy, Wendy (1996). "The Free Love Movement and Radical Individualism". Libertarian Enterprise. 19: 1.

^ Spurlock, John C. Free Love Marriage and Middle-Class Radicalism in America. New York, NY: New York UP, 1988.

^ Passet, Joanne E. Sex Radicals and the Quest for Women's Equality. Chicago: U of Illinois P, 2003.

^ a b Laurie, Timothy; Stark, Hannah (2017), "Love's Lessons: Intimacy, Pedagogy and Political Community", Angelaki: Journal of the Theoretical Humanities, 22 (4): 69–79, doi:10.1080/0969725x.2017.1406048, S2CID 149182610

^ Soren Kierkegaard. Works of Love.


Sources

Chadwick, Henry (1998). Saint Augustine Confessions. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-283372-3.
Fisher, Helen (2004). Why We Love: the Nature and Chemistry of Romantic Love. New York : H. Holt. ISBN 978-0-8050-6913-6.
Giles, James (1994). "A theory of love and sexual desire". Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour. 24 (4): 339–357. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5914.1994.tb00259.x.
Kierkegaard, Søren (2009). Works of Love. New York City: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. ISBN 978-0-06-171327-9.
Oord, Thomas Jay (2010). Defining Love: A Philosophical, Scientific, and Theological Engagement. Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos. ISBN 978-1-58743-257-6.
Singer, Irving (1966). The Nature of Love. Vol. (in three volumes) (v.1 reprinted and later volumes from The University of Chicago Press, 1984 ed.). Random House. ISBN 978-0-226-76094-0.
Sternberg, R.J. (1986). "A triangular theory of love". Psychological Review. 93 (2): 119–135. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.93.2.119.
Sternberg, R.J. (1987). "Liking versus loving: A comparative evaluation of theories". Psychological Bulletin. 102 (3): 331–345. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.102.3.331.
Tennov, Dorothy (1979). Love and Limerence: the Experience of Being in Love. New York: Stein and Day. ISBN 978-0-8128-6134-1.
Wood Samuel E., Ellen Wood and Denise Boyd (2005). The World of Psychology (5th ed.). Pearson Education. pp. 402–403. ISBN 978-0-205-35868-7.

Further reading
Bayer, A, ed. (2008). Art and love in Renaissance Italy. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
External links


Love  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata

History of Love, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Friendship at Curlie
Philanthropy at Curlie
Romance at Curlie
vteEmotions (list)Emotions
Acceptance
Admiration
Adoration
Aesthetic
Affection
Agitation
Agony
Amusement
Anger
Angst
Anguish
Annoyance
Anticipation
Anxiety
Apathy
Arousal
Attraction
Awe
Boredom
Calmness
Compassion
Confidence
Confusion
Contempt
Contentment
Courage
Cruelty
Curiosity
Defeat
Depression
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Distrust
Doubt
Ecstasy
Embarrassment
vicarious
Empathy
Emptiness
Enthrallment
Enthusiasm
Envy
Euphoria
Excitement
Faith
Fear
Flow
Frustration
Gratification
Gratitude
Greed
Grief
Guilt
Happiness
Hatred
Hiraeth
Homesickness
Hope
Horror
Hostility
Humiliation
Hygge
Hysteria
Indulgence
Infatuation
Insecurity
Inspiration
Interest
Irritation
Isolation
Jealousy
Joy
Kindness
Loneliness
Love
limerence
Lust
Mono no aware
Neglect
Nostalgia
Outrage
Panic
Passion
Pity
self-pity
Pleasure
Pride
grandiosity
hubris
insult
vanity
Rage
Regret
Rejection
Relief
Remorse
Resentment
Sadness
melancholy
Saudade
Schadenfreude
Sehnsucht
Sentimentality
Shame
Shock
Shyness
Social connection
Sorrow
Spite
Stress
chronic
Suffering
Surprise
Sympathy
Trust
Wonder
sense of wonder
Worry
Worldviews
Cynicism
Defeatism
Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz
Related
Affect
consciousness
in education
measures
in psychology
Affective
computing
forecasting
neuroscience
science
spectrum
Affectivity
positive
negative
Appeal to emotion
Emotion
and art
and memory
and music
and sex
and sleep
classification
evolution
expressed
functional accounts
group
homeostatic
in animals
perception
recognition
in conversation
regulation
interpersonal
work
Emotional
aperture
bias
blackmail
competence
conflict
contagion
detachment
dysregulation
eating
exhaustion
expression
and gender
intelligence
and bullying
intimacy
isolation
lability
labor
lateralization
literacy
prosody
reasoning
responsivity
security
symbiosis
well-being
Emotionality
bounded
Emotions
and culture
history
in decision-making
in the workplace
in virtual communication
moral
self-conscious
social
social sharing
sociology
Feeling
Group affective tone
Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems
Jealousy in art
Meta-emotion
Pathognomy
Pathos
Social emotional development
Stoic passions
Theory
affect
appraisal
constructed emotion
discrete emotion
somatic marker
Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages
vteInterpersonal relationshipsTypesRomantic
Boyfriend
Girlfriend
Cohabitation
Significant other
Domestic partnership
Same-sex relationship
Monogamy
Marriage
Husband
Wife
Soulmate
Widowhood
Non-monogamy
Open relationship
Open marriage
Polyamory
Polyfidelity
Polygamy
Concubinage
Mistress
Casual sex
Casual dating
Friends with benefits
Enjo kōsai
Sexual partner
One-night stand
Courtesan
Gigolo
Sugar dating
Non-romantic
Platonic love
Kinship
Family
Siblings
Friendship
Enemy
Stranger
Acquaintance
Historical
Cicisbeo
Seraglio
Plaçage
Marriage à la façon du pays
Royal mistress
Royal favorite
Maîtresse-en-titre
Romantic friendship
Events
Bonding
Courtship
Dating
Mating
Romance
Breakup
Annulment
Divorce
Separation
Legal
Marital
Meet market
Singles event
Wedding
Emotions
Affinity
Attachment
Compersion
Intimacy
Jealousy
Limerence
Love
Passion
Unconditional love
Practices
Bride price
Dower
Dowry
Gold digging
Hypergamy
Infidelity
Repression
Sexual activity
Transgression
Abuse
Child abuse
Dating violence
Domestic violence
Elder abuse

Authority control: National libraries 
Spain
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Love&oldid=1114694800"
Categories: LoveEmotionsEthical principlesFruit of the Holy SpiritPersonal lifeVirtueHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: archived copy as titleArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from January 2018Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing Sanskrit-language textArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2019Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012CS1: long volume valuePages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataPages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with Curlie linksArticles containing Welsh-language textArticles containing Danish-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAkanAlemannischአማርኛÆngliscالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽАварAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisFryskGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતીगोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi KonknniGungbe客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLi NihaLigureLimburgsLingálaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPicardPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSarduShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSiSwatiSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeTyapУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtWalon文言Winaray吴语Xitsongaייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 20:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










