



Microscope - Wikipedia










































Microscope

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Scientific instrument
This article is about microscopes, the instruments, in general. For light microscopes, see Optical microscope. For other uses, see Microscope (disambiguation).


This scientific article needs additional citations to secondary or tertiary sources such as review articles, monographs, or textbooks.  Please add such references to provide context and establish the relevance of any primary research articles cited. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


MicroscopeOptical microscope used at the Wiki Science Competition 2017 in ThailandUsesSmall sample observationNotable experimentsDiscovery of cellsRelated itemsOptical microscope Electron microscope
A microscope (from Ancient Greek  μικρός (mikrós) 'small', and  σκοπέω (skopéō) 'to look (at); examine, inspect') is a laboratory instrument used to examine objects that are too small to be seen by the naked eye. Microscopy is the science of investigating small objects and structures using a microscope. Microscopic means being invisible to the eye unless aided by a microscope.
There are many types of microscopes, and they may be grouped in different ways. One way is to describe the method an instrument uses to interact with a sample and produce images, either by sending a beam of light or electrons through a sample in its optical path, by detecting photon emissions from a sample, or by scanning across and a short distance from the surface of a sample using a probe. The most common microscope (and the first to be invented) is the optical microscope, which uses lenses to refract visible light that passed through a thinly sectioned sample to produce an observable image. Other major types of microscopes are the fluorescence microscope, electron microscope (both the transmission electron microscope and the scanning electron microscope) and various types of scanning probe microscopes.[1]

Contents

1 History

1.1 Rise of modern light microscopes
1.2 Electron microscopes
1.3 Scanning probe microscopes
1.4 Fluorescence microscopes
1.5 Super resolution microscopes
1.6 X-ray microscopes


2 Types

2.1 Optical microscope
2.2 Electron microscope
2.3 Scanning probe
2.4 Other types

2.4.1 Mobile apps




3 See also
4 References
5 External links


History
Further information: Timeline of microscope technology and Optical microscope § History
 18th-century microscopes from the Musée des Arts et Métiers, Paris
Although objects resembling lenses date back 4,000 years and there are Greek accounts of the optical properties of water-filled spheres (5th century BC) followed by many centuries of writings on optics, the earliest known use of simple microscopes (magnifying glasses) dates back to the widespread use of lenses in eyeglasses in the 13th century.[2][3][4] The earliest known examples of compound microscopes, which combine an objective lens near the specimen with an eyepiece to view a real image, appeared in Europe around 1620.[5] The inventor is unknown, even though many claims have been made over the years. Several revolve around the spectacle-making centers in the Netherlands, including claims it was invented in 1590 by Zacharias Janssen (claim made by his son) or Zacharias' father, Hans Martens, or both,[6][7] claims it was invented by their neighbor and rival spectacle maker, Hans Lippershey (who applied for the first telescope patent in 1608),[8] and claims it was invented by expatriate Cornelis Drebbel, who was noted to have a version in London in 1619.[9][10] Galileo Galilei (also sometimes cited as compound microscope inventor) seems to have found after 1610 that he could close focus his telescope to view small objects and, after seeing a compound microscope built by Drebbel exhibited in Rome in 1624, built his own improved version.[11][12][13] Giovanni Faber coined the name microscope for the compound microscope Galileo submitted to the Accademia dei Lincei in 1625[14] (Galileo had called it the occhiolino 'little eye').

Rise of modern light microscopes
 Carl Zeiss binocular compound microscope, 1914
The first detailed account of the microscopic anatomy of organic tissue based on the use of a microscope did not appear until 1644, in Giambattista Odierna's L'occhio della mosca, or The Fly's Eye.[15]
The microscope was still largely a novelty until the 1660s and 1670s when naturalists in Italy, the Netherlands and England began using them to study biology. Italian scientist Marcello Malpighi, called the father of histology by some historians of biology, began his analysis of biological structures with the lungs. The publication in 1665 of Robert Hooke's Micrographia had a huge impact, largely because of its impressive illustrations. A significant contribution came from Antonie van Leeuwenhoek who achieved up to 300 times magnification using a simple single lens microscope. He sandwiched a very small glass ball lens between the holes in two metal plates riveted together, and with an adjustable-by-screws needle attached to mount the specimen.[16] Then, Van Leeuwenhoek re-discovered red blood cells (after Jan Swammerdam) and spermatozoa, and helped popularise the use of microscopes to view biological ultrastructure. On 9 October 1676, van Leeuwenhoek reported the discovery of micro-organisms.[15]
The performance of a light microscope depends on the quality and correct use of the condensor lens system to focus light on the specimen and the objective lens to capture the light from the specimen and form an image.[5] Early instruments were limited until this principle was fully appreciated and developed from the late 19th to very early 20th century, and until electric lamps were available as light sources. In 1893 August Köhler developed a key principle of sample illumination, Köhler illumination, which is central to achieving the theoretical limits of resolution for the light microscope. This method of sample illumination produces even lighting and overcomes the limited contrast and resolution imposed by early techniques of sample illumination. Further developments in sample illumination came from the discovery of phase contrast by Frits Zernike in 1953, and differential interference contrast illumination by Georges Nomarski in 1955; both of which allow imaging of unstained, transparent samples.

Electron microscopes
See also: electron microscope
 Electron microscope constructed by Ernst Ruska in 1933
In the early 20th century a significant alternative to the light microscope was developed, an instrument that uses a beam of electrons rather than light to generate an image. The German physicist, Ernst Ruska, working with electrical engineer Max Knoll, developed the first prototype electron microscope in 1931, a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The transmission electron microscope works on similar principles to an optical microscope but uses electrons in the place of light and electromagnets in the place of glass lenses. Use of electrons, instead of light, allows for much higher resolution.
Development of the transmission electron microscope was quickly followed in 1935 by the development of the scanning electron microscope by Max Knoll.[17] Although TEMs were being used for research before WWII, and became popular afterwards, the SEM was not commercially available until 1965.
Transmission electron microscopes became popular following the Second World War. Ernst Ruska, working at Siemens, developed the first commercial transmission electron microscope and, in the 1950s, major scientific conferences on electron microscopy started being held. In 1965, the first commercial scanning electron microscope was developed by Professor Sir Charles Oatley and his postgraduate student Gary Stewart, and marketed by the Cambridge Instrument Company as the "Stereoscan".
One of the latest discoveries made about using an electron microscope is the ability to identify a virus.[18] Since this microscope produces a visible, clear image of small organelles, in an electron microscope there is no need for reagents to see the virus or harmful cells, resulting in a more efficient way to detect pathogens.

Scanning probe microscopes
See also: scanning probe microscope
From 1981 to 1983 Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer worked at IBM in Zurich, Switzerland to study the quantum tunnelling phenomenon. They created a practical instrument, a scanning probe microscope from quantum tunnelling theory, that read very small forces exchanged between a probe and the surface of a sample. The probe approaches the surface so closely that electrons can flow continuously between probe and sample, making a current from surface to probe. The microscope was not initially well received due to the complex nature of the underlying theoretical explanations. In 1984 Jerry Tersoff and D.R. Hamann, while at AT&T's Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey began publishing articles that tied theory to the experimental results obtained by the instrument. This was closely followed in 1985 with functioning commercial instruments, and in 1986 with Gerd Binnig, Quate, and Gerber's invention of the atomic force microscope, then Binnig's and Rohrer's Nobel Prize in Physics for the SPM.[19]
New types of scanning probe microscope have continued to be developed as the ability to machine ultra-fine probes and tips has advanced.

Fluorescence microscopes
See also: fluorescence microscope, immunofluorescence, and confocal microscope
 Fluorescence microscope with the filter cube turret above the objective lenses, coupled with a camera.
The most recent developments in light microscope largely centre on the rise of fluorescence microscopy in biology.[20] During the last decades of the 20th century, particularly in the post-genomic era, many techniques for fluorescent staining of cellular structures were developed.[20] The main groups of techniques involve targeted chemical staining of particular cell structures, for example, the chemical compound DAPI to label DNA, use of antibodies conjugated to fluorescent reporters, see
immunofluorescence, and fluorescent proteins, such as green fluorescent protein.[21] These techniques use these different fluorophores for analysis of cell structure at a molecular level in both live and fixed samples.
The rise of fluorescence microscopy drove the development of a major modern microscope design, the confocal microscope. The principle was patented in 1957 by Marvin Minsky, although laser technology limited practical application of the technique. It was not until 1978 when Thomas and Christoph Cremer developed the first practical confocal laser scanning microscope and the technique rapidly gained popularity through the 1980s.

Super resolution microscopes
Main articles: Super-resolution microscopy and Microscopy § Sub-diffraction techniques
Much current research (in the early 21st century) on optical microscope techniques is focused on development of superresolution analysis of fluorescently labelled samples. Structured illumination can improve resolution by around two to four times and techniques like stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy are approaching the resolution of electron microscopes.[22] This occurs because the diffraction limit is occurred from light or excitation, which makes the resolution must be doubled to become super saturated. Stefan Hell was awarded the 2014 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the development of the STED technique, along with Eric Betzig and William Moerner who adapted fluorescence microscopy for single-molecule visualization.[23]

X-ray microscopes
Main article: X-ray microscope
X-ray microscopes are instruments that use electromagnetic radiation usually in the soft X-ray band to image objects. Technological advances in X-ray lens optics in the early 1970s made the instrument a viable imaging choice.[24] They are often used in tomography (see micro-computed tomography) to produce three dimensional images of objects, including biological materials that have not been chemically fixed. Currently research is being done to improve optics for hard X-rays which have greater penetrating power.[24]

Types
 Types of microscopes illustrated by the principles of their beam paths
 Evolution of spatial resolution achieved with optical, transmission (TEM) and aberration-corrected electron microscopes (ACTEM).[25]
Microscopes can be separated into several different classes. One grouping is based on what interacts with the sample to generate the image, i.e., light or photons (optical microscopes), electrons (electron microscopes) or a probe (scanning probe microscopes). Alternatively, microscopes can be classified based on whether they analyze the sample via a scanning point (confocal optical microscopes, scanning electron microscopes and scanning probe microscopes) or analyze the sample all at once (wide field optical microscopes and transmission electron microscopes).
Wide field optical microscopes and transmission electron microscopes both use the theory of lenses (optics for light microscopes and electromagnet lenses for electron microscopes) in order to magnify the image generated by the passage of a wave transmitted through the sample, or reflected by the sample. The waves used are electromagnetic (in optical microscopes) or electron beams (in electron microscopes). Resolution in these microscopes is limited by the wavelength of the radiation used to image the sample, where shorter wavelengths allow for a higher resolution.[20]
Scanning optical and electron microscopes, like the confocal microscope and scanning electron microscope, use lenses to focus a spot of light or electrons onto the sample then analyze the signals generated by the beam interacting with the sample. The point is then scanned over the sample to analyze a rectangular region. Magnification of the image is achieved by displaying the data from scanning a physically small sample area on a relatively large screen. These microscopes have the same resolution limit as wide field optical, probe, and electron microscopes.
Scanning probe microscopes also analyze a single point in the sample and then scan the probe over a rectangular sample region to build up an image. As these microscopes do not use electromagnetic or electron radiation for imaging they are not subject to the same resolution limit as the optical and electron microscopes described above.

Optical microscope
Main articles: Optical microscope, Digital microscope, and USB microscope
The most common type of microscope (and the first invented) is the optical microscope. This is an optical instrument containing one or more lenses producing an enlarged image of a sample placed in the focal plane. Optical microscopes have refractive glass (occasionally plastic or quartz), to focus light on the eye or on to another light detector. Mirror-based optical microscopes operate in the same manner. Typical magnification of a light microscope, assuming visible range light, is up to 1,250× with a theoretical resolution limit of around 0.250 micrometres or 250 nanometres.[20] This limits practical magnification to ~1,500×. Specialized techniques (e.g., scanning confocal microscopy, Vertico SMI) may exceed this magnification but the resolution is diffraction limited. The use of shorter wavelengths of light, such as ultraviolet, is one way to improve the spatial resolution of the optical microscope, as are devices such as the near-field scanning optical microscope.
Sarfus is a recent optical technique that increases the sensitivity of a standard optical microscope to a point where it is possible to directly visualize nanometric films (down to 0.3 nanometre) and isolated nano-objects (down to 2 nm-diameter). The technique is based on the use of non-reflecting substrates for cross-polarized reflected light microscopy.
Ultraviolet light enables the resolution of microscopic features as well as the imaging of samples that are transparent to the eye. Near infrared light can be used to visualize circuitry embedded in bonded silicon devices, since silicon is transparent in this region of wavelengths.

In fluorescence microscopy many wavelengths of light ranging from the ultraviolet to the visible can be used to cause samples to fluoresce, which allows viewing by eye or with specifically sensitive cameras. Unstained cells viewed by typical brightfield (left) compared to phase-contrast microscopy (right).
Phase-contrast microscopy is an optical microscopic illumination technique in which small phase shifts in the light passing through a transparent specimen are converted into amplitude or contrast changes in the image.[20] The use of phase contrast does not require staining to view the slide. This microscope technique made it possible to study the cell cycle in live cells.
The traditional optical microscope has more recently evolved into the digital microscope. In addition to, or instead of, directly viewing the object through the eyepieces, a type of sensor similar to those used in a digital camera is used to obtain an image, which is then displayed on a computer monitor. These sensors may use CMOS or charge-coupled device (CCD) technology, depending on the application.
Digital microscopy with very low light levels to avoid damage to vulnerable biological samples is available using sensitive photon-counting digital cameras. It has been demonstrated that a light source providing pairs of entangled photons may minimize the risk of damage to the most light-sensitive samples. In this application of ghost imaging to photon-sparse microscopy, the sample is illuminated with infrared photons, each of which is spatially correlated with an entangled partner in the visible band for efficient imaging by a photon-counting camera.[26]

 Modern transmission electron microscope
Electron microscope
 Transmission electron micrograph of a dividing cell undergoing cytokinesisMain article: Electron microscope
The two major types of electron microscopes are transmission electron microscopes (TEMs) and scanning electron microscopes (SEMs).[20][21] They both have series of electromagnetic and electrostatic lenses to focus a high energy beam of electrons on a sample. In a TEM the electrons pass through the sample, analogous to basic optical microscopy.[20] This requires careful sample preparation, since electrons are scattered strongly by most materials.[21] The samples must also be very thin (below 100 nm) in order for the electrons to pass through it.[20][21] Cross-sections of cells stained with osmium and heavy metals reveal clear organelle membranes and proteins such as ribosomes.[21] With a 0.1 nm level of resolution, detailed views of viruses (20 – 300 nm) and a strand of DNA (2 nm in width) can be obtained.[21] In contrast, the SEM has raster coils to scan the surface of bulk objects with a fine electron beam. Therefore, the specimen do not necessarily need to be sectioned, but coating with a nanometric metal or carbon layer may be needed for nonconductive samples.[20] SEM allows fast surface imaging of samples, possibly in thin water vapor to prevent drying.[20][21]

Scanning probe
Main article: Scanning probe microscopy
The different types of scanning probe microscopes arise from the many different types of interactions that occur when a small probe is scanned over and interacts with a specimen. These interactions or modes can be recorded or mapped as function of location on the surface to form a characterization map. The three most common types of scanning probe microscopes are atomic force microscopes (AFM), near-field scanning optical microscopes (MSOM or SNOM, scanning near-field optical microscopy), and scanning tunneling microscopes (STM).[27] An atomic force microscope has a fine probe, usually of silicon or silicon nitride, attached to a cantilever; the probe is scanned over the surface of the sample, and the forces that cause an interaction between the probe and the surface of the sample are measured and mapped. A near-field scanning optical microscope is similar to an AFM but its probe consists of a light source in an optical fiber covered with a tip that has usually an aperture for the light to pass through. The microscope can capture either transmitted or reflected light to measure very localized optical properties of the surface, commonly of a biological specimen. Scanning tunneling microscopes have a metal tip with a single apical atom; the tip is attached to a tube through which a current flows.[28] The tip is scanned over the surface of a conductive sample until a tunneling current flows; the current is kept constant by computer movement of the tip and an image is formed by the recorded movements of the tip.[27]

 Leaf surface viewed by a scanning electron microscope.
Other types
Scanning acoustic microscopes use sound waves to measure variations in acoustic impedance. Similar to Sonar in principle, they are used for such jobs as detecting defects in the subsurfaces of materials including those found in integrated circuits. On February 4, 2013, Australian engineers built a "quantum microscope" which provides unparalleled precision.[29]

Mobile apps
Mobile app microscopes can optionally be used as optical microscope when the flashlight is activated. However, mobile app microscopes are harder to use due to visual noise, are often limited to 40x, and the resolution limits of the camera lens itself.

See also

Fluorescence interference contrast microscopy
Laser capture microdissection
Microscope image processing
Microscope slide
Multifocal plane microscopy
Royal Microscopical Society

References
 First atomic force microscope


^ Characterization and Analysis of Polymers. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience. 2008. ISBN 978-0-470-23300-9.

^ Bardell, David (May 2004). "The Invention of the Microscope". BIOS. 75 (2): 78–84. doi:10.1893/0005-3155(2004)75<78:tiotm>2.0.co;2. JSTOR 4608700. S2CID 96668398.

^ The history of the telescope by Henry C. King, Harold Spencer Jones Publisher Courier Dover Publications, 2003, pp. 25–27 ISBN 0-486-43265-3, 978-0-486-43265-6

^ Atti Della Fondazione Giorgio Ronchi E Contributi Dell'Istituto Nazionale Di Ottica, Volume 30, La Fondazione-1975, p. 554

^ a b Murphy, Douglas B.; Davidson, Michael W. (2011). Fundamentals of light microscopy and electronic imaging (2nd ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-471-69214-0.

^ Sir Norman Lockyer (1876). Nature Volume 14.

^ Albert Van Helden; Sven Dupré; Rob van Gent (2010). The Origins of the Telescope. Amsterdam University Press. pp. 32–36, 43. ISBN 978-90-6984-615-6.

^ "Who Invented the Microscope?". Live Science. 14 September 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2017.

^ Eric Jorink (2010-10-25). Reading the Book of Nature in the Dutch Golden Age, 1575-1715. ISBN 978-90-04-18671-2.

^ William Rosenthal, Spectacles and Other Vision Aids: A History and Guide to Collecting, Norman Publishing, 1996, pp. 391–92

^ Raymond J. Seeger, Men of Physics: Galileo Galilei, His Life and His Works, Elsevier – 2016, p. 24

^ J. William Rosenthal, Spectacles and Other Vision Aids: A History and Guide to Collecting, Norman Publishing, 1996, page 391

^ uoregon.edu, Galileo Galilei (Excerpt from the Encyclopedia Britannica)

^ Gould, Stephen Jay (2000). "Chapter 2: The Sharp-Eyed Lynx, Outfoxed by Nature". The Lying Stones of Marrakech: Penultimate Reflections in Natural History. New York: Harmony. ISBN 978-0-224-05044-9.

^ a b Wootton, David (2006). Bad medicine: doctors doing harm since Hippocrates. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. p. 110. ISBN 978-0-19-280355-9.[page needed]

^ Liz Logan (27 April 2016). "Early Microscopes Revealed a New World of Tiny Living Things". Smithsonian.com. Retrieved 3 June 2016.

^ Knoll, Max (1935). "Aufladepotentiel und Sekundäremission elektronenbestrahlter Körper". Zeitschrift für Technische Physik. 16: 467–475.

^ Goldsmith, Cynthia S.; Miller, Sara E. (2009-10-01). "Modern Uses of Electron Microscopy for Detection of Viruses". Clinical Microbiology Reviews. 22 (4): 552–563. doi:10.1128/cmr.00027-09. ISSN 0893-8512. PMC 2772359. PMID 19822888.

^ Morita, Seizo (2007). Roadmap of Scanning Probe Microscopy. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-34315-8.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Lodish, Harvey; Berk, Arnold; Zipursky, S. Lawrence; Matsudaira, Paul; Baltimore, David; Darnell, James (2000). "Microscopy and Cell Architecture". Molecular Cell Biology. 4th Edition.

^ a b c d e f g Alberts, Bruce; Johnson, Alexander; Lewis, Julian; Raff, Martin; Roberts, Keith; Walter, Peter (2002). "Looking at the Structure of Cells in the Microscope". Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th Edition.

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2014 – Scientific Background" (PDF). www.nobelprize.org. Retrieved 2018-03-20.

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2014". www.nobelprize.org. Retrieved 2018-03-20.

^ a b Erko, A. (2008). Modern developments in X-ray and neutron optics. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-74561-7.

^ Pennycook, S.J.; Varela, M.; Hetherington, C.J.D.; Kirkland, A.I. (2011). "Materials Advances through Aberration-Corrected Electron Microscopy" (PDF). MRS Bulletin. 31: 36–43. doi:10.1557/mrs2006.4.

^ Aspden, Reuben S.; Gemmell, Nathan R.; Morris, Peter A.; Tasca, Daniel S.; Mertens, Lena; Tanner, Michael G.; Kirkwood, Robert A.; Ruggeri, Alessandro; Tosi, Alberto; Boyd, Robert W.; Buller, Gerald S.; Hadfield, Robert H.; Padgett, Miles J. (2015). "Photon-sparse microscopy: visible light imaging using infrared illumination" (PDF). Optica. 2 (12): 1049. Bibcode:2015Optic...2.1049A. doi:10.1364/OPTICA.2.001049. ISSN 2334-2536.

^ a b Bhushan, Bharat, ed. (2010). Springer handbook of nanotechnology (3rd rev. & extended ed.). Berlin: Springer. p. 620. ISBN 978-3-642-02525-9.

^ Sakurai, T.; Watanabe, Y., eds. (2000). Advances in scanning probe microscopy. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 978-3-642-56949-4.

^ "Quantum Microscope for Living Biology". Science Daily. 4 February 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2013.


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Microscopes.

Milestones in Light Microscopy, Nature Publishing
FAQ on Optical Microscopes
Nikon MicroscopyU, tutorials from Nikon
Molecular Expressions : Exploring the World of Optics and Microscopy, Florida State University.
vteScanning probe microscopyCommon
Atomic force
Conductive
Infrared
Non-contact
Photoconductive
Scanning tunneling
Electrochemical
Spin polarized
Other
Ballistic electron emission
Chemical force
Electrostatic force
Kelvin probe force
Magnetic force
Magnetic resonance force
Near-field scanning optical
Nano-FTIR
Photon scanning
Photothermal microspectroscopy
Piezoresponse force
Scanning capacitance
Scanning electrochemical
Scanning gate
Scanning Hall probe
Scanning ion-conductance
Scanning joule expansion
Scanning Kelvin probe
Scanning quantum dot microscopy
Scanning SQUID microscope
Scanning SQUID microscopy
Scanning thermal
Scanning voltage
Applications
Scanning probe lithography
Dip-pen nanolithography
Feature-oriented scanning
Millipede memory
See also
Nanotechnology
Microscope
Microscopy
Vibrational analysis

vteAnalytical chemistryInstrumentation
Atomic absorption spectrometer
Flame emission spectrometer
Gas chromatograph
High-performance liquid chromatograph
Infrared spectrometer
Mass spectrometer
Melting point apparatus
Microscope
Optical spectrometer
Spectrophotometer
Techniques
Calorimetry
Chromatography
Electroanalytical methods
Gravimetric analysis
Ion mobility spectrometry
Mass spectrometry
Spectroscopy
Titration
Sampling
Coning and quartering
Dilution
Dissolution
Filtration
Masking
Pulverization
Sample preparation
Separation process
Sub-sampling
Calibration
Chemometrics
Calibration curve
Matrix effect
Internal standard
Standard addition
Isotope dilution
Prominent publications
Analyst
Analytica Chimica Acta
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Analytical Biochemistry

 Category
 Commons
Portal
 WikiProject

vteOptical microscopy
Microscope
Optical microscopy
Illumination andcontrast methods
Bright-field microscopy
Köhler illumination
Dark-field microscopy
Phase contrast
Quantitative phase-contrast microscopy
Differential interference contrast (DIC)
Dispersion staining
Second harmonic imaging (SHIM)
4Pi microscope
Structured illumination
Sarfus
Raman
Fluorescence methods
Fluorescence microscopy
Confocal microscopy
Multiphoton microscopy (Two-photon, Three-photon)
Image deconvolution
Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRF)
Lightsheet microscopy (LSFM/SPIM)
Lattice light-sheet microscopy
Sub-diffractionlimit techniques
Diffraction limit
Stimulated emission depletion (STED)
Photo-activated localization microscopy (PALM/STORM)
Near-field (NSOM/SNOM)

 Category
 Commons

vteLaboratory equipmentGeneralHeatersDryers
Alcohol burner
Bunsen burner
Desiccator
Heating mantle
Hot plate
Lab oven
Kiln
Meker–Fisher burner
Striker
Teclu burner
Water bath
Vacuum dry box
MixersShakers
Chemostat
Homogenizer
Liquid whistle
Magnetic stirrer
Mortar and pestle
Shaker
Sonicator
Static mixer
Stirring rod
Vortex mixer
Wash bottle
StandsClampsHolders
Beaker clamp
Clamp holder
Tripod
Burette clamp
Extension clamp
Flask clamp
Funnel support
Iron ring
Pinch clamp
Retort stand
Screw clamp
Test tube holder
Test tube rack
Wire gauze
Lab drying rack
ContainersStorage
Agar plate
Cryogenic storage dewar
Incubator
Laminar flow cabinet
Microtiter plate
Petri dish
Picotiter plate
Refrigerator
Weighing boat
Weighing dish
Other items
Aspirator
Autoclave
Balance brush
Cork borer
Crucible
Filter paper
File
Forceps
Centrifuge
Microscope
Pipeclay triangle
Spectrophotometer
Splint
Stopper
Scoopula
Spatula
Test tube brush
Wire brush
Inoculation needle
Inoculation loop
GlasswareApparatus
Dean–Stark
Soxhlet extractor
Kipp's
Bottles
Boston round
Condensers
Cold finger
Liebig
Dishes
Evaporating
Petri
Syracuse
Watch glass
Flasks
Büchner
Vacuum (Dewar)
Erlenmeyer
Fernbach
Fleaker
Florence
Retort
Round-bottom
Schlenk
Volumetric
Funnels
Büchner
Hirsch
Dropping
Separatory
Measuring devices
Burette
Conical measure
Cuvette
Eye dropper
Eudiometer
Graduated cylinder
Ostwald viscometer
Pipette
Tubes
Drying
Cragie
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
Test
Thiele
Thistle
Other items
Beaker
Bell jar
Gas syringe
Vial
Analytical chemistryCompositional
AutoAnalyzer
CHN analyzer
Colorimeter
Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) device
Gas chromatograph (GC)
Liquid chromatograph (LC)
Mass spectrometer (MS)
pH indicator
pH meter
Microscopy
Scanning electron microscope (SEM)
Transmission electron microscope (TEM)
Thermochemistry
Calorimeter
differential scanning
Melting-point apparatus
Thermometer
Thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA)
Other items
Analytical balance
Colony counter
Spiral plater
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument
Plate reader
ElectronicsControl devices
Bench power supply
Current source
Voltage source
Function generator
Galvanostat
Pulse generator
Potentiostat
Measurement
Ammeter
Logic analyzer
Multimeter
Network analyzer
Oscilloscope
Spectrum analyzer
Time-domain reflectometer
Transistor tester
Voltmeter
Tools
Heat gun
Soldering iron
Tweezers
Wire stripper
General
Alligator clip
Test probe
SafetyPersonal protectiveequipment (PPE)
Lab coat
Face shield
Respirator
Rubber apron
Safety shower
Eye and hand
Acid-resistant gloves
Eyewash station
Glove box
Medical gloves
Nitrile gloves
Safety glasses
Safety goggles
Other items
Biosafety cabinet
Fire blanket
Fire extinguisher
Fume hood
Safety cabinet
Solvent cabinet
Instruments used in medical laboratories
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microscope&oldid=1114883400"
Categories: Microbiology equipmentMicroscopesMicroscopyScientific instrumentsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2013Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles lacking reliable references from April 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesUse Canadian English from September 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian EnglishCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiversity




Languages


AfrikaansАԥсшәаالعربيةArmãneashtiঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCymraegDanskDavvisámegiellaDeutschDiné bizaadEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaelgGalego贛語Gĩkũyũ客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLimburgsLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄မြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語NapulitanoNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаپنجابیپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSeelterskSesotho sa LeboaShqipසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheTiếng ViệtVõroWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 19:27 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










