



Paper - Wikipedia










































Paper

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Thin material for writing, printing, etc.
For other uses, see Paper (disambiguation).


PaperPaper products: book, toilet paper, ruled paper, carton, egg boxMaterial typeThin materialPhysical propertiesDensity (ρ)From 10 gsm to 3000 gsm
Paper"Paper" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese charactersTraditional Chinese紙Simplified Chinese纸TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinzhǐIPA[ʈʂɨ̀]WuSuzhounesetsỳYue: CantoneseYale RomanizationjíJyutpingzi2Southern MinHokkien POJchoáTâi-lôtsuá

Paper is a thin sheet material produced by mechanically or chemically processing cellulose fibres derived from wood, rags, grasses or other vegetable sources in water, draining the water through fine mesh leaving the fibre evenly distributed on the surface, followed by pressing and drying. Although paper was originally made in single sheets by hand, almost all is now made on large machines—some making reels 10 metres wide, running at 2,000 metres per minute and up to 600,000 tonnes a year. It is a versatile material with many uses, including printing, painting, graphics, signage, design, packaging, decorating, writing, and cleaning. It may also be used as filter paper, wallpaper, book endpaper, conservation paper, laminated worktops, toilet tissue, or currency and security paper, or in a number of industrial and construction processes.
The papermaking process developed in east Asia, probably China, at least as early as 105 CE,[1] by the Han court eunuch Cai Lun, although the earliest archaeological fragments of paper derive from the 2nd century BCE in China.[2] The modern pulp and paper industry is global, with China leading its production and the United States following.

Contents

1 History
2 Early sources of fibre
3 Etymology
4 Papermaking

4.1 Chemical pulping
4.2 Mechanical pulping
4.3 De-inked pulp
4.4 Additives
4.5 Producing paper
4.6 Finishing

4.6.1 Paper grain




5 Applications

5.1 Published, written, or informational items
5.2 Packaging and industrial uses


6 Types, thickness and weight
7 Paper stability
8 Environmental impact
9 Future
10 See also
11 Citations
12 General references
13 Further reading
14 External links


History
Main article: History of paper
 Hemp wrapping paper, China, c. 100 BC
The oldest known archaeological fragments of the immediate precursor to modern paper date to the 2nd century BCE in China. The pulp papermaking process is ascribed to Cai Lun, a 2nd-century CE Han court eunuch.[2]
It has been said that knowledge of papermaking was passed to the Islamic world after the Battle of Talas in 751 CE when two Chinese papermakers were captured as prisoners. Although the veracity of this story is uncertain, paper started to be made in Samarkand soon after.[3] In the 13th century, the knowledge and uses of paper spread from the Middle East to medieval Europe, where the first water-powered paper mills were built.[4] Because paper was introduced to the West through the city of Baghdad, it was first called bagdatikos.[5] In the 19th century, industrialization greatly reduced the cost of manufacturing paper. In 1844, the Canadian inventor Charles Fenerty and the German inventor Friedrich Gottlob Keller independently developed processes for pulping wood fibres.[6]

Early sources of fibre
See also: wood pulp and deinking
Before the industrialisation of paper production the most common fibre source was recycled fibres from used textiles, called rags. The rags were from hemp, linen and cotton.[7] A process for removing printing inks from recycled paper was invented by German jurist Justus Claproth in 1774.[7] Today this method is called deinking. It was not until the introduction of wood pulp in 1843 that paper production was not dependent on recycled materials from ragpickers.[7]

Etymology
Further information: Papyrus
The word paper is etymologically derived from Latin papyrus, which comes from the Greek πᾰ́πῡρος (pápūros), the word for the Cyperus papyrus plant.[8][9] Papyrus is a thick, paper-like material produced from the pith of the Cyperus papyrus plant, which was used in ancient Egypt and other Mediterranean cultures for writing before the introduction of paper.[10] Although the word paper is etymologically derived from papyrus, the two are produced very differently and the development of the first is distinct from the development of the second. Papyrus is a lamination of natural plant fibre, while paper is manufactured from fibres whose properties have been changed by maceration.[2]

Papermaking
Main article: Papermaking
Chemical pulping
Main articles: Kraft process, sulfite process, and soda pulping
To make pulp from wood, a chemical pulping process separates lignin from cellulose fibre. A cooking liquor is used to dissolve the lignin, which is then washed from the cellulose; this preserves the length of the cellulose fibres. Paper made from chemical pulps are also known as wood-free papers (not to be confused with tree-free paper); this is because they do not contain lignin, which deteriorates over time. The pulp can also be bleached to produce white paper, but this consumes 5% of the fibres. Chemical pulping processes are not used to make paper made from cotton, which is already 90% cellulose.

 The microscopic structure of paper: Micrograph of paper autofluorescing under ultraviolet illumination. The individual fibres in this sample are around 10 µm in diameter.
There are three main chemical pulping processes: the sulfite process dates back to the 1840s and was the dominant method before the second world war. The kraft process, invented in the 1870s and first used in the 1890s, is now the most commonly practised strategy; one of its advantages is the chemical reaction with lignin produces heat, which can be used to run a generator. Most pulping operations using the kraft process are net contributors to the electricity grid or use the electricity to run an adjacent paper mill. Another advantage is that this process recovers and reuses all inorganic chemical reagents. Soda pulping is another specialty process used to pulp straws, bagasse and hardwoods with high silicate content.

Mechanical pulping
There are two major mechanical pulps: thermomechanical pulp (TMP) and groundwood pulp (GW). In the TMP process, wood is chipped and then fed into steam-heated refiners, where the chips are squeezed and converted to fibres between two steel discs. In the groundwood process, debarked logs are fed into grinders where they are pressed against rotating stones to be made into fibres. Mechanical pulping does not remove the lignin, so the yield is very high, > 95%; however, lignin causes the paper thus produced to turn yellow and become brittle over time. Mechanical pulps have rather short fibres, thus producing weak paper. Although large amounts of electrical energy are required to produce mechanical pulp, it costs less than the chemical kind.

De-inked pulp
Paper recycling processes can use either chemically or mechanically produced pulp; by mixing it with water and applying mechanical action the hydrogen bonds in the paper can be broken and fibres separated again. Most recycled paper contains a proportion of virgin fibre for the sake of quality; generally speaking, de-inked pulp is of the same quality or lower than the collected paper it was made from.
There are three main classifications of recycled fibre:

Mill broke or internal mill waste – This incorporates any substandard or grade-change paper made within the paper mill itself, which then goes back into the manufacturing system to be re-pulped back into paper. Such out-of-specification paper is not sold and is therefore often not classified as genuine reclaimed recycled fibre; however most paper mills have been reusing their own waste fibre for many years, long before recycling became popular.
Preconsumer waste – This is offcut and processing waste, such as guillotine trims and envelope blank waste; it is generated outside the paper mill and could potentially go to landfill, and is a genuine recycled fibre source; it includes de-inked preconsumer waste (recycled material that has been printed but did not reach its intended end use, such as waste from printers and unsold publications).[11]
Postconsumer waste – This is fibre from paper that has been used for its intended end use and includes office waste, magazine papers and newsprint. As the vast majority of this material has been printed – either digitally or by more conventional means such as lithography or rotogravure – it will either be recycled as printed paper or go through a de-inking process first.
Recycled papers can be made from 100% recycled materials or blended with virgin pulp, although they are (generally) not as strong nor as bright as papers made from the latter.

Additives
Besides the fibres, pulps may contain fillers such as chalk or china clay,[12] which improve its characteristics for printing or writing.[13] Additives for sizing purposes may be mixed with it or applied to the paper web later in the manufacturing process; the purpose of such sizing is to establish the correct level of surface absorbency to suit ink or paint.

Producing paper
Main articles: Paper machine and papermaking
 Paper mill in Mänttä-Vilppula, Finland
The pulp is fed to a paper machine, where it is formed as a paper web and the water is removed from it by pressing and drying.
Pressing the sheet removes the water by force. Once the water is forced from the sheet, a special kind of felt, which is not to be confused with the traditional one, is used to collect the water.  When making paper by hand, a blotter sheet is used instead.
Drying involves using air or heat to remove water from the paper sheets. In the earliest days of papermaking, this was done by hanging the sheets like laundry; in more modern times, various forms of heated drying mechanisms are used. On the paper machine, the most common is the steam-heated can dryer. These can reach temperatures above 200 °F (93 °C) and are used in long sequences of more than forty cans where the heat produced by these can easily dry the paper to less than six percent moisture.

Finishing
The paper may then undergo sizing to alter its physical properties for use in various applications.
Paper at this point is uncoated. Coated paper has a thin layer of material such as calcium carbonate or china clay applied to one or both sides in order to create a surface more suitable for high-resolution halftone screens. (Uncoated papers are rarely suitable for screens above 150 lpi.) Coated or uncoated papers may have their surfaces polished by calendering. Coated papers are divided into matte, semi-matte or silk, and gloss. Gloss papers give the highest optical density in the printed image.
The paper is then fed onto reels if it is to be used on web printing presses, or cut into sheets for other printing processes or other purposes. The fibres in the paper basically run in the machine direction. Sheets are usually cut "long-grain", i.e. with the grain parallel to the longer dimension of the sheet. Continuous form paper (or continuous stationery) is cut to width with holes punched at the edges, and folded into stacks.

Paper grain
All paper produced by paper machines as the Fourdrinier Machine are wove paper, i.e. the wire mesh that transports the web leaves a pattern that has the same density along the paper grain and across the grain. Textured finishes, watermarks and wire patterns imitating hand-made laid paper can be created by the use of appropriate rollers in the later stages of the machine.
Wove paper does not exhibit "laidlines", which are small regular lines left behind on paper when it was handmade in a mould made from rows of metal wires or bamboo. Laidlines are very close together. They run perpendicular to the "chainlines", which are further apart. Handmade paper similarly exhibits "deckle edges", or rough and feathery borders.[14]

Applications
 Paper money from different countries
Paper can be produced with a wide variety of properties, depending on its intended use.

Published, written, or informational items
For representing value: paper money, bank note, cheque, security (see security paper), voucher, ticket
For storing information: book, notebook, graph paper, punched card, photographic paper
For published materials, publications, and reading materials: books, newspapers, magazines, posters, pamphlets, maps, signs, labels, advertisements, billboards.
For individual use: diary, notebooks, writing pads, memo pads journals, planners, note to remind oneself, etc.; for temporary personal use: scratch paper
For business and professional use: copier paper, ledger paper, typing paper, computer printer paper. Specialized paper for forms and documents such as invoices, receipts, tickets, vouchers, bills, contracts, official forms, agreements.
For communication: between individuals and/or groups of people:  letter, post cards, airmail, telegrams, newsprint, card stock
For organizing and sending documents: envelopes, file folders, packaging, pocket folders, partition folders.
For artistic works and uses; drawing paper, pastels, water color paintings, sketch pads, charcoal drawings,
For special printed items using more elegant forms of paper; stationery, parchment,
Packaging and industrial uses
For packaging: corrugated box, paper bag, envelope, wrapping paper, paper string
For cleaning: toilet paper, paper towels, facial tissue.
For food utensils and containers: wax paper, paper plates and paper cups,  beverage cartons, tea bags, condiments, food packaging, coffee filters, cupcake cups.
For construction: papier-mâché, origami paper, paper planes, quilling, paper honeycomb, sandpaper, used as a core material in composite materials, paper engineering, construction paper, paper yarn, and paper clothing
For other uses: emery paper, blotting paper, litmus paper, universal indicator paper, paper chromatography, electrical insulation paper (see also fishpaper), filter paper, wallpaper
It is estimated that paper-based storage solutions captured 0.33% of the total in 1986 and only 0.007% in 2007, even though in absolute terms the world's capacity to store information on paper increased from 8.7 to 19.4 petabytes.[15] It is estimated that in 1986 paper-based postal letters represented less than 0.05% of the world's telecommunication capacity, with sharply decreasing tendency after the massive introduction of digital technologies.[15]
Paper has a major role in the visual arts. It is used by itself to form two- and three-dimensional shapes and collages.[16][17] It has also evolved to being a structural material used in furniture design.[18] Watercolor paper has a long history of production and use.

Types, thickness and weight
Main articles: Paper size, Grammage, and Paper density
 Card and paper stock for crafts use comes in a wide variety of textures and colors
The thickness of paper is often measured by caliper, which is typically given in thousandths of an inch in the United States and in micrometres (µm) in the rest of the world.[19] Paper may be between 0.07 and 0.18 millimetres (0.0028 and 0.0071 in) thick.[20]
Paper is often characterized by weight. In the United States, the weight is the weight of a ream (bundle of 500 sheets) of varying "basic sizes" before the paper is cut into the size it is sold to end customers. For example, a ream of 20 lb, 8.5 in × 11 in (216 mm × 279 mm) paper weighs 5 pounds because it has been cut from larger sheets into four pieces.[21] In the United States, printing paper is generally 20 lb, 24 lb, 28 lb, or 32 lb at most. Cover stock is generally 68 lb, and 110 lb or more is considered card stock.
In Europe and other regions using the ISO 216 paper-sizing system, the weight is expressed in grams per square metre (g/m2 or usually gsm) of the paper. Printing paper is generally between 60 gsm and 120 gsm. Anything heavier than 160 gsm is considered card. The weight of a ream therefore depends on the dimensions of the paper and its thickness.
Most commercial paper sold in North America is cut to standard paper sizes based on customary units and is defined by the length and width of a sheet of paper.
The ISO 216 system used in most other countries is based on the surface area of a sheet of paper, not on a sheet's width and length. It was first adopted in Germany in 1922 and generally spread as nations adopted the metric system. The largest standard size paper is A0 (A zero), measuring one square metre (approx. 1189 × 841 mm). A1 is half the size of a sheet of A0 (i.e., 594 mm × 841 mm), such that two sheets of A1 placed side by side are equal to one sheet of A0. A2 is half the size of a sheet of A1, and so forth. Common sizes used in the office and the home are A4 and A3 (A3 is the size of two A4 sheets).
The density of paper ranges from 250 kg/m3 (16 lb/cu ft) for tissue paper to 1500 kg/m3 (94 lb/cu ft) for some specialty paper. Printing paper is about 800 kg/m3 (50 lb/cu ft).[22]
Paper may be classified into seven categories:[23]

Printing papers of wide variety.
Wrapping papers for the protection of goods and merchandise. This includes wax and kraft papers.
Writing paper suitable for stationery requirements. This includes ledger, bank, and bond paper.
Blotting papers containing little or no size.
Drawing papers usually with rough surfaces used by artists and designers, including cartridge paper.
Handmade papers including most decorative papers, Ingres papers, Japanese paper and tissues, all characterized by lack of grain direction.
Specialty papers including cigarette paper, toilet tissue, and other industrial papers.
Some paper types include:


Bank paper
Banana paper
Bond paper
Book paper
Coated paper: glossy and matte surface
Construction paper/sugar paper
Cotton paper
Fish paper (vulcanized fibres for electrical insulation)
Inkjet paper
Kraft paper
Laid paper
Leather paper
Mummy paper
Oak tag paper
Sandpaper
Troublewit, specially pleated paper
Tyvek paper
Wallpaper
Washi
Waterproof paper
Wax paper
Wove paper
Xuan paper

Paper stability
 A book printed in 1920 on acidic paper, now disintegrating a hundred years later.
Much of the early paper made from wood pulp contained significant amounts of alum, a variety of aluminium sulfate salt that is significantly acidic. Alum was added to paper to assist in sizing,[24] making it somewhat water resistant so that inks did not "run" or spread uncontrollably. Early papermakers did not realize that the alum they added liberally to cure almost every problem encountered in making their product would be eventually detrimental.[25] The cellulose fibres that make up paper are hydrolyzed by acid, and the presence of alum eventually degrades the fibres until the acidic paper disintegrates in a process known as "slow fire". Documents written on rag paper are significantly more stable. The use of non-acidic additives to make paper is becoming more prevalent, and the stability of these papers is less of an issue.
Paper made from mechanical pulp contains significant amounts of lignin, a major component in wood. In the presence of light and oxygen, lignin reacts to give yellow materials,[26] which is why newsprint and other mechanical paper yellows with age. Paper made from bleached kraft or sulfite pulps does not contain significant amounts of lignin and is therefore better suited for books, documents and other applications where whiteness of the paper is essential.
Paper made from wood pulp is not necessarily less durable than a rag paper. The aging behaviour of a paper is determined by its manufacture, not the original source of the fibres.[27] Furthermore, tests sponsored by the Library of Congress prove that all paper is at risk of acid decay, because cellulose itself produces formic, acetic, lactic and oxalic acids.[28]
Mechanical pulping yields almost a tonne of pulp per tonne of dry wood used, which is why mechanical pulps are sometimes referred to as "high yield" pulps. With almost twice the yield as chemical pulping, mechanical pulps is often cheaper. Mass-market paperback books and newspapers tend to use mechanical papers. Book publishers tend to use acid-free paper, made from fully bleached chemical pulps for hardback and trade paperback books.

Environmental impact
Main articles: Environmental impact of paper and Deforestation
The production and use of paper has a number of adverse effects on the environment.
Worldwide consumption of paper has risen by 400% in the past 40 years[clarification needed] leading to increase in deforestation, with 35% of harvested trees being used for paper manufacture. Most paper companies also plant trees to help regrow forests. Logging of old growth forests accounts for less than 10% of wood pulp,[29] but is one of the most controversial issues.
Paper waste accounts for up to 40% of total waste produced in the United States each year, which adds up to 71.6 million tons of paper waste per year in the United States alone.[30] The average office worker in the US prints 31 pages every day.[31] Americans also use in the order of 16 billion paper cups per year.
Conventional bleaching of wood pulp using elemental chlorine produces and releases into the environment large amounts of chlorinated organic compounds, including chlorinated dioxins.[32] Dioxins are recognized as a persistent environmental pollutant, regulated internationally by the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Dioxins are highly toxic, and health effects on humans include reproductive, developmental, immune and hormonal problems. They are known to be carcinogenic. Over 90% of human exposure is through food, primarily meat, dairy, fish and shellfish, as dioxins accumulate in the food chain in the fatty tissue of animals.[33]
The paper pulp and print industries emitted together about 1% of world Greenhouse-gas emissions in 2010[34] and about 0.9% in 2012,[35] but less than screens: digital technologies emitted approximately 4% of world Greenhouse-gas emissions in the year 2019 and the number can be two times larger by 2025.[36]

Future
Some manufacturers have started using a new, significantly more environmentally friendly alternative to expanded plastic packaging. Made out of paper, and known commercially as PaperFoam, the new packaging has mechanical properties very similar to those of some expanded plastic packaging, but is biodegradable and can also be recycled with ordinary paper.[37]
With increasing environmental concerns about synthetic coatings (such as PFOA) and the higher prices of hydrocarbon based petrochemicals, there is a focus on zein (corn protein) as a coating for paper in high grease applications such as popcorn bags.[38]
Also, synthetics such as Tyvek and Teslin have been introduced as printing media as a more durable material than paper.

See also


Science portal
Writing portal
Ancient Egypt portal
Books portal

Arches paper
Buckypaper
Continuous form paper (or "continuous stationery")
Deinked pulp
Environmental impact of paper
Fibre crop
Graphene oxide paper
Lokta paper
Mass deacidification
Paper and ink testing
Paper armour
Paper chemicals
Paper clip
Paper craft
Parchment paper, which emulates the texture of animal-based parchment
Roll hardness tester
Seed paper
Stone paper
Citations


^ Hogben, Lancelot. "Printing, Paper and Playing Cards". Bennett, Paul A. (ed.) Books and Printing: A Treasury for Typophiles. New York: The World Publishing Company, 1951. pp. 15–31. p. 17. & Mann, George. Print: A Manual for Librarians and Students Describing in Detail the History, Methods, and Applications of Printing and Paper Making. London: Grafton & Co., 1952. p. 77

^ a b c Tsien 1985, p. 38

^ Ward, James (2015). The Perfection of the Paper Clip: Curious Tales of Invention, Accidental Genius, and Stationery Obsession. Atria Books. ISBN 978-1476799865.

^ Burns 1996, pp. 417f.

^ Murray, Stuart A. P. The Library: An illustrated History. Skyhorse Publishing, 2009, p. 57.

^ Burger, Peter (2007). Charles Fenerty and his paper invention. Toronto: Peter Burger. pp. 25–30. ISBN 978-0-9783318-1-8. OCLC 173248586. Archived from the original on 19 April 2009. Retrieved 19 May 2009.

^ a b c Göttsching, Lothar; Gullichsen, Johan; Pakarinen, Heikki; Paulapuro, Hannu; Yhdistys, Suomen Paperi-Insinöörien; Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (2000). Recycling fiber and deinking. Finland: Fapet Oy. pp. 12–14. ISBN 978-952-5216-07-3. OCLC 247670296.

^ πάπυρος Archived 16 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon, on Perseus

^ "papyrus". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020.

^ "papyrus". Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d. Retrieved 20 November 2008.

^ "Natural Resource Defense Council". Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 20 February 2008.

^ Appropriate Technology. Intermediate Technology Publications. 1996.

^ Thorn, Ian; Au, Che On (24 July 2009). Applications of Wet-End Paper Chemistry. Springer Science & Business Media. Bibcode:2009aowp.book.....T. ISBN 978-1-4020-6038-0.

^ "ARCHIVED – Introduction – Detecting the Truth. Fakes, Forgeries and Trickery – Library and Archives Canada" Archived 2 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine in a virtual museum exhibition at Library and Archives Canada

^ a b "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information" Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine, especially Supporting online material Archived 18 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Martin Hilbert and Priscila López (2011), Science, 332(6025), 60–65; free access to the article through here: martinhilbert.net/WorldInfoCapacity.html doi:10.1126/science.1200970

^ "Lynette Schweigert". NEA. 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018.

^ "Herminia Albarrán Romero". NEA. 24 January 2013. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018.

^ Morris (August–September 2018). "Material Values, Paper". The Economist. p. 38.

^ "Paper Thickness (Caliper) Chart". Case Paper. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2017.

^ Elert, Glenn. "Thickness of a Piece of Paper". The Physics Factbook. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 27 May 2017.

^ McKenzie, Bruce G. (1989). The Hammerhill guide to desktop publishing in business. Hammerhill. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-9615651-1-4. OCLC 851074844.

^ "Density of paper and paperboard". PaperOnWeb. Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2007.

^ Johnson, Arthur (1978). The Thames and Hudson manual of bookbinding. London: Thames and Hudson. OCLC 959020143.

^ Biermann, Christopher J/ (1993). Essentials of pulping and papermaking. San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-097360-6. OCLC 813399142.

^ Clark, James d'A. (1985). Pulp Technology and Treatment for Paper (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Miller Freeman Publications. ISBN 978-0-87930-164-4.

^ Fabbri, Claudia; Bietti, Massimo; Lanzalunga, Osvaldo (2005). "Generation and Reactivity of Ketyl Radicals with Lignin Related Structures. On the Importance of the Ketyl Pathway in the Photoyellowing of Lignin Containing Pulps and Papers". J. Org. Chem. 2005 (70): 2720–2728. doi:10.1021/jo047826u. PMID 15787565.

^ Erhardt, D.; Tumosa, C. (2005). "Chemical Degradation of Cellulose in Paper over 500 years". Restaurator: International Journal for the Preservation of Library and Archival Material. 26 (3): 155. doi:10.1515/rest.2005.26.3.151. S2CID 98291111.

^ 
"The Deterioration and Preservation of Paper: Some Essential Facts". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Research by the Library of Congress has demonstrated that cellulose itself generates acids as it ages, including formic, acetic, lactic, and oxalic acids

^ Martin, Sam (2004). "Paper Chase". Ecology Communications, Inc. Archived from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007.

^ EPA (28 June 2006). "General Overview of What's in America's Trash". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012.

^ Groll, T. 2015 In vielen Büros wird unnötig viel ausgedruckt Archived 17 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Zeit Online, 20 June 2015.

^ Effluents from Pulp Mills using Bleaching – PSL1. Health Canada DSS. 1991. ISBN 978-0-662-18734-9. Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2007. Pdf Archived 12 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine

^ 
"Dioxins and their effects on human health". World Health Organization. June 2014. Archived from the original on 27 April 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2015. More than 90% of human exposure is through food

^ "World GHG Emissions Flow Chart 2010" (PDF). Ecofys. Ecofys. Retrieved 5 July 2020.

^ "World GHG Emissions 2012". SANKEY DIAGRAMS. Ecofys. Retrieved 5 July 2020.

^ Efoui-Hess, Maxime. "CLIMATE CRISIS: THE UNSUSTAINABLE USE OF ONLINE VIDEO" (PDF). The Shift Project. Retrieved 5 July 2020.

^ "PaperFoam Carbon Friendly Packaging". Archived from the original on 9 March 2006. Retrieved 3 April 2006.

^ "Barrier compositions and articles produced with the compositions cross-reference to related application". Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018.


General references
Burns, Robert I. (1996). "Paper comes to the West, 800–1400".  In Lindgren, Uta (ed.). Europäische Technik im Mittelalter. 800 bis 1400. Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.). Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag. pp. 413–422. ISBN 978-3-7861-1748-3.
Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin (1985).  Needham, Joseph (ed.). Paper and Printing. Science and Civilisation in China, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. Vol. V (part 1). Cambridge University Press.
"Document Doubles" in ARCHIVED – Introduction – Detecting the Truth. Fakes, Forgeries and Trickery – Library and Archives Canada, a virtual museum exhibition at Library and Archives Canada
Further reading
Monro, Alexander (2013). The Paper Trail: An Unexpected History of the World's Greatest Invention. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 9781846141898. OCLC 1040764924.
"Paper Brightness, Whiteness & Shade: Definitions and Differences" by David Rogers (June 26, 2015)
External links



Look up paper in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paper.

Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI) official website
The Arnold Yates Paper collection at University of Maryland Libraries
"How is paper made?" at The Straight Dope, 22 November 2005
Thirteen-minute video on modern paper production system, from Sappi
vtePaper
Paper engineering / Papermaking
History
Battle of Talas
Missal of Silos
Originators
Cai Lun
Zuo Bo/Tso Po/Tso Tzǔ-yi
Damjing

Developers
Matthias Koops
Friedrich Gottlob Keller
Charles Fenerty

Scholars
Thomas Francis Carter
Dard Hunter
Tsien Tsuen-hsuin

Types
Acid-free
Air-laid
Amate
Asphalt
Banana
Bible
Blotting
Bond
Bristol
Carbon
Cardboard
Cartridge
Coated
Construction
Contact
Copy
Carbonless
Correction
Cotton (rag)
Crêpe
Display
Dó
Electrical insulation
Genkō yōshi
Glassine
Graph
Greaseproof
Hemp
India
Inkjet
Ingres
Korean
Kraft
Butcher
Laid
Lokta
Manila
Mummy
Newsprint
Onionskin
Origami
Paperboard
Parchment
Photographic
Plastic-coated
Red rosin
Rice
Rolling
Scritta
Security
Seed
Stone
Tar
Thermal
Tissue
Tracing
Transfer
Tree-free
Wallpaper
Washi
Wasli
Waterproof
Wax
Wood-free
Wove
Writing
Xuan
Materials
China clay
Corrugated fiberboard
Fiber crop
Paper chemicals
Papyrus
Wood pulp
Specifications
Density
Grammage
Paper sizes
Surface chemistry of paper
Units of paper quantity
Wet strength
Manufactureand process
Bleaching of wood pulp
Calender
Conical refiner
Deinking
Elemental chlorine free
Environmental impact of paper
Handmade paper
Hollander beater
Kraft process
Organosolv
Paper machine
Paper recycling
Papermaking
Soda pulping
Sulfite process
Industry
Paper industry
Canada
Europe
India
Japan
United States
Paper mill
List
Uses
Lined paper
Paper towels
Papier-mache
Cardboard
Clothing
Tissues
Notebooks
Watercolor paper
Paper money
Beverage cartons

 Category
 Commons

Links to related articles
vtePaper productsContainers
Box
Carton
Cigarette pack
Coffee cup sleeve
Corrugated box
Corrugated fiberboard
Envelope
Molded pulp
Oyster pail
Paper bag
Paper cup
Paperboard
Shipping tube
Hygiene
Facial tissue
Napkin
Paper towel
Toilet paper
Wet wipe
Stationery
Continuous stationery
Greeting card
Index card
Letter
Manila folder
Notebook
Postage stamp
Postcard
Post-it Note
Financial
Banknote
Business card
Coupon
Passbook
Visiting card
Decorations
Ingrain wallpaper
Mat
Wallpaper
Media
Book
Magazine
Newspaper
Newsprint
Pamphlet
Recreation
Confetti
Paper craft
Paper toys
Playing card
Quilling
Other
Drink coaster
Filter paper
Form
Sandpaper
Security paper

vteDecorative arts and handicrafts
History
Textile
Banner-making
Canvas work
Crocheting
Cross-stitch
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving
Paper
Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage
Decoupage
Photomontage
Iris folding
Jianzhi
Kamikiri
Origami
Kirigami
Moneygami
Embossing
Marbling
Papercraft
Papercutting
Papermaking
Paper toys
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper
Wood
Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning
Ceramic
Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta
Glass
Cameo glass
Enamelled glass
Glass etching
Glassware
Stained glass
Chip work
Metal
Chemical milling
Enamel
Engraving
Etching
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith
Bronze and brass ornamental work
Ironwork
Other
Assemblage
Balloon modelling
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Faux painting
Grotesque
Gargoyle
Hardstone carving
Lath art
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic
Glass mosaic
Ornament
Pargeting
Pietra dura
Private press
Pressed flower craft
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal

vteLabelingLabel construction
Adhesive
Die cutting (web)
Hologram
In-mould labelling
Label
Paper
Perforation
Pressure-sensitive adhesive
Plastic
Printing
Security hologram
Release liner
Security printing
Security label
Smart label
Sticker
Content
Advertising
Barcode
Country of origin
Cigarette warning label
Ecolabel
EU energy label
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
List of food labeling regulations
Mandatory labelling
Nameplate
Nutrition facts label
Plain tobacco packaging
Radio-frequency identification
United Kingdom food information regulations
UPC
Warning label
Wine label
Use
Advertising
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Label dispenser
Label printer
Packaging and labeling
Track and trace

vtePackagingGeneraltopics
Active packaging
Child-resistant packaging
Contract packager
Edible packaging
Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging
Overpackaging
Package pilferage
Package testing
Package theft
Packaging engineering
Resealable packaging
Reusable packaging
Reuse of bottles
Shelf life
Shelf-ready packaging
Shelf-stable
Sustainable packaging
Tamper-evident
Tamper resistance
Wrap rage
Productpackages
Alternative wine closure
Banana box
Beer bottle
Box wine
Case-ready meat
Coffee bag
Cosmetic packaging
Currency packaging
Disposable food packaging
Drink can
Egg carton
Evidence packaging
Field ration
Flour sack
Foam food container
Food packaging
Fuel container
Gas cylinder
Glass milk bottle
Growler
Juicebox
Low plastic water bottle
Luxury packaging
Milk bag
Optical disc packaging
Oyster pail
Popcorn bag
Pharmaceutical packaging
Plastic milk container
Sand bag
Self-heating food packaging
Screw cap (wine)
Single-serve coffee container
Water bottle
Wine bottle
Containers
Aerosol spray
Aluminium bottle
Aluminum can
Ampoule
Antistatic bag
Bag-in-box
Bag
Barrel
Biodegradable bag
Blister pack
Boil-in-bag
Bottle
Box
Bulk box
Cage
Case
Carboy
Carton
Chub
Clamshell
Corrugated box design
Crate
Disposable cup
Drum
Endcap
Envelope
Euro container
Flexible intermediate bulk container
Flexi-bag
Folding carton
Glass bottle
Gunny sack
Inhaler
Insulated shipping container
Intermediate bulk container
Jar
Jerrycan
Jug
Keg
Mesh bag
Multilayered packaging
Multi-pack
Packet (container)
Padded envelope
Pail
Paper bag
Paper sack
Plastic bag
Plastic bottle
Retort pouch
Salvage drum
Sachet
Water sachet
Security bag
Shipping container
Shipping tube
Skin pack
Spray bottle
Squround
Stand-up pouch
Steel and tin cans
Tetra Brik
Thermal bag
Tub (container)
Tube
Unit load
Vial
Wooden box
Materialsandcomponents
Adhesive
Aluminium foil
Bail handle
Bioplastic
Biodegradable plastic
BoPET
Bubble wrap
Bung
Cellophane
Closure
Coated paper
Coating
Coextrusion
Corrugated fiberboard
Corrugated plastic
Cushioning
Desiccant
Double seam
Flip-top
Foam peanut
Gel pack
Glass
Hot-melt adhesive
Humidity indicator card
Kraft paper
Label
Lid
Linear low-density polyethylene
Liquid packaging board
Living hinge
Low-density polyethylene
Metallised film
Modified atmosphere
Molded pulp
Nonwoven fabric
Overwrap
Oxygen scavenger
Package handle
Packaging gas
Pallet
Paper
Paper pallet
Paperboard
Plastic-coated paper
Plastic film
Plastic pallet
Plastic wrap
Polyester
Polyethylene
Polypropylene
Pressure-sensitive tape
Pump dispenser
Screw cap
Screw cap (wine)
Security printing
Security tape
Shock detector
Shock and vibration data logger
Shrink wrap
Slip sheet
Staple (fastener)
Strapping
Stretch wrap
Susceptor
Tamper-evident band
Tear tape
Temperature data logger
Time temperature indicator
Tinplate
Velostat
Processes
Aseptic processing
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Blow fill seal
Blow molding
Calendering
Canning
Coating
Containerization
Converting
Corona treatment
Curtain coating
Die cutting
Die forming (plastics)
Electronic article surveillance
Extrusion
Extrusion coating
Flame treatment
Glass production
Graphic design
Hazard analysis and critical control points
Hermetic seal
Induction sealing
Injection moulding
Lamination
Laser cutting
Molding
Package tracking
Papermaking
Plastic extrusion
Plastic welding
Printing
Product development
Production control
Quality assurance
Radio-frequency identification
Roll slitting
Shearing (manufacturing)
Thermoforming
Track and trace
Ultrasonic welding
Vacuum forming
Vacuum packaging
Verification and validation
Machinery
Barcode printer
Barcode reader
Bottling line
Calender
Can seamer
Cartoning machine
Case sealer
Check weigher
Conveyor system
Drum pump
Extended core stretch wrapper
Filler
Heat gun
Heat sealer
Industrial robot
Injection molding machine
Label printer applicator
Lineshaft roller conveyor
Logistics automation
Material-handling equipment
Mechanical brake stretch wrapper
Multihead weigher
Orbital stretch wrapper
Packaging machinery
Pallet inverter
Palletizer
Rotary wheel blow molding systems
Seed-counting machine
Shrink tunnel
Staple gun
Tape dispenser
Turntable stretch wrapper
Vertical form fill sealing machine
Environment,post-use
Biodegradation
Closed-loop box reuse
Environmental engineering
Glass recycling
Industrial ecology
Life-cycle assessment
Litter
Packaging waste
Paper recycling
PET bottle recycling
Plastic recycling
Recycling
Reusable packaging
Reverse logistics
Source reduction
Sustainable packaging
Waste management
 Category: Packaging
vteWood productsLumber/timber
Batten
Beam
Bressummer
Cruck
Flitch beam
Flooring
Joist
Lath
Molding
Panelling
Plank
Plate
Post
Purlin
Rafter
Railroad ties
Reclaimed
Shingle
Siding
Sill
Stud
Timber truss
Treenail
Truss
Utility pole
Engineeredwood
Cross-laminated timber
Glued laminated timber
veneer
LVL
parallel strand
I-joist
Fiberboard
hardboard
Masonite
MDF
Oriented strand board
Oriented structural straw board
Particle board
Plywood
Structural insulated panel
Wood-plastic composite
lumber
Fuelwood
Charcoal
biochar
Firelog
Firewood
Pellet fuel
Wood fuel
Fibers
Cardboard
Corrugated fiberboard
Paper
Paperboard
Pulp
Pulpwood
Rayon
Derivatives
Birch-tar
Cellulose
nano
Hemicellulose
Cellulosic ethanol
Dyes
Lignin
Liquid smoke
Lye
Methanol
Pyroligneous acid
Pine tar
Pitch
Sandalwood oil
Tannin
Wood gas
By-products
Barkdust
Black liquor
Ramial chipped wood
Sawdust
Tall oil
Wood flour
Wood wool
Woodchips
Historical
Axe ties
Bavin (wood)
Billet (wood)
Clapboard
Dugout canoe
Potash
Sawdust brandy
Split-rail fence
Tanbark
Timber framing
Wooden masts
See also
Biomass
Certified wood
Destructive distillation
Dry distillation
Engineered bamboo
Forestry
List of woods
Mulch
Non-timber forest products
Papermaking
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood processing
Woodworking

 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry

vteWriting and writing materialEnduringPlant-based
Amate
Trema micrantha
Ficus aurea
Bamboo and wooden slips
Birch bark (Betula)
Folding-book manuscript
Streblus asper
Broussonetia papyrifera
Ola leaf (Corypha umbraculifera)
Palm leaf (Borassus)
Paper
Papyrus (Cyperus papyrus)
Other materials
Animal skin
Parchment
Vellum
Ink
Metals
Intaglio
Stamping
Oracle bone
Photographic film
Stone
Geoglyph
Petroglyph
Tablets
Clay tablet
Slate
Wax tablet
Textile printing
Silk text
Impermanent
Electronic paper
Screen
Skywriting
Carrier objects
Book
Codex
Notebook
Electronic media
Hu/Shaku (baton)
Inscription
Bas-relief
Manuscript
Palimpsest
Microform
Scroll
Sign
Related topics
Writing systems
History of writing
List of writing systems
Ktav Stam

vteSculpturesTypes of sculptures
Architectural sculpture
Assemblage
Bas relief
Bust
Earth art
Environmental sculpture
Figurine
Installation art
Kinetic sculpture
Mobile
Statue
Styles of sculptures
Detonography
Modern sculpture
Relief
Elements in sculpture
Mass
Negative space
Space
Volume
Traditional materials
Wood
Marble
Limestone
Granite
Porphyry
Diorite
Jade
Ivory
Clay
Terracotta
Bronze
Gold
Silver
Butter
Soapstone
Modern materials
Steel
Jesmonite
Acrylic
Concrete
Plastic
Fiberglass
Glass
Aluminum
Fabric
Paper
Found object
Notable sculptures
Great Sphinx of Giza (c. 2558–2532 BCE)
Abu Simbel temples (c. 1264 BCE)
Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon (438 BCE)
Colossus of Rhodes (c. 292 BCE)
Winged Victory of Samothrace (c. 2nd century BCE)
Terracotta Army (246–210 BCE)
Laocoön and His Sons (c. 200 BCE-70 CE)
Venus de Milo (130–100 BCE)
Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius (175 CE)
Buddhas of Bamiyan (507–554 CE)
Chartes Cathedral (c. 1194–1250 CE)
The Golden Virgin
Jules Verne's Tomb
Konark Sun Temple (1250 CE)
Les Quatre Braves
Moai, Easter Islands (1250–1500 CE)
Pietà (1498–1499)
David (1501–1504)
Kamagaya Great Buddha (1776)
Nelson's Column (1843)
Adams Memorial (1881)
Liberty Enlightening the World, Statue of Liberty (1886)
The Gates of Hell (1890–1917)
The Thinker (1904)
Mount Rushmore (1927–1941)
Christ the Redeemer (1927–1931)
The Motherland Calls (1967)
Mother Motherland, Kiev (1981)
Genghis Khan Equestrian Statue (2008)

 Category

vteData storageFundamental storage technologies
Semiconductor memory
Magnetic storage
Optical storage
Paper data storage
Uncommon storage technologies
Related technologies
Robotics
File systems
Data compression
Encryption
RAID
Network storage
Networked storage
File server
Network-attached storage
Storage area network

vteMagnetic storage media
Wire (1898)
Tape (1928)
Drum (1932)
Ferrite core (1949)
Hard disk (1956)
Stripe card (1956)
MICR (1956)
Thin film (1962)
CRAM (1962)
Twistor (~1968)
Floppy disk (1969)
Bubble (~1970)
MRAM (1995)
Racetrack (2008)

vteOptical storage mediaBlu-ray (2006)
BD-R (2006)
BD-RE (2006)
BD-R XL (2010)
BD-RE XL (2010)
Professional Disc (2003)
PDD (2004)
DVD (1995)
DVD-R (1997)
DVD-RW (1999)
DVD+RW (2001)
DVD+R (2002)
DVD+R DL (2004)
DVD-R DL (2005)
Compact disc (1982)
CD-R (1988)
CD-i (1991)
CD-RW (1997)
Discontinued
Microform (1870)
Optical tape (20th century)
Optical disc (20th century)
LaserDisc (1978)
WORM (1979)
GD-ROM (1997)
MIL-CD (1999)
DataPlay (2002)
UDO (2003)
ProData (2003)
UMD (2004)
HD DVD (2006)
Magneto-optic Kerr effect (1877)
MO disc (1980s)
MiniDisc (1992)
MD Data (1993)
Hi-MD (2004)
Optical Assist
Laser turntable (1986)
Floptical (1991)
Super DLT (1998)

vtePaper data storage mediaAntiquity
Writing on papyrus (c. 3000 BCE)
Paper (105 CE)
Modern
Index card (1640s)
Punched tape (mid-1800s)
Punched card (1880s)
Edge-notched card (1904)
Optical mark recognition (1930s)
Barcode (1948)

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paper&oldid=1111052186"
Categories: PaperPapermakingChinese inventionsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from August 2014Articles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017CS1: long volume valueCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia Commons




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛÆngliscالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralBislamaБългарскиབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCymraegDanskDeutschދިވެހިބަސްEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતી客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаລາວLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLi NihaLigureLimburgsLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىBahasa MelayuMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄Монголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPälzischپنجابیپښتوភាសាខ្មែរPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTsetsêhestâheseTürkçeУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtWalonWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 19 September 2022, at 02:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










