



Plant - Wikipedia










































Plant

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
For other uses, see Plant (disambiguation).


Kingdom of mainly multicellular, predominantly photosynthetic eukaryotes




PlantsTemporal range: Mesoproterozoic–present 



Pha.



Proterozoic




Archean

Had'n










Scientific classification 


Domain:

Eukaryota


(unranked):

Diaphoretickes


(unranked):

Archaeplastida


Kingdom:

Plantaesensu Copeland, 1956


Superdivisions



Chlorokybophyta
Mesostigmatophyta
Spirotaenia
Chlorobionta Kenrick & Crane 1997
Chlorophyta
Streptobionta Kenrick & Crane 1997
Klebsormidiophyceae
Charophyta (stoneworts)
Chaetosphaeridiales
Coleochaetophyta
Zygnematophyta
Embryophyta Engler, 1892 (land plants)
Marchantiophyta (liverworts)
Bryophyta (mosses)
Anthocerotophyta (hornworts)
†Horneophyta
†Aglaophyta
Tracheophyta (vascular plants)


Synonyms



Viridiplantae Cavalier-Smith 1981[1]
Chlorobionta Jeffrey 1982, emend. Bremer 1985, emend. Lewis and McCourt 2004[2]
Chlorobiota Kenrick and Crane 1997[3]
Chloroplastida Adl et al., 2005 [4]
Phyta Barkley 1939 emend. Holt & Uidica 2007
Cormophyta Endlicher, 1836
Cormobionta Rothmaler, 1948
Euplanta Barkley, 1949
Telomobionta Takhtajan, 1964
Embryobionta Cronquist et al., 1966
Metaphyta Whittaker, 1969


Plants are predominantly photosynthetic eukaryotes of the kingdom Plantae. Historically, the plant kingdom encompassed all living things that were not animals, and included algae and fungi; however, all current definitions of Plantae exclude the fungi and some algae, as well as the prokaryotes (the archaea and bacteria). By one definition, plants form the clade Viridiplantae (Latin name for "green plants") which is sister of the Glaucophyta, and consists of the green algae and Embryophyta (land plants). The latter includes the flowering plants, conifers and other gymnosperms, ferns and their allies, hornworts, liverworts, and mosses.
Most plants are multicellular organisms. Green plants obtain most of their energy from sunlight via photosynthesis by primary chloroplasts that are derived from endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria. Their chloroplasts contain chlorophylls a and b, which gives them their green color. Some plants are parasitic or mycotrophic and have lost the ability to produce normal amounts of chlorophyll or to photosynthesize, but still have flowers, fruits, and seeds. Plants are characterized by sexual reproduction and alternation of generations, although asexual reproduction is also common.
There are about 320,000 known species of plants, of which the great majority, some 260–290 thousand, produce seeds.[5] Green plants provide a substantial proportion of the world's molecular oxygen,[6] and are the basis of most of Earth's ecosystems. Plants that produce grain, fruit, and vegetables also form basic human foods and have been domesticated for millennia. Plants have many cultural and other uses, as ornaments, building materials, writing material and, in great variety, they have been the source of medicines and psychoactive drugs. The scientific study of plants is known as botany, a branch of biology.

Contents

1 Definition

1.1 Current definitions of Plantae
1.2 Algae
1.3 Fungi


2 Diversity

2.1 Evolution
2.2 Embryophytes
2.3 Fossils


3 Structure, growth, and development

3.1 Factors affecting growth

3.1.1 Effects of freezing


3.2 DNA damage and repair
3.3 Plant cells


4 Physiology

4.1 Photosynthesis
4.2 Immune system
4.3 Internal distribution


5 Genomics
6 Ecology

6.1 Distribution
6.2 Ecological relationships
6.3 Competition


7 Importance

7.1 Cultivation

7.1.1 Food
7.1.2 Medicines
7.1.3 Nonfood products
7.1.4 Aesthetic uses


7.2 Scientific and cultural uses
7.3 Negative effects


8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links


Definition
All living things were traditionally placed into one of two groups, plants and animals. This classification may date from Aristotle (384 BC – 322 BC), who made the distinction between plants, which generally do not move, and animals, which often are mobile to catch their food. Much later, when Linnaeus (1707–1778) created the basis of the modern system of scientific classification, these two groups became the kingdoms Vegetabilia (later Metaphyta or Plantae) and Animalia (also called Metazoa). Since then, it has become clear that the plant kingdom as originally defined included several unrelated groups, and the fungi and several groups of algae were removed to new kingdoms. However, these organisms are still sometimes considered plants, particularly in informal contexts.[citation needed]
The term "plant" generally implies the possession of the following traits: multicellularity, possession of cell walls containing cellulose, and the ability to carry out photosynthesis with primary chloroplasts.[7][8]

Current definitions of Plantae
When the name Plantae or plant is applied to a specific group of organisms or taxon, it usually refers to one of four concepts. From least to most inclusive, these four groupings are:



Name(s)

Scope

Description


Land plants, also known as Embryophyta

Plantae sensu strictissimo

Plants in the strictest sense include the liverworts, hornworts, mosses, and vascular plants, as well as fossil plants similar to these surviving groups (e.g., Metaphyta Whittaker, 1969,[9] Plantae Margulis, 1971[10]).


Green plants, also known as Viridiplantae, Viridiphyta, Chlorobionta or Chloroplastida

Plantae sensu stricto

Plants in a strict sense include the green algae, and land plants that emerged within them, including stoneworts. The relationships between plant groups are still being worked out, and the names given to them vary considerably. The clade Viridiplantae encompasses a group of organisms that have cellulose in their cell walls, possess chlorophylls a and b and have plastids bound by only two membranes that are capable of photosynthesis and of storing starch. This clade is the main subject of this article (e.g., Plantae Copeland, 1956[11]).


Archaeplastida, also known as Plastida or Primoplantae

Plantae sensu lato

Plants in a broad sense comprise the green plants listed above plus the red algae (Rhodophyta) and the glaucophyte algae (Glaucophyta) that store Floridean starch outside the plastids, in the cytoplasm. This clade includes all of the organisms that eons ago acquired their primary chloroplasts directly by engulfing cyanobacteria (e.g., Plantae Cavalier-Smith, 1981[12]).


Old definitions of plant (obsolete)

Plantae sensu amplo

Plants in the widest sense refers to older, obsolete classifications that placed diverse algae, fungi or bacteria in Plantae (e.g., Plantae or Vegetabilia Linnaeus,[13] Plantae Haeckel 1866,[14] Metaphyta Haeckel, 1894,[15] Plantae Whittaker, 1969[9]).

Another way of looking at the relationships between the different groups that have been called "plants" is through a cladogram, which shows their evolutionary relationships. These are not yet completely settled, but one accepted relationship between the three groups described above is shown below[clarification needed].[16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23][24][excessive citations] Those which have been called "plants" are in bold (some minor groups have been omitted).







Archaeplastida + cryptista 





 





 


Rhodophyta (red algae)



 


 


Rhodelphidia (predatorial)



 


 


Picozoa



 



 


 





 


Glaucophyta (glaucophyte algae)



 


green plants





 





Prasinodermophyta





 


Palmophyllophyceae (prasinophyte clade VI)



 


 


Prasinodermophyceae



 



 



 


 





 


Chlorophyta



 


Streptophyta





 


Charales (stoneworts)



 


 


land plants or embryophytes



 



 



 



 



 


 


Cryptista



 



 



groups traditionallycalled green algae
The way in which the groups of green algae are combined and named varies considerably between authors.
Algae
 Green algae from Ernst Haeckel's Kunstformen der Natur, 1904.
Main article: Algae
Algae consist of several groups of organisms which produce food by photosynthesis and thus have traditionally been included in the plant kingdom. The seaweeds range from large multicellular algae to single-celled organisms and are classified into three groups, the green algae, red algae and brown algae. There is good evidence that the brown algae evolved independently from the others, from non-photosynthetic ancestors that formed endosymbiotic relationships with red algae rather than from cyanobacteria, and they are no longer classified as plants as defined here.[25][26]
The Viridiplantae, the green plants – green algae and land plants – form a clade, a group consisting of all the descendants of a common ancestor. With a few exceptions, the green plants have the following features in common; primary chloroplasts derived from cyanobacteria containing chlorophylls a and b, cell walls containing cellulose, and food stores in the form of starch contained within the plastids. They undergo closed mitosis without centrioles, and typically have mitochondria with flat cristae. The chloroplasts of green plants are surrounded by two membranes, suggesting they originated directly from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria.
Two additional groups, the Rhodophyta (red algae) and Glaucophyta (glaucophyte algae), also have primary chloroplasts that appear to be derived directly from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria, although they differ from Viridiplantae in the pigments which are used in photosynthesis and so are different in colour. These groups also differ from green plants in that the storage polysaccharide is floridean starch and is stored in the cytoplasm rather than in the plastids. They appear to have had a common origin with Viridiplantae and the three groups form the clade Archaeplastida, whose name implies that their chloroplasts were derived from a single ancient endosymbiotic event. This is the broadest modern definition of the term 'plant'.
In contrast, most other algae (e.g. brown algae/diatoms, haptophytes, dinoflagellates, and euglenids) not only have different pigments but also have chloroplasts with three or four surrounding membranes. They are not close relatives of the Archaeplastida, presumably having acquired chloroplasts separately from ingested or symbiotic green and red algae. They are thus not included in even the broadest modern definition of the plant kingdom, although they were in the past.
The green plants or Viridiplantae were traditionally divided into the green algae (including the stoneworts) and the land plants. However, it is now known that the land plants evolved from within a group of green algae, so that the green algae by themselves are a paraphyletic group, i.e. a group that excludes some of the descendants of a common ancestor. Paraphyletic groups are generally avoided in modern classifications, so that in recent treatments the Viridiplantae have been divided into two clades, the Chlorophyta and the Streptophyta (including the land plants and Charophyta).[27][28]
The Chlorophyta (a name that has also been used for all green algae) are the sister group to the Charophytes, from which the land plants evolved. There are about 4,300 species,[29] mainly unicellular or multicellular marine organisms such as the sea lettuce, Ulva.
The other group within the Viridiplantae are the mainly freshwater or terrestrial Streptophyta, which consists of the land plants together with the Charophyta, itself consisting of several groups of green algae such as the desmids and stoneworts. Streptophyte algae are either unicellular or form multicellular filaments, branched or unbranched.[28] The genus Spirogyra is a filamentous streptophyte alga familiar to many, as it is often used in teaching and is one of the organisms responsible for the algal "scum" on ponds. The freshwater stoneworts strongly resemble land plants and are believed to be their closest relatives.[30] Growing immersed in fresh water, they consist of a central stalk with whorls of branchlets.

Fungi
This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Main article: Fungi
 A variety of fungi species
Linnaeus' original classification placed the fungi within the Plantae, since they were unquestionably neither animals or minerals and these were the only other alternatives. With 19th century developments in microbiology, Ernst Haeckel introduced the new kingdom Protista in addition to Plantae and Animalia, but whether fungi were best placed in the Plantae or should be reclassified as protists remained controversial.  In 1969, Robert Whittaker proposed the creation of the kingdom Fungi. Molecular evidence has since shown that the most recent common ancestor (concestor), of the Fungi was probably more similar to that of the Animalia than to that of Plantae or any other kingdom.[31]
Whittaker's original reclassification was based on the fundamental difference in nutrition between the Fungi and the Plantae. Unlike plants, which generally gain carbon through photosynthesis, and so are called autotrophs, fungi do not possess chloroplasts and generally obtain carbon by breaking down and absorbing surrounding materials, and so are called heterotrophic saprotrophs. In addition, the substructure of multicellular fungi is different from that of plants, taking the form of many chitinous microscopic strands called hyphae, which may be further subdivided into cells or may form a syncytium containing many eukaryotic nuclei. Fruiting bodies, of which mushrooms are the most familiar example, are the reproductive structures of fungi, and are unlike any structures produced by plants.[citation needed]

Diversity
The table below shows some species count estimates of different green plant (Viridiplantae) divisions. About 85–90% of all plants are flowering plants. Several projects are currently attempting to collect all plant species in online databases, e.g. the World Flora Online and World Plants both list about 391,000 species.[32][33][34]


Diversity of living green plant (Viridiplantae) divisions


Informal group

Division name[citation needed]

Common name

No. of living species

Approximate no. in informal group


Green algae

Chlorophyta

Green algae (chlorophytes)

3,800–4,300 [35][36]

8,500
(6,600–10,300)



Charophyta

Green algae (e.g. desmids & stoneworts)

2,800–6,000 [37][38]


Bryophytes

Marchantiophyta

Liverworts

6,000–8,000 [39]

19,000
(18,100–20,200)



Anthocerotophyta

Hornworts

100–200 [40]


Bryophyta

Mosses

12,000 [41]


Pteridophytes

Lycopodiophyta

Clubmosses

1,200 [26]

12,000
(12,200)



Polypodiophyta

Ferns, whisk ferns & horsetails

11,000 [26]


spermatophyte

Cycadophyta

Cycads

160 [42]

260,000
(259,511)



Ginkgophyta

Ginkgo

1 [43]


Pinophyta

Conifers

630 [26]


Gnetophyta

Gnetophytes

70 [26]


Magnoliophyta

Flowering plants

258,650 [44]


The naming of plants is governed by the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants and International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (see cultivated plant taxonomy).

Evolution
Further information: Evolutionary history of plants
The evolution of plants has resulted in increasing levels of complexity, from the earliest algal mats, through bryophytes, lycopods, ferns to the complex gymnosperms and angiosperms of today. Plants in all of these groups continue to thrive, especially in the environments in which they evolved.
An algal scum formed on the land 1,200 million years ago, but it was not until the Ordovician Period, around 450 million years ago, that land plants appeared.[45] However, new evidence from the study of carbon isotope ratios in Precambrian rocks has suggested that complex photosynthetic plants developed on the earth over 1000 m.y.a.[46] For more than a century it has been assumed that the ancestors of land plants evolved in aquatic environments and then adapted to a life on land, an idea usually credited to botanist Frederick Orpen Bower in his 1908 book The Origin of a Land Flora. A recent alternative view, supported by genetic evidence, is that they evolved from terrestrial single-celled algae,[47] and that even the common ancestor of red and green algae, and the unicellular freshwater algae glaucophytes, originated in a terrestrial environment in freshwater biofilms or microbial mats.[48] Primitive land plants began to diversify in the late Silurian Period, around 420 million years ago, and the results of their diversification are displayed in remarkable detail in an early Devonian fossil assemblage from the Rhynie chert. This chert preserved early plants in cellular detail, petrified in volcanic springs. By the middle of the Devonian Period most of the features recognised in plants today are present, including roots, leaves and secondary wood, and by late Devonian times seeds had evolved.[49] Late Devonian plants had thereby reached a degree of sophistication that allowed them to form forests of tall trees. Evolutionary innovation continued in the Carboniferous and later geological periods and is ongoing today. Most plant groups were relatively unscathed by the Permo-Triassic extinction event, although the structures of communities changed. This may have set the scene for the evolution of flowering plants in the Triassic (~200 million years ago), which exploded in the Cretaceous and Tertiary. The latest major group of plants to evolve were the grasses, which became important in the mid Tertiary, from around 40 million years ago. The grasses, as well as many other groups, evolved new mechanisms of metabolism to survive the low CO2 and warm, dry conditions of the tropics over the last 10 million years.
A 1997 proposed phylogenetic tree of Plantae, after Kenrick and Crane,[50] is as follows, with modification to the Pteridophyta from Smith et al.[51] The Prasinophyceae are a paraphyletic assemblage of early diverging green algal lineages, but are treated as a group outside the Chlorophyta:[52] later authors have not followed this suggestion.




 





 


Prasinophyceae (micromonads)



 


 





Streptobionta





 





Embryophytes





 





Stomatophytes





 





Polysporangiates





 





Tracheophytes





Eutracheophytes





Euphyllophytina





Lignophyta





 


Spermatophytes (seed plants)



 


 


Progymnospermophyta †



 



 


Pteridophyta





 





 


Pteridopsida (true ferns)



 


 


Marattiopsida



 


 


Equisetopsida (horsetails)



 


 


Psilotopsida (whisk ferns & adders'-tongues)



 


 


Cladoxylopsida †



 



 



 



 


Lycophytina





 


Lycopodiophyta



 


 


Zosterophyllophyta †



 



 



 


 


Rhyniophyta †



 



 



 


 


Aglaophyton †



 


 


Horneophytopsida †



 



 



 


 


Bryophyta (mosses)



 


 


Anthocerotophyta (hornworts)



 



 



 


 


Marchantiophyta (liverworts)



 



 



 


 


Charophyta



 



 



 


 





Chlorophyta





 





 


Trebouxiophyceae (Pleurastrophyceae)



 


 


Chlorophyceae



 



 


 


Ulvophyceae



 



 



 



 

A newer proposed classification follows Leliaert et al. 2011[53] and modified with Silar 2016[20][21][54][55] for the green algae clades and Novíkov & Barabaš-Krasni 2015[56] for the land plants clade. Notice that the Prasinophyceae are here placed inside the Chlorophyta.







Viridiplantae





 





 


Mesostigmatophyceae



 


 





 


Chlorokybophyceae



 


 


Spirotaenia



 



 



 


 





 


Chlorophyta inc. Prasinophyceae



 


Streptobionta





 


Streptofilum



 


 





 


Klebsormidiophyta



 


Phragmoplastophyta





 


Charophyta Rabenhorst 1863 emend. Lewis & McCourt 2004 (Stoneworts)



 


 





 


Coleochaetophyta



 


 





 


Zygnematophyta



 


Embryophyta





 


Marchantiophyta (Liverworts)



 


Stomatophyta





 


Bryophyta (True mosses)



 


 





 


Anthocerotophyta (Non-flowering hornworts)



 


Polysporangiophyta





 


†Horneophyta



 


 





 


†Aglaophyta



 


 


Tracheophyta (Vascular Plants)



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Green algae

Later, a phylogeny based on genomes and transcriptomes from 1,153 plant species was proposed.[57] The placing of algal groups is supported by phylogenies based on genomes from the Mesostigmatophyceae and Chlorokybophyceae that have since been sequenced.[58][59] The classification of Bryophyta is supported both by Puttick et al. 2018,[60] and by phylogenies involving the hornwort genomes that have also since been sequenced.[61][62]




 





 


Rhodophyta



 


 





 


Glaucophyta



 


Viridiplantae





 


Chlorophyta



 


 





 


Prasinococcales



 


 


 



 


 





 





 


Mesostigmatophyceae



 


 





 


Chlorokybophyceae



 


 


Spirotaenia



 



 



 


 





 


Klebsormidiales



 


 





 


Chara



 


 





 


Coleochaetales



 


 





 


Zygnematophyceae



 


 





 





Bryophytes





 


Hornworts



 


 





 


Liverworts



 


 


Mosses



 



 



 



 


 





 


Lycophytes



 


 





 


Ferns



 


Spermatophytes





 


Gymnosperms



 


 


Angiosperms



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 


chlorophyte algae gradestreptophyte algae grade


 

Embryophytes
Main article: Embryophyte
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dicksonia antarctica, a species of tree fernThe plants that are likely most familiar to us are the multicellular land plants, called embryophytes. Embryophytes include the vascular plants, such as ferns, conifers and flowering plants. They also include the bryophytes, of which mosses and liverworts are the most common.
All of these plants have eukaryotic cells with cell walls composed of cellulose, and most obtain their energy through photosynthesis, using light, water and carbon dioxide to synthesize food. About three hundred plant species do not photosynthesize but are parasites on other species of photosynthetic plants. Embryophytes are distinguished from green algae, which represent a mode of photosynthetic life similar to the kind modern plants are believed to have evolved from, by having specialized reproductive organs protected by non-reproductive tissues.
Bryophytes first appeared during the early Paleozoic. They mainly live in habitats where moisture is available for significant periods, although some species, such as Targionia, are desiccation-tolerant. Most species of bryophytes remain small throughout their life-cycle. This involves an alternation between two generations: a haploid stage, called the gametophyte, and a diploid stage, called the sporophyte. In bryophytes, the sporophyte is always unbranched and remains nutritionally dependent on its parent gametophyte. The embryophytes have the ability to secrete a cuticle on their outer surface, a waxy layer that confers resistance to desiccation. In the mosses and hornworts a cuticle is usually only produced on the sporophyte. Stomata are absent from liverworts, but occur on the sporangia of mosses and hornworts, allowing gas exchange.
Vascular plants first appeared during the Silurian period, and by the Devonian had diversified and spread into many different terrestrial environments. They developed a number of adaptations that allowed them to spread into increasingly more arid places, notably the vascular tissues xylem and phloem, that transport water and food throughout the organism. Root systems capable of obtaining soil water and nutrients also evolved during the Devonian. In modern vascular plants, the sporophyte is typically large, branched, nutritionally independent and long-lived, but there is increasing evidence that Paleozoic gametophytes were just as complex as the sporophytes. The gametophytes of all vascular plant groups evolved to become reduced in size and prominence in the life cycle.
In seed plants, the microgametophyte is reduced from a multicellular free-living organism to a few cells in a pollen grain and the miniaturised megagametophyte remains inside the megasporangium, attached to and dependent on the parent plant. A megasporangium enclosed in a protective layer called an integument is known as an ovule. After fertilisation by means of sperm produced by pollen grains, an embryo sporophyte develops inside the ovule. The integument becomes a seed coat, and the ovule develops into a seed. Seed plants can survive and reproduce in extremely arid conditions, because they are not dependent on free water for the movement of sperm, or the development of free living gametophytes.
The first seed plants, pteridosperms (seed ferns), now extinct, appeared in the Devonian and diversified through the Carboniferous. They were the ancestors of modern gymnosperms, of which four surviving groups are widespread today, particularly the conifers, which are dominant trees in several biomes. The name gymnosperm comes from the Greek γυμνόσπερμος, a composite of γυμνός (gymnos lit. 'naked') and σπέρμα (sperma lit. 'seed'), as the ovules and subsequent seeds are not enclosed in a protective structure (carpels or fruit), but are borne naked, typically on cone scales.

Fossils
Main articles: Paleobotany and Evolutionary history of plants
 A petrified log in Petrified Forest National Park, Arizona
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Plant fossils include roots, wood, leaves, seeds, fruit, pollen, spores, phytoliths, and amber (the fossilized resin produced by some plants). Fossil land plants are recorded in terrestrial, lacustrine, fluvial and nearshore marine sediments. Pollen, spores and algae (dinoflagellates and acritarchs) are used for dating sedimentary rock sequences. The remains of fossil plants are not as common as fossil animals, although plant fossils are locally abundant in many regions worldwide.
The earliest fossils clearly assignable to Kingdom Plantae are fossil green algae from the Cambrian. These fossils resemble calcified multicellular members of the Dasycladales. Earlier Precambrian fossils are known that resemble single-cell green algae, but definitive identity with that group of algae is uncertain.
The earliest fossils attributed to green algae date from the Precambrian (ca. 1200 mya).[63][64] The resistant outer walls of prasinophyte cysts (known as phycomata) are well preserved in fossil deposits of the Paleozoic (ca. 250–540 mya). A filamentous fossil (Proterocladus) from middle Neoproterozoic deposits (ca. 750 mya) has been attributed to the Cladophorales, while the oldest reliable records of the Bryopsidales, Dasycladales) and stoneworts are from the Paleozoic.[52][65]
The oldest known fossils of embryophytes date from the Ordovician, though such fossils are fragmentary. By the Silurian, fossils of whole plants are preserved, including the simple vascular plant Cooksonia in mid-Silurian and the much larger and more complex lycophyte Baragwanathia longifolia in late Silurian. From the early Devonian Rhynie chert, detailed fossils of lycophytes and rhyniophytes have been found that show details of the individual cells within the plant organs and the symbiotic association of these plants with fungi of the order Glomales. The Devonian period also saw the evolution of leaves and roots, and the first modern tree, Archaeopteris. This tree with fern-like foliage and a trunk with conifer-like wood was heterosporous producing spores of two different sizes, an early step in the evolution of seeds.[66]
The Coal measures are a major source of Paleozoic plant fossils, with many groups of plants in existence at this time. The spoil heaps of coal mines are the best places to collect; coal itself is the remains of fossilised plants, though structural detail of the plant fossils is rarely visible in coal. In the Fossil Grove at Victoria Park in Glasgow, Scotland, the stumps of Lepidodendron trees are found in their original growth positions.
The fossilized remains of conifer and angiosperm roots, stems and branches may be locally abundant in lake and inshore sedimentary rocks from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras. Sequoia and its allies, magnolia, oak, and palms are often found.

 Range of pangaea glossopteris.
Petrified wood is common in some parts of the world, and is most frequently found in arid or desert areas where it is more readily exposed by erosion. Petrified wood is often heavily silicified (the organic material replaced by silicon dioxide), and the impregnated tissue is often preserved in fine detail. Such specimens may be cut and polished using lapidary equipment. Fossil forests of petrified wood have been found in all continents.
Fossils of seed ferns such as Glossopteris are widely distributed throughout several continents of the Southern Hemisphere, a fact that gave support to Alfred Wegener's early ideas regarding Continental drift theory.

Structure, growth, and development
Further information: Plant morphology
 The leaf is usually the primary site of photosynthesis in plants.
Most of the solid material in a plant is taken from the atmosphere. Through the process of photosynthesis, most plants use the energy in sunlight to convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, plus water, into simple sugars. These sugars are then used as building blocks and form the main structural component of the plant. Chlorophyll, a green-colored, magnesium-containing pigment is essential to this process; it is generally present in plant leaves, and often in other plant parts as well. Parasitic plants, on the other hand, use the resources of their host to provide the materials needed for metabolism and growth.
Plants usually rely on soil primarily for support and water (in quantitative terms), but they also obtain compounds of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium and other elemental nutrients from the soil. Epiphytic and lithophytic plants depend on air and nearby debris for nutrients, and carnivorous plants supplement their nutrient requirements, particularly for nitrogen and phosphorus, with insect prey that they capture. For the majority of plants to grow successfully they also require oxygen in the atmosphere and around their roots (soil gas) for respiration. Plants use oxygen and glucose (which may be produced from stored starch) to provide energy.[67] Some plants grow as submerged aquatics, using oxygen dissolved in the surrounding water, and a few specialized vascular plants, such as mangroves and reed (Phragmites australis),[68] can grow with their roots in anoxic conditions.

Factors affecting growth
The genome of a plant controls its growth. For example, selected varieties or genotypes of wheat grow rapidly, maturing within 110 days, whereas others, in the same environmental conditions, grow more slowly and mature within 155 days.[69]
Growth is also determined by environmental factors, such as temperature, available water, available light, carbon dioxide and available nutrients in the soil. Any change in the availability of these external conditions will be reflected in the plant's growth and the timing of its development.[citation needed]
Biotic factors also affect plant growth. Plants can be so crowded that no single individual produces normal growth, causing etiolation and chlorosis. Optimal plant growth can be hampered by grazing animals, suboptimal soil composition, lack of mycorrhizal fungi, and attacks by insects or plant diseases, including those caused by bacteria, fungi, viruses, and nematodes.[69]

 There is no photosynthesis in deciduous leaves in autumn.
Simple plants like algae may have short life spans as individuals, but their populations are commonly seasonal. Annual plants grow and reproduce within one growing season, biennial plants grow for two growing seasons and usually reproduce in second year, and perennial plants live for many growing seasons and once mature will often reproduce annually. These designations often depend on climate and other environmental factors. Plants that are annual in alpine or temperate regions can be biennial or perennial in warmer climates. Among the vascular plants, perennials include both evergreens that keep their leaves the entire year, and deciduous plants that lose their leaves for some part of it. In temperate and boreal climates, they generally lose their leaves during the winter; many tropical plants lose their leaves during the dry season.[citation needed]
The growth rate of plants is extremely variable. Some mosses grow less than 0.001 millimeters per hour (mm/h), while most trees grow 0.025–0.250 mm/h. Some climbing species, such as kudzu, which do not need to produce thick supportive tissue, may grow up to 12.5 mm/h.[citation needed] Plants protect themselves from frost and dehydration stress with antifreeze proteins, heat-shock proteins and sugars (sucrose is common). LEA (Late Embryogenesis Abundant) protein expression is induced by stresses and protects other proteins from aggregation as a result of desiccation and freezing.[70]

Effects of freezing
When water freezes in plants, the consequences for the plant depend very much on whether the freezing occurs within cells (intracellularly) or outside cells in intercellular spaces.[71] Intracellular freezing, which usually kills the cell[72] regardless of the hardiness of the plant and its tissues, seldom occurs in nature because rates of cooling are rarely high enough to support it. Rates of cooling of several degrees Celsius per minute are typically needed to cause intracellular formation of ice.[73] At rates of cooling of a few degrees Celsius per hour, segregation of ice occurs in intercellular spaces.[74] This may or may not be lethal, depending on the hardiness of the tissue. At freezing temperatures, water in the intercellular spaces of plant tissue freezes first, though the water may remain unfrozen until temperatures drop below −7 °C (19 °F).[71] After the initial formation of intercellular ice, the cells shrink as water is lost to the segregated ice, and the cells undergo freeze-drying. This dehydration is now considered the fundamental cause of freezing injury.

DNA damage and repair
Plants are continuously exposed to a range of biotic and abiotic stresses.  These stresses often cause DNA damage directly, or indirectly via the generation of reactive oxygen species.[75] Plants are capable of a DNA damage response that is a critical mechanism for maintaining genome stability.[76] The DNA damage response is particularly important during seed germination, since seed quality tends to deteriorate with age in association with DNA damage accumulation.[77] During germination repair processes are activated to deal with this accumulated DNA damage.[78] In particular, single- and double-strand breaks in DNA can be repaired.[79] Double-strand repair in plants often produce DNA junctions with structural alterations.[80]: 89  The DNA checkpoint kinase ATM has a key role in integrating progression through germination with repair responses to the DNA damages accumulated by the aged seed.[81]

Plant cells
 Plant cell structureThis section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Main article: Plant cell
Plant cells are typically distinguished by their large water-filled central vacuole, chloroplasts, and rigid cell walls that are made up of cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. Cell division is also characterized by the development of a phragmoplast for the construction of a cell plate in the late stages of cytokinesis. Just as in animals, plant cells differentiate and develop into multiple cell types. Totipotent meristematic cells can differentiate into vascular, storage, protective (e.g. epidermal layer), or reproductive tissues, with more primitive plants lacking some tissue types.[82]

Physiology
Main article: Plant physiology
Photosynthesis
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Main articles: Photosynthesis and Biological pigment
Plants photosynthesize, which means that they manufacture their own food molecules using energy obtained from light. The primary mechanism plants have for capturing light energy is the pigment chlorophyll. All green plants contain two forms of chlorophyll, chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. The latter of these pigments is not found in red or brown algae.
The simple equation of photosynthesis is as follows:






6


CO

2







+
6


H

2





O




→


light





C

6






H

12






O

6







+
6


O

2










{\displaystyle {\ce {6CO2{}+6H2O{}->[{\text{light}}]C6H12O6{}+6O2{}}}}


Immune system
See also: Immune system and Plant disease resistance
By means of cells that behave like nerves, plants receive and distribute within their systems information about incident light intensity and quality. Incident light that stimulates a chemical reaction in one leaf, will cause a chain reaction of signals to the entire plant via a type of cell termed a bundle sheath cell. Researchers, from the Warsaw University of Life Sciences in Poland, found that plants have a specific memory for varying light conditions, which prepares their immune systems against seasonal pathogens.[83] Plants use pattern-recognition receptors to recognize conserved microbial signatures. This recognition triggers an immune response. The first plant receptors of conserved microbial signatures were identified in rice (XA21, 1995)[84] and in Arabidopsis thaliana (FLS2, 2000).[85] Plants also carry immune receptors that recognize highly variable pathogen effectors. These include the NBS-LRR class of proteins.

Internal distribution
This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Main article: Vascular tissue
Vascular plants differ from other plants in that nutrients are transported between their different parts through specialized structures, called xylem and phloem. They also have roots for taking up water and minerals. The xylem moves water and minerals from the root to the rest of the plant, and the phloem provides the roots with sugars and other nutrient produced by the leaves.[82]

Genomics
Plants have some of the largest genomes among all organisms.[86] The largest plant genome (in terms of gene number) is that of wheat (Triticum asestivum), predicted to encode ≈94,000 genes[87] and thus almost 5 times as many as the human genome. The first plant genome sequenced was that of Arabidopsis thaliana which encodes about 25,500 genes.[88] In terms of sheer DNA sequence, the smallest published genome is that of the carnivorous bladderwort (Utricularia gibba) at 82 Mb (although it still encodes 28,500 genes)[89] while the largest, from the Norway Spruce (Picea abies), extends over 19,600 Mb (encoding about 28,300 genes).[90]

Ecology
Main article: Plant ecology
The photosynthesis conducted by land plants and algae is the ultimate source of energy and organic material in nearly all ecosystems. Photosynthesis, at first by cyanobacteria and later by photosynthetic eukaryotes, radically changed the composition of the early Earth's anoxic atmosphere, which as a result is now 21% oxygen. Animals and most other organisms are aerobic, relying on oxygen; those that do not are confined to relatively rare anaerobic environments. Plants are the primary producers in most terrestrial ecosystems and form the basis of the food web in those ecosystems. Many animals rely on plants for shelter as well as oxygen and food.[citation needed] Plants form about 80% of the world biomass at about 450 gigatonnes (4.4×1011 long tons; 5.0×1011 short tons) of carbon.[91]
Land plants are key components of the water cycle and several other biogeochemical cycles. Some plants have coevolved with nitrogen fixing bacteria, making plants an important part of the nitrogen cycle. Plant roots play an essential role in soil development and the prevention of soil erosion.[citation needed]

Distribution
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Plants are distributed almost worldwide. While they inhabit a multitude of biomes and ecoregions, few can be found beyond the tundras at the northernmost regions of continental shelves. At the southern extremes, plants of the Antarctic flora have adapted tenaciously to the prevailing conditions.[citation needed]
Plants are often the dominant physical and structural component of habitats where they occur. Many of the Earth's biomes are named for the type of vegetation because plants are the dominant organisms in those biomes, such as grasslands, taiga and tropical rainforest.[citation needed]

Ecological relationships
 The Venus flytrap, a species of carnivorous plant.
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Numerous animals have coevolved with plants. Many animals pollinate flowers in exchange for food in the form of pollen or nectar. Many animals disperse seeds, often by eating fruit and passing the seeds in their feces. Myrmecophytes are plants that have coevolved with ants. The plant provides a home, and sometimes food, for the ants. In exchange, the ants defend the plant from herbivores and sometimes competing plants. Ant wastes provide organic fertilizer.
The majority of plant species have various kinds of fungi associated with their root systems in a kind of mutualistic symbiosis known as mycorrhiza. The fungi help the plants gain water and mineral nutrients from the soil, while the plant gives the fungi carbohydrates manufactured in photosynthesis. Some plants serve as homes for endophytic fungi that protect the plant from herbivores by producing toxins. The fungal endophyte, Neotyphodium coenophialum, in tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea) does tremendous economic damage to the cattle industry in the U.S. Many legume plants have nitrogen fixing bacteria in the genus Rhizobium, found in nodules of their roots, that fix nitrogen from the air for the plant to use. In exchange, the plants supply sugars to the bacteria.[92]
Various forms of parasitism are also fairly common among plants, from the semi-parasitic mistletoe that merely takes some nutrients from its host, but still has photosynthetic leaves, to the fully parasitic broomrape and toothwort that acquire all their nutrients through connections to the roots of other plants, and so have no chlorophyll. Some plants, known as myco-heterotrophs, parasitize mycorrhizal fungi, and hence act as epiparasites on other plants.
Many plants are epiphytes, meaning they grow on other plants, usually trees, without parasitizing them. Epiphytes may indirectly harm their host plant by intercepting mineral nutrients and light that the host would otherwise receive. The weight of large numbers of epiphytes may break tree limbs. Hemiepiphytes like the strangler fig begin as epiphytes but eventually set their own roots and overpower and kill their host. Many orchids, bromeliads, ferns and mosses often grow as epiphytes. Bromeliad epiphytes accumulate water in leaf axils to form phytotelmata that may contain complex aquatic food webs.[93]
Approximately 630 plants are carnivorous, such as the Venus Flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) and sundew (Drosera species). They trap small animals and digest them to obtain mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus.[94]

Competition
Competition occurs when members of the same species, or several different species, compete for shared resources in a given habitat. According to the competitive exclusion principle, when environmental resources are limited, species cannot occupy nor be supported by identical niches.[95] Eventually, one species will out-compete the other, which will push the disadvantaged species to extinction.[95]
In regard to plants, competition tends to negatively affect their growth when competing for shared resources.[96] These shared resources commonly include space for growth, sunlight, water and nutrients. Light is an important resource because it is necessary for photosynthesis.[96] Plants use their leaves to shade other plants from sunlight and grow quickly to maximize their own expose.[96] Water is also important for photosynthesis, and plants have different root systems to maximize water uptake from soil.[97] Some plants have deep roots that are able to locate water stored deep underground, and others have shallower roots that are capable of extending longer distances to collect recent rainwater.[97]
Minerals are also important for plant growth and development, where deficiencies can occur if nutrient needs are not met.[98] Common nutrients competed for amongst plants include nitrogen and phosphorus. Space is also extremely important for a growing and developing plant.[99] Having optimal space makes it more likely that leaves are exposed to sufficient amounts of sunlight and are not overcrowded in order for photosynthesis to occur.[99] If an old tree dies, then competition arises amongst a number of trees to replace it.[96] Those that are less effective competitors are less likely to contribute to the next generation of offspring.[96]
Contrary to the belief that plants are always in competition, new research has found that in a harsh environment mature plants sheltering seedlings help the smaller plant survive.[100]

Importance
Main article: Plants in culture
Cultivation
The study of plant uses by people is called economic botany or ethnobotany.[101] Human cultivation of plants is part of agriculture, which is the basis of human civilization.[102] Plant agriculture is subdivided into agronomy, horticulture and forestry.[103]

Food
 Mechanical harvest of oats.
Main article: Agriculture
Humans depend on plants for food, either directly or as feed for domestic animals. Agriculture deals with the production of food crops, and has played a key role in the history of world civilizations. Agriculture includes agronomy for arable crops, horticulture for vegetables and fruit, and forestry for timber.[104] About 7,000 species of plant have been used for food, though most of today's food is derived from only 30 species. The major staples include cereals such as rice and wheat, starchy roots and tubers such as cassava and potato, and legumes such as peas and beans. Vegetable oils such as olive oil and palm oil provide lipids, while fruit and vegetables contribute vitamins and minerals to the diet.[105]

Medicines
Main article: Medicinal plants
 Melocactus plants being used as medicine.
Medicinal plants are a primary source of organic compounds, both for their medicinal and physiological effects, and for the industrial synthesis of a vast array of organic chemicals.[106] Many hundreds of medicines are derived from plants, both traditional medicines used in herbalism[107][108] and chemical substances purified from plants or first identified in them, sometimes by ethnobotanical search, and then synthesised for use in modern medicine. Modern medicines derived from plants include aspirin, taxol, morphine, quinine, reserpine, colchicine, digitalis and vincristine. Plants used in herbalism include ginkgo, echinacea, feverfew, and Saint John's wort. The pharmacopoeia of Dioscorides, De Materia Medica, describing some 600 medicinal plants, was written between 50 and 70 AD and remained in use in Europe and the Middle East until around 1600 AD; it was the precursor of all modern pharmacopoeias.[109][110][111]

Nonfood products
 Timber in storage for later processing at a sawmill
Main article: Non-food crop
Plants grown as industrial crops are the source of a wide range of products used in manufacturing, sometimes so intensively as to risk harm to the environment.[112] Nonfood products include essential oils, natural dyes, pigments, waxes, resins, tannins, alkaloids, amber and cork. Products derived from plants include soaps, shampoos, perfumes, cosmetics, paint, varnish, turpentine, rubber, latex, lubricants, linoleum, plastics, inks, and gums. Renewable fuels from plants include firewood, peat and other biofuels.[113][114] The fossil fuels coal, petroleum and natural gas are derived from the remains of aquatic organisms including phytoplankton in geological time.[115]
Structural resources and fibres from plants are used to construct dwellings and to manufacture clothing. Wood is used not only for buildings, boats, and furniture, but also for smaller items such as musical instruments and sports equipment. Wood is pulped to make paper and cardboard.[116] Cloth is often made from cotton, flax, ramie or synthetic fibres such as rayon and acetate derived from plant cellulose. Thread used to sew cloth likewise comes in large part from cotton.[117]

Aesthetic uses
 A rose espalier at Niedernhall in Germany.
Thousands of plant species are cultivated for aesthetic purposes as well as to provide shade, modify temperatures, reduce wind, abate noise, provide privacy, and prevent soil erosion. Plants are the basis of a multibillion-dollar per year tourism industry, which includes travel to historic gardens, national parks, rainforests, forests with colorful autumn leaves, and festivals such as Japan's[118] and America's cherry blossom festivals.[119]

 Capitals of ancient Egyptian columns decorated to resemble papyrus plants. (at Luxor, Egypt)
While some gardens are planted with food crops, many are planted for aesthetic, ornamental, or conservation purposes. Arboretums and botanical gardens are public collections of living plants. In private outdoor gardens, lawn grasses, shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, herbaceous perennials and bedding plants are used. Gardens may cultivate the plants in a naturalistic state, or may sculpture their growth, as with topiary or espalier. Gardening is the most popular leisure activity in the U.S., and working with plants or horticulture therapy is beneficial for rehabilitating people with disabilities.[citation needed]
Plants may also be grown or kept indoors as houseplants, or in specialized buildings such as greenhouses that are designed for the care and cultivation of living plants. Venus Flytrap, sensitive plant and resurrection plant are examples of plants sold as novelties. There are also art forms specializing in the arrangement of cut or living plant, such as bonsai, ikebana, and the arrangement of cut or dried flowers. Ornamental plants have sometimes changed the course of history, as in tulipomania.[120]
Architectural designs resembling plants appear in the capitals of Ancient Egyptian columns, which were carved to resemble either the Egyptian white lotus or the papyrus.[121] Images of plants are often used in painting and photography, as well as on textiles, money, stamps, flags and coats of arms.[citation needed]

Scientific and cultural uses
 Barbara McClintock (1902–1992) was a pioneering cytogeneticist who used maize (corn) to study the mechanism of inheritance of traits.
Basic biological research has often been done with plants. In genetics, the breeding of pea plants allowed Gregor Mendel to derive the basic laws governing inheritance,[122] and examination of chromosomes in maize allowed Barbara McClintock to demonstrate their connection to inherited traits.[123] The plant Arabidopsis thaliana is used in laboratories as a model organism to understand how genes control the growth and development of plant structures.[124] NASA predicts that space stations or space colonies will one day rely on plants for life support.[125]
Ancient trees are revered and many are famous. Tree rings themselves are an important method of dating in archeology, and serve as a record of past climates.[126]
Plants figure prominently in mythology, religion and literature.[127][128][129] They are used as national and state emblems, including state trees and state flowers. Plants are often used as memorials, gifts and to mark special occasions such as births, deaths, weddings and holidays. The arrangement of flowers may be used to send hidden messages.[citation needed]

Negative effects
 Musk Thistle are invasive species in texas.
Weeds are commercially or aesthetically undesirable plants growing in managed environments such as farms, urban areas, gardens, lawns, and parks. People have spread plants beyond their native ranges and some of these introduced plants become invasive, damaging existing ecosystems by displacing native species, and sometimes becoming serious weeds of cultivation.[citation needed]
Plants may cause harm to animals, including people. Plants that produce windblown pollen invoke allergic reactions in people who suffer from hay fever. A wide variety of plants are poisonous. Toxalbumins are plant poisons fatal to most mammals and act as a serious deterrent to consumption. Several plants cause skin irritations when touched, such as poison ivy. Certain plants contain psychotropic chemicals, which are extracted and ingested or smoked, including nicotine from tobacco, cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa, cocaine from Erythroxylon coca and opium from opium poppy. Smoking causes damage to health or even death, while some drugs may also be harmful or fatal to people.[130][131] Both illegal and legal drugs derived from plants may have negative effects on the economy, affecting worker productivity and law enforcement costs.[132][133]

See also


Plants portal

Biosphere
Evolutionary history of plants
Plant defense against herbivory
Plant identification
Plant reproduction
Plant to plant communication via mycorrhizal networks
The Plant List

References


^ Cavalier-Smith, T. (1981). "Eukaryote kingdoms: Seven or nine?". BioSystems. 14 (3–4): 461–481. doi:10.1016/0303-2647(81)90050-2. PMID 7337818.

^ Lewis, L.A.; McCourt, R.M. (2004). "Green algae and the origin of land plants". American Journal of Botany. 91 (10): 1535–1556. doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1535. PMID 21652308.

^ Kenrick, Paul; Crane, Peter R. (1997). The origin and early diversification of land plants: A cladistic study. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. ISBN 978-1-56098-730-7.

^ Adl, S.M. et al. (2005). "The new higher level classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists". The Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology. 52 (5): 399–451. doi:10.1111/j.1550-7408.2005.00053.x. PMID 16248873. S2CID 8060916.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ "Numbers of threatened species by major groups of organisms (1996–2010)" (PDF). International Union for Conservation of Nature. 11 March 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.

^ Field, C.B.; Behrenfeld, M.J.; Randerson, J.T.; Falkowski, P. (1998). "Primary production of the biosphere: Integrating terrestrial and oceanic components". Science. 281 (5374): 237–240. Bibcode:1998Sci...281..237F. doi:10.1126/science.281.5374.237. PMID 9657713. Archived from the original on 25 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.

^ "plant[2] – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary". Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2009.

^ "plant (life form) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Archived from the original on 13 March 2009. Retrieved 25 March 2009.

^ a b Whittaker, R.H. (1969). "New concepts of kingdoms or organisms" (PDF). Science. 163 (3863): 150–160. Bibcode:1969Sci...163..150W. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.403.5430. doi:10.1126/science.163.3863.150. PMID 5762760. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2014.

^ Margulis, L (1971). "Whittaker's five kingdoms of organisms: minor revisions suggested by considerations of the origin of mitosis". Evolution. 25 (1): 242–245. doi:10.2307/2406516. JSTOR 2406516. PMID 28562945.

^ Copeland, H.F. (1956). The Classification of Lower Organisms. Palo Alto: Pacific Books, p. 6, [1] Archived 14 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Cavalier-Smith, T. (1981). "Eukaryote Kingdoms: Seven or Nine?". BioSystems. 14 (3–4): 461–481. doi:10.1016/0303-2647(81)90050-2. PMID 7337818.

^ Linnaeus, C. (1751). Philosophia botanica Archived 23 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 1st ed., p. 37.

^ Haeckel, E. (1866). Generale Morphologie der Organismen. Berlin: Verlag von Georg Reimer. pp. vol. 1: i–xxxii, 1–574, pls I–II, vol. 2: i–clx, 1–462, pls I–VIII.

^ Haeckel, E. (1894). Die systematische Phylogenie Archived 27 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Based on Rogozin, I.B.; Basu, M.K.; Csürös, M. & Koonin, E.V. (2009), "Analysis of Rare Genomic Changes Does Not Support the Unikont–Bikont Phylogeny and Suggests Cyanobacterial Symbiosis as the Point of Primary Radiation of Eukaryotes", Genome Biology and Evolution, 1: 99–113, doi:10.1093/gbe/evp011, PMC 2817406, PMID 20333181 and Becker, B. & Marin, B. (2009), "Streptophyte algae and the origin of embryophytes", Annals of Botany, 103 (7): 999–1004, doi:10.1093/aob/mcp044, PMC 2707909, PMID 19273476; see also the slightly different cladogram in Lewis, Louise A. & McCourt, R.M. (2004), "Green algae and the origin of land plants", Am. J. Bot., 91 (10): 1535–1556, doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1535, PMID 21652308

^ Parfrey, Laura Wegener; Lahr, Daniel J.G.; Knoll, Andrew H.; Katz, Laura A. (16 August 2011). "Estimating the timing of early eukaryotic diversification with multigene molecular clocks". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 108 (33): 13624–13629. Bibcode:2011PNAS..10813624P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1110633108. PMC 3158185. PMID 21810989.

^ Derelle, Romain; Torruella, Guifré; Klimeš, Vladimír; Brinkmann, Henner; Kim, Eunsoo; Vlček, Čestmír; Lang, B. Franz; Eliáš, Marek (17 February 2015). "Bacterial proteins pinpoint a single eukaryotic root". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 112 (7): E693–E699. Bibcode:2015PNAS..112E.693D. doi:10.1073/pnas.1420657112. PMC 4343179. PMID 25646484.

^ Jackson, Christopher; Clayden, Susan; Reyes-Prieto, Adrian (1 January 2015). "The Glaucophyta: the blue-green plants in a nutshell". Acta Societatis Botanicorum Poloniae. 84 (2): 149–165. doi:10.5586/asbp.2015.020.

^ a b Sánchez-Baracaldo, Patricia; Raven, John A.; Pisani, Davide; Knoll, Andrew H. (12 September 2017). "Early photosynthetic eukaryotes inhabited low-salinity habitats". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 114 (37): E7737–E7745. doi:10.1073/pnas.1620089114. PMC 5603991. PMID 28808007.

^ a b Gitzendanner, Matthew A.; Soltis, Pamela S.; Wong, Gane K.-S.; Ruhfel, Brad R.; Soltis, Douglas E. (2018). "Plastid phylogenomic analysis of green plants: A billion years of evolutionary history". American Journal of Botany. 105 (3): 291–301. doi:10.1002/ajb2.1048. PMID 29603143.

^ Gawryluk, Ryan M. R.; Tikhonenkov, Denis V.; Hehenberger, Elisabeth; Husnik, Filip; Mylnikov, Alexander P.; Keeling, Patrick J. (8 August 2019). "Non-photosynthetic predators are sister to red algae". Nature. 572 (7768): 240–243. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1398-6. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 31316212. S2CID 197542583.

^ Riediger M, Hihara Y, Hess WR (1 June 2018). "From cyanobacteria and algae to land plants: The RpaB/Ycf27 regulatory network in transition". Perspectives in Phycology. 5 (1): 13–25. doi:10.1127/pip/2018/0078. S2CID 90444313.

^ Linzhou Li; Sibo Wang; Hongli Wang; Sunil Kumar Sahu; Birger Marin; Haoyuan Li; Yan Xu; Hongping Liang; Zhen Li; Shifeng Chen; Tanja Reder; Zehra Çebi; Sebastian Wittek; Morten Petersen; Barbara Melkonian; Hongli Du; Huanming Yang; Jian Wang; Gane Ka-Shu Wong; Xun Xu; Xin Liu; Yves Van de Peer; Michael Melkonian; Huan Liu (22 June 2020). "The genome of Prasinoderma coloniale unveils the existence of a third phylum within green plants". Nature Ecology & Evolution. 4 (9): 1220–1231. doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1221-7. PMC 7455551. PMID 32572216.

^ Margulis, L. (1974). "Five-kingdom classification and the origin and evolution of cells". The power of phylogenetic approaches to detect horizontally transferred genes. Evolutionary Biology. Vol. 7. pp. 45–78. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-6944-2_2. ISBN 978-1-4615-6946-6. PMC 1847511. PMID 17376230.

^ a b c d e Raven, Peter H.; Evert, Ray F.; Eichhorn, Susan E. (2005). Biology of Plants (7th ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 978-0-7167-1007-3.

^ Lewis, Louise A. & McCourt, R.M. (2004), "Green algae and the origin of land plants", Am. J. Bot., 91 (10): 1535–1556, doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1535, PMID 21652308

^ a b Becker, B. & Marin, B. (2009), "Streptophyte algae and the origin of embryophytes", Annals of Botany, 103 (7): 999–1004, doi:10.1093/aob/mcp044, PMC 2707909, PMID 19273476

^ Guiry, M.D.; Guiry, G.M. (2007). "Phylum: Chlorophyta taxonomy browser". AlgaeBase version 4.2 World-wide electronic publication, National University of Ireland, Galway. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 23 September 2007.

^ "Tassel Stonewort - Advice Centre". Freshwater Habitats Trust. Retrieved 25 August 2022.

^ Deacon, J.W. (2005). Fungal Biology. Wiley. ISBN 978-1-4051-3066-0. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016.

^ "An Online Flora of All Known Plants". World Flora Online. Retrieved 26 October 2020.

^ Hassler, Michael. "Total Species Count". World Plants. Synonymic Checklist and Distribution of the World Flora. Retrieved 26 October 2020.

^ "How many plant species are there in the world? Scientists now have an answer". Mongabay Environmental News. 12 May 2016. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022.

^ Van den Hoek, C.; Mann, D.G.; & Jahns, H.M. 1995. Algae: An Introduction to Phycology. pp. 343, 350, 392, 413, 425, 439, & 448 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). ISBN 0-521-30419-9

^ Guiry, M.D. & Guiry, G.M. (2011), AlgaeBase : Chlorophyta, World-wide electronic publication, National University of Ireland, Galway, archived from the original on 13 September 2019, retrieved 26 July 2011

^ Guiry, M.D. & Guiry, G.M. (2011), AlgaeBase : Charophyta, World-wide electronic publication, National University of Ireland, Galway, archived from the original on 13 September 2019, retrieved 26 July 2011

^ Van den Hoek, C.; Mann, D.G.; & Jahns, H.M. 1995. Algae: An Introduction to Phycology. pp. 457, 463, & 476. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). ISBN 0-521-30419-9

^ Crandall-Stotler, Barbara & Stotler, Raymond E., 2000. "Morphology and classification of the Marchantiophyta". p. 21 in A. Jonathan Shaw & Bernard Goffinet (Eds.), Bryophyte Biology. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). ISBN 0-521-66097-1

^ Schuster, Rudolf M., The Hepaticae and Anthocerotae of North America, volume VI, pp. 712–713. (Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History, 1992). ISBN 0-914868-21-7.

^ Goffinet, Bernard; William R. Buck (2004). "Systematics of the Bryophyta (Mosses): From molecules to a revised classification". Monographs in Systematic Botany. 98: 205–239.

^ Gifford, Ernest M.; Foster, Adriance S. (1988). Morphology and Evolution of Vascular Plants (3rd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. p. 358. ISBN 978-0-7167-1946-5.

^ Taylor, Thomas N.; Taylor, Edith L. (1993). The Biology and Evolution of Fossil Plants. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. p. 636. ISBN 978-0-13-651589-0.

^ International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, 2006. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species:Summary Statistics Archived 27 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine

^ "The oldest fossils reveal evolution of non-vascular plants by the middle to late Ordovician Period (≈450–440 m.y.a.) on the basis of fossil spores" Transition of plants to land Archived 2 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine

^ Strother, Paul K.; Battison, Leila; Brasier, Martin D.; Wellman, Charles H. (26 May 2011). "Earth's earliest non-marine eukaryotes". Nature. 473 (7348): 505–509. Bibcode:2011Natur.473..505S. doi:10.1038/nature09943. PMID 21490597. S2CID 4418860.

^ Harholt, Jesper; Moestrup, Øjvind; Ulvskov, Peter (1 February 2016). "Why Plants Were Terrestrial from the Beginning". Trends in Plant Science. 21 (2): 96–101. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2015.11.010. PMID 26706443. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022.

^ Ponce-Toledo, R. I.; Deschamps, P.; López-García, P.; Zivanovic, Y.; Benzerara, K.; Moreira, D. (2017). "An early-branching freshwater cyanobacterium at the origin of plastids". Current Biology. 27 (3): 386–391. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.056. PMC 5650054. PMID 28132810.

^ Rothwell, G.W.; Scheckler, S.E.; Gillespie, W.H. (1989). "Elkinsia gen. nov., a Late Devonian gymnosperm with cupulate ovules". Botanical Gazette. 150 (2): 170–189. doi:10.1086/337763. JSTOR 2995234. S2CID 84303226.

^ Kenrick, Paul & Peter R. Crane. 1997. The Origin and Early Diversification of Land Plants: A Cladistic Study. (Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Institution Press.) ISBN 1-56098-730-8.

^ Smith Alan R.; Pryer, Kathleen M.; Schuettpelz, E.; Korall, P.; Schneider, H.; Wolf, Paul G. (2006). "A classification for extant ferns" (PDF). Taxon. 55 (3): 705–731. doi:10.2307/25065646. JSTOR 25065646. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008.

^ a b Leliaert, F.; Smith, D.R.; Moreau, H.; Herron, M.D.; Verbruggen, H.; Delwiche, C.F.; De Clerck, O. (2012). "Phylogeny and molecular evolution of the green algae" (PDF). Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences. 31: 1–46. doi:10.1080/07352689.2011.615705. S2CID 17603352. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2015.

^ Leliaert, Frederik; Verbruggen, Heroen; Zechman, Frederick W. (2011). "Into the deep: New discoveries at the base of the green plant phylogeny". BioEssays. 33 (9): 683–692. doi:10.1002/bies.201100035. PMID 21744372. S2CID 40459076.

^ Silar, Philippe (2016), "Protistes Eucaryotes: Origine, Evolution et Biologie des Microbes Eucaryotes", HAL Archives-ouvertes: 1–462, archived from the original on 13 May 2016, retrieved 21 July 2016

^ Mikhailyuk, Tatiana; Lukešová, Alena; Glaser, Karin; Holzinger, Andreas; Obwegeser, Sabrina; Nyporko, Svetlana; Friedl, Thomas; Karsten, Ulf (2018). "New Taxa of Streptophyte Algae (Streptophyta) from Terrestrial Habitats Revealed Using an Integrative Approach". Protist. 169 (3): 406–431. doi:10.1016/j.protis.2018.03.002. ISSN 1434-4610. PMC 6071840. PMID 29860113.

^ Novíkov & Barabaš-Krasni (2015). Modern plant systematics. Liga-Pres. p. 685. doi:10.13140/RG.2.1.4745.6164. ISBN 978-966-397-276-3.

^ Leebens-Mack, M.; Barker, M.; Carpenter, E.; Deyholos, M.K.; Gitzendammer, M.A.; Graham, S.W.; Grosse, I.; Li, Zheng (2019). "One thousand plant transcriptomes and the phylogenomics of green plants". Nature. 574 (7780): 679–685. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1693-2. PMC 6872490. PMID 31645766.

^ Liang, Zhe;  et al. (2019). "Mesostigma viride Genome and Transcriptome Provide Insights into the Origin and Evolution of Streptophyta". Advanced Science. 7 (1): 1901850. doi:10.1002/advs.201901850. PMC 6947507. PMID 31921561.

^ Wang, Sibo;  et al. (2020). "Genomes of early-diverging streptophyte algae shed light on plant terrestrialization". Nature Plants. 6 (2): 95–106. doi:10.1038/s41477-019-0560-3. PMC 7027972. PMID 31844283.

^ Puttick, Mark;  et al. (2018). "The Interrelationships of Land Plants and the Nature of the Ancestral Embryophyte". Current Biology. 28 (5): 733–745. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.063. PMID 29456145.

^ Zhang, Jian;  et al. (2020). "The hornwort genome and early land plant evolution". Nature Plants. 6 (2): 107–118. doi:10.1038/s41477-019-0588-4. PMC 7027989. PMID 32042158.

^ Li, Fay Wei;  et al. (2020). "Anthoceros genomes illuminate the origin of land plants and the unique biology of hornworts". Nature Plants. 6 (3): 259–272. doi:10.1038/s41477-020-0618-2. PMC 8075897. PMID 32170292.

^ Knoll, Andrew H (2003). Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of Evolution on Earth. Princeton University Press.

^ Tappan, H (1980). Palaeobiology of Plant Protists. Freeman, San Francisco.

^ Butterfield, Nicholas J.; Knoll, Andrew H.; Swett, Keene (1994). "Paleobiology of the Neoproterozoic Svanbergfjellet Formation, Spitsbergen". Lethaia. 27 (1): 76. doi:10.1111/j.1502-3931.1994.tb01558.x.

^ Stewart, Wilson A.; Rothwell, Gar W. (1993). Paleobotany and the evolution of plants (2 ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521382946.

^ Wilson, Edward O.;  et al. (1973). Life on Earth (First ed.). Stamford, Conn., Sinauer Associates. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-87893-934-3.

^ R.M.M., Crawford (1982). "Physiological responses in flooding". Encyclopedia of Plant Physiology. 12B: 453–477.

^ a b Robbins, W.W.; Weier, T.E.; et al., Botany: Plant Science, 3rd edition, Wiley International, New York, 1965.

^ Goyal, K.; Walton, L.J.; Tunnacliffe, A. (2005). "LEA proteins prevent protein aggregation due to water stress". Biochemical Journal. 388 (Part 1): 151–157. doi:10.1042/BJ20041931. PMC 1186703. PMID 15631617.

^ a b Glerum, C. 1985. Frost hardiness of coniferous seedlings: principles and applications. pp. 107–123 in Duryea, M.L. (Ed.). Proceedings: Evaluating seedling quality: principles, procedures, and predictive abilities of major tests. Workshop, October 1984, Oregon State Univ., For. Res. Lab., Corvallis OR.

^ Lyons, J.M.; Raison, J.K.; Steponkus, P.L. 1979. The plant membrane in response to low temperature: an overview. pp. 1–24 in Lyons, J.M.; Graham, D.; Raison, J.K. (Eds.). Low Temperature Stress in Crop Plants. Academic Press, New York NY.

^ Mazur, P. 1977. The role of intracellular freezing in the death of cells cooled at supraoptimal rates. Cryobiology 14:251–272.

^ Sakai, A.; Larcher, W. (Eds.) 1987. Frost Survival of Plants. Springer-Verlag, New York. 321 p.

^ Roldán-Arjona, T.; Ariza, R.R. (2009). "Repair and tolerance of oxidative DNA damage in plants". Mutation Research. 681 (2–3): 169–179. doi:10.1016/j.mrrev.2008.07.003. PMID 18707020. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 22 September 2017.

^ Yoshiyama, K.O. (2016). "SOG1: a master regulator of the DNA damage response in plants". Genes and Genetic Systems. 90 (4): 209–216. doi:10.1266/ggs.15-00011. PMID 26617076.

^ Waterworth, W.M.; Bray, C.M.; West, C.E. (2015). "The importance of safeguarding genome integrity in germination and seed longevity". Journal of Experimental Botany. 66 (12): 3549–3558. doi:10.1093/jxb/erv080. PMID 25750428.

^ Koppen, G.; Verschaeve, L. (2001). "The alkaline single-cell gel electrophoresis/comet assay: a way to study DNA repair in radicle cells of germinating Vicia faba". Folia Biologica (Prague). 47 (2): 50–54. PMID 11321247.

^ Waterworth, W.M.; Masnavi, G.; Bhardwaj, R.M.; Jiang, Q.; Bray, C.M.; West, C.E. (2010). "A plant DNA ligase is an important determinant of seed longevity". Plant Journal. 63 (5): 848–860. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04285.x. PMID 20584150.

^ Britt, Anne B. (1996). "DNA Damage And Repair In Plants". Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology. Annual Reviews. 47 (1): 75–100. doi:10.1146/annurev.arplant.47.1.75. ISSN 1040-2519. PMID 15012283.

^ Waterworth, W.M.; Footitt, S.; Bray, C.M.; Finch-Savage, W.E.; West, C.E. (2016). "DNA damage checkpoint kinase ATM regulates germination and maintains genome stability in seeds". PNAS. 113 (34): 9647–9652. doi:10.1073/pnas.1608829113. PMC 5003248. PMID 27503884.

^ a b Campbell, Neil A.; Reece, Jane B. (2005). Biology (7th ed.). Pearson/Benjamin Cummings. ISBN 978-0-8053-7146-8.

^ Gill, Victoria (14 July 2010). "Plants 'can think and remember'". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018.

^ Song, W.Y.;  et al. (1995). "A receptor kinase-like protein encoded by the rice disease resistance gene, XA21". Science. 270 (5243): 1804–1806. Bibcode:1995Sci...270.1804S. doi:10.1126/science.270.5243.1804. PMID 8525370. S2CID 10548988. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018.

^ Gomez-Gomez, L.;  et al. (2000). "FLS2: an LRR receptor-like kinase involved in the perception of the bacterial elicitor flagellin in Arabidopsis". Molecular Cell. 5 (6): 1003–1011. doi:10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80265-8. PMID 10911994.

^ Michael, Todd P.; Jackson, Scott (1 July 2013). "The First 50 Plant Genomes". The Plant Genome. 6 (2): 0. doi:10.3835/plantgenome2013.03.0001in.

^ Brenchley, Rachel; Spannagl, Manuel; Pfeifer, Matthias; Barker, Gary L.A.; D'Amore, Rosalinda; Allen, Alexandra M.; McKenzie, Neil; Krame r, Melissa; Kerhornou, Arnau (29 November 2012). "Analysis of the bread wheat genome using whole-genome shotgun sequencing". Nature. 491 (7426): 705–710. Bibcode:2012Natur.491..705B. doi:10.1038/nature11650. PMC 3510651. PMID 23192148.

^ Arabidopsis Genome Initiative (14 December 2000). "Analysis of the genome sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana". Nature. 408 (6814): 796–815. Bibcode:2000Natur.408..796T. doi:10.1038/35048692. PMID 11130711.

^ Ibarra-Laclette, Enrique; Lyons, Eric; Hernández-Guzmán, Gustavo; Pérez-Torres, Claudia Anahí; Carretero-Paulet, Lorenzo; Chang, Tien-Hao; Lan, Tianying; Welch, Andreanna J.; Juárez, María Jazmín Abraham (6 June 2013). "Architecture and evolution of a minute plant genome". Nature. 498 (7452): 94–98. Bibcode:2013Natur.498...94I. doi:10.1038/nature12132. PMC 4972453. PMID 23665961.

^ Nystedt, Björn; Street, Nathaniel R.; Wetterbom, Anna; Zuccolo, Andrea; Lin, Yao-Cheng; Scofield, Douglas G.; Vezzi, Francesco; Delhomme, Nicolas; Giacomello, Stefania (30 May 2013). "The Norway spruce genome sequence and conifer genome evolution". Nature. 497 (7451): 579–584. Bibcode:2013Natur.497..579N. doi:10.1038/nature12211. PMID 23698360.

^ Bar-On YM, Phillips R, Milo R (June 2018). "The biomass distribution on Earth" (PDF). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 115 (25): 6506–6511. doi:10.1073/pnas.1711842115. PMC 6016768. PMID 29784790. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2020.

^ Wagner, Stephen (2011). "Biological Nitrogen Fixation". Nature Education Knowledge. Archived from the original on 17 March 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2017.

^ Frank, Howard, Bromeliad Phytotelmata Archived 20 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine, October 2000

^ Barthlott, W.; Porembski, S.; Seine, R.; Theisen, I. 2007. The Curious World of Carnivorous Plants: A Comprehensive Guide to Their Biology and Cultivation. Timber Press: Portland, Oregon.

^ a b Pocheville, Arnaud (January 2015). "The Ecological Niche: History and Recent Controversies". Handbook for Evolutionary Thinking - Springer. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2021.

^ a b c d e "Competition in Plant Communities". obo. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021.

^ a b Casper, Brenda B.; Jackson, Robert B. (November 1997). "Plant Competition Underground". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 28 (1): 545–570. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.28.1.545. ISSN 0066-4162. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021.

^ Craine, Joseph M.; Dybzinski, Ray (2013). "Mechanisms of plant competition for nutrients, water and light". Functional Ecology. 27 (4): 833–840. doi:10.1111/1365-2435.12081. ISSN 1365-2435. S2CID 83776710.

^ a b Oborny, Beáta; Kun, Ádám; Czárán, Tamás; Bokros, Szilárd (2000). "The Effect of Clonal Integration on Plant Competition for Mosaic Habitat Space". Ecology. 81 (12): 3291–3304. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2000)081[3291:TEOCIO]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 1939-9170. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021.

^ University of Portsmouth (13 November 2019). "Plants might be helping each other more than thought". phys.org. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2021.

^ Kochhar, S.L. (31 May 2016). Economic Botany: A Comprehensive Study. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781316675397.

^ Wrench, Jason S. (9 January 2013). Workplace Communication for the 21st Century: Tools and Strategies that Impact the Bottom Line [2 volumes]: Tools and Strategies That Impact the Bottom Line. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313396328.

^ United States Agricultural Research Service (1903). Report on the Agricultural Experiment Stations. U.S. Government Printing Office.

^ "The Development of Agriculture". National Geographic. 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2017.

^ "Food and drink". Kew Gardens. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2017.

^ "Chemicals from Plants". Cambridge University Botanic Garden. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 9 December 2017. Note that the details of each plant and the chemicals it yields are described in the linked subpages.

^ Tapsell, L.C.; Hemphill, I.; Cobiac, L. (August 2006). "Health benefits of herbs and spices: the past, the present, the future". Med. J. Aust. 185 (4 Suppl): S4–24. doi:10.5694/j.1326-5377.2006.tb00548.x. PMID 17022438. S2CID 9769230. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020.

^ Lai, P.K.; Roy, J.; Roy (June 2004). "Antimicrobial and chemopreventive properties of herbs and spices". Curr. Med. Chem. 11 (11): 1451–1460. doi:10.2174/0929867043365107. PMID 15180577.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "Greek Medicine". National Institutes of Health, USA. 16 September 2002. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2014.

^ Hefferon, Kathleen (2012). Let Thy Food Be Thy Medicine. Oxford University Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0199873982. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2017.

^ Rooney, Anne (2009). The Story of Medicine. Arcturus Publishing. p. 143. ISBN 978-1848580398. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2017.

^ "Industrial Crop Production". Grace Communications Foundation. 2016. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016.

^ "Industrial Crops and Products An International Journal". Elsevier. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2016.

^ Cruz, Von Mark V.; Dierig, David A. (2014). Industrial Crops: Breeding for BioEnergy and Bioproducts. Springer. pp. 9 and passim. ISBN 978-1-4939-1447-0. Archived from the original on 22 April 2017. Retrieved 1 October 2017.

^ Sato, Motoaki (1990). Thermochemistry of the formation of fossil fuels (PDF). Fluid-Mineral Interactions: A Tribute to H. P. Eugster, Special Publication No. 2. The Geochemical Society. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 1 October 2017.

^ Sixta, Herbert, ed. (2006). Handbook of pulp. Vol. 1. Winheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH. p. 9. ISBN 978-3-527-30997-9.

^ "Natural fibres". Discover Natural Fibres. Archived from the original on 20 July 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016.

^ Sosnoski, Daniel (1996). Introduction to Japanese culture. Tuttle. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-8048-2056-1. Retrieved 13 December 2017.

^ "History of the Cherry Blossom Trees and Festival". National Cherry Blossom Festival: About. National Cherry Blossom Festival. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2016.

^ Lambert, Tim (2014). "A Brief History of Gardening". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016.

^ Wilkinson, Richard H. (2000). The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. Thames and Hudson. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-0-500-05100-9.

^ Blumberg, Roger B. "Mendel's Paper in English". Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2017.

^ "Barbara McClintock: A Brief Biographical Sketch". WebCite. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2016.

^ "About Arabidopsis". TAIR. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016.

^ "Engineering Life". NASA. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016.

^ How Tree Rings Tell Time and Climate History Archived 12 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Author: Bauer, Bruce Climate.gov From November 29th, 2018 Received September 22nd 2021

^ Leitten, Rebecca Rose. "Plant Myths and Legends". Cornell University Liberty Hyde Bailey Conservatory. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016.

^ "Seven of the most sacred plants in the world". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020.

^ "Literary Plants". Nature Plants. 1 (11): 15181. 2015. doi:10.1038/nplants.2015.181. PMID 27251545.

^ "cocaine/crack". Archived from the original on 20 May 2007. Retrieved 25 May 2007.

^ "Deaths related to cocaine". Archived from the original on 17 July 2006. Retrieved 25 May 2007.

^ "Illegal drugs drain $160 billion a year from American economy". Archived from the original on 15 February 2008.

^ García-Altés, Anna; Ollé, Josep Ma; Antoñanzas, Fernando; Colom, Joan (September 2002). "The social cost of illegal drug consumption in Spain". Addiction. 97 (9): 1145–1153. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2002.00170.x. PMID 12199830. Archived from the original on 2 October 2007. Retrieved 25 May 2007.


Further reading
General

Evans, L.T. (1998). Feeding the Ten Billion – Plants and Population Growth. Cambridge University Press. Paperback, 247 pages. ISBN 0-521-64685-5.
Kenrick, Paul & Crane, Peter R. (1997). The Origin and Early Diversification of Land Plants: A Cladistic Study. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. ISBN 1-56098-730-8.
Raven, Peter H.; Evert, Ray F.; & Eichhorn, Susan E. (2005). Biology of Plants (7th ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-1007-2.
Taylor, Thomas N. & Taylor, Edith L. (1993). The Biology and Evolution of Fossil Plants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-651589-4.
Trewavas A (2003). "Aspects of Plant Intelligence". Annals of Botany. 92 (1): 1–20. doi:10.1093/aob/mcg101. PMC 4243628. PMID 12740212.
Species estimates and counts

International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) Species Survival Commission (2004). IUCN Red List The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
Prance G.T. (2001). "Discovering the Plant World". Taxon. 50 (2, Golden Jubilee Part 4): 345–359. doi:10.2307/1223885. JSTOR 1223885.
External links



The Wikibook Dichotomous Key has a page on the topic of: Plantae

Jones, T.M.; Reid, C.S.; Urbatsch, L.E. "Visual study of divisional Plantae". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) (requires Microsoft Silverlight)
Chaw, S.-M.;  et al. (1997). "Molecular Phylogeny of Extant Gymnosperms and Seed Plant Evolution: Analysis of Nuclear 18s rRNA Sequences" (PDF). Mol. Biol. Evol. 14 (1): 56–68. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a025702. PMID 9000754. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2005.
Index Nominum Algarum
Interactive Cronquist classification
Plant Resources of Tropical Africa
Tree of Life
Botanical and vegetation databases
African Plants Initiative database
Australia
Chilean plants at Chilebosque
e-Floras (Flora of China, Flora of North America and others)
Flora Europaea
Flora of Central Europe (in German)
Flora of North America
List of Japanese Wild Plants Online
Meet the Plants-National Tropical Botanical Garden
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center – Native Plant Information Network at University of Texas, Austin
The Plant List
United States Department of Agriculture not limited to continental US species
vteBotany
History
Outline
Subdisciplines
Archaeobotany
Astrobotany
Bryology
Dendrology
Ethnobotany
Paleobotany
Phycology
Phytochemistry
Phytogeography
Geobotany
Plant anatomy
Plant ecology
Plant pathology
Plant groups
Algae
Archaeplastida
Bryophyte
Non-vascular plants
Vascular plants
Spermatophytes
Pteridophyte
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm
Plant anatomy Plant morphology(glossary)Plant cells
Cell wall
Phragmoplast
Plastid
Plasmodesma
Vacuole
Tissues
Cork
Ground tissue
Mesophyll
Meristem
Storage organs
Vascular tissue
Vascular bundle
Wood
Vegetative
Bulb
Root
Rhizoid
Rhizome
Shoot
Bud
Leaf
Cataphyll
Petiole
Sessility
Stem
Reproductive(Flower)
Archegonium
Androecium
Pollen
Stamen
Staminode
Tapetum
Flower
Aestivation
Flower development
Floral diagram
Floral formula
Floral symmetry
Whorl
Fruit
Anatomy
Berry
Capsule
Nut
Pyrena
Seed
Dispersal
Endosperm
Gametophyte
Gynandrium
Gynoecium
Ovary
Locule
Ovule
Stigma
Hypanthium (Floral cup)
Inflorescence
Bract
Pedicellate
Raceme
Umbel
Perianth
Tepal
Petal
Sepal
Plant embryo
Receptacle
Sporophyll
Sporophyte
Surface structures
Cuticle
Epicuticular wax
Epidermis
Nectar
Stoma
Thorns, spines, and prickles
Trichome
Plant physiologyMaterials
Aleurone
Bulk flow
Cellulose
Nutrition
Photosynthesis
Chlorophyll
Phytomelanin
Plant hormones
Sap
Starch
Sugar
Transpiration
Turgor pressure
Plant growthand habit
Habit
Cushion plants
Rosettes
Shrubs
Prostrate shrubs
Subshrubs
Succulent plants
Trees
Vines
Lianas
Herbaceous plants
Secondary growth
Woody plants
Reproduction EvolutionEcology
Alternation of generations
Double fertilization
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary history
timeline
Flora
Germination
Pollination
Artificial
Pollinators
Pollen tube
Self
Sporangium
Microsporangia
Microspore
Megasporangium
Megaspore
Spore
Plant taxonomy
Biological classification
Botanical nomenclature
Botanical name
Correct name
Author citation
International Code of Nomenclature (ICN)
ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)
Cultivated plant taxonomy
Citrus taxonomy
Cultigen
Cultivar
Group
Grex
History of plant systematics
Herbarium
International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
Plant taxonomy systems
Taxonomic rank
Practice
Agronomy
Floriculture
Forestry
Horticulture
ListsRelated topics
Botanical terms
Botanists
by author abbreviation
Botanical expedition

 Portal
 WikiProject
 Category
 Commons

vteClassification of Archaeplastida or Plantae s.l.
Domain
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukaryota
(Supergroup
Plant
Hacrobia
Heterokont
Alveolata
Rhizaria
Excavata
Amoebozoa
Opisthokonta
Animal
Fungi)
ArchaeplastidaRhodelphidia
Rhodelphidea
Rhodophyta(red algae)
Cyanidiophyceae
Porphyridiophyceae
Stylonematophyceae
Compsopogonophyceae
Rhodellophyceae
Bangiophyceae
Florideophyceae
Glaucophyta
Glaucocystophyceae
incertae sedis
Algospongia
Viridiplantae  or Plantae s.s.(green algae & land plants)Prasinodermophyta
Prasinodermophyceae
Palmophyllophyceae
ChlorophytaPrasinophytina
Mamiellophyceae
Pyramimonadophyceae
Chlorophytina
Nephroselmidophyceae
Picocystophyceae
Chloropicophyceae
Pedinophyceae
Chlorodendrophyceae
UTC clade
Ulvophyceae
Trebouxiophyceae
Chlorophyceae
StreptophytaChlorokybophytina
Mesostigmatophyceae
Chlorokybophyceae
Spirotaenia
Klebsormidiophytina
Klebsormidiophyceae
Phragmoplastophytes
Charophyceae
Coleochaetophyceae
Zygnematophyceae
Embryophytes(land plants)
(see below↓)
Embryophytes or Plantae sensu strictissimoBryophytesMarchantiophyta(liverworts)
Haplomitriopsida
Marchantiopsida
Jungermanniopsida
Anthocerotophyta(hornworts)
Leiosporocerotopsida
Anthocerotopsida
Bryophyta(mosses)
Takakiopsida
Sphagnopsida
Andreaeobryopsida
Andreaeopsida
Oedipodiopsida
Tetraphidopsida
Polytrichopsida
Bryopsida
PolysporangiophytesProtracheophytes
†Horneophytopsida
†Aglaophyton
Tracheophytes(vascular plants)Paratracheophytes
†Rhyniopsida
EutracheophytesLycophytes
†Zosterophyllopsida
Lycopodiopsida (clubmosses, spikemosses & quillworts)
Euphyllophytes
†Eophyllophytopsida
†Trimerophytopsida
Moniliformopses
†Cladoxylopsida
Polypodiopsida (ferns and horsetails)
Lignophytes†Progymnosperms
†Noeggerathiopsida
†Aneurophytopsida
†Archaeopteridopsida
Spermatophytes(seed plants)†Pteridosperms(seed ferns)
†Arberiopsida
†Moresnetiopsida
†Lyginopteridopsida
†Pachytestopsida
†Caytoniales
†Callistophytales
†Calamopityales
†Peltaspermopsida
†Umkomasiales
†Axelrodiales
†Phasmatocycadopsida
†Pentoxylales
†Dictyopteridiopsida
†Cycadeoideopsida
Acrogymnospermae(living gymnosperms)
†Pityopsida
Cycadopsida (cycads)
Ginkgoopsida (Ginkgo)
Pinopsida (conifers)
Gnetopsida
Magnoliopsida(flowering plants)
Basal angiosperms
Core angiosperms
Magnoliids
Monocots
Eudicots

† = extinct •   Plants portal •   List of plant orders •  Current definitions of Plantae

vteEukaryota
Domain
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukaryota
(Supergroup
Plant
Hacrobia
Heterokont
Alveolata
Rhizaria
Excavata
Amoebozoa
Opisthokonta
Animal
Fungi)
DiaphoretickesArchaeplastida
Glaucophyta
Rhodelphidia
Rhodophyta
Picozoa
Green algaePlantae s.s.
Prasinodermophyta
Chlorophyta
Streptophyta
Cryptista
Endohelea
Palpitophyta
Katablepharidophyta
Cryptophyta
A+H
Alveidia
Haptista
Centroheliozoa
Haptophyta
SAR + TelonemiaSARHalvariaAlveolata
Ciliates
Acavomonadia
Colponemidia
Chromerida
Colpodellida
Sporozoa
Perkinsozoa
Dinophyta
Stramenopiles(heterokonts)
Bicosoecea
Developea
Hyphochytrea
Ochrophyta
Peronosporomycota
Opalinata
Pirsoniomycota
Placidozoa
Platysulcea
Sagenista
Rhizaria
Filosa
Retaria
Endomyxa

Telonemia
DiscobaEolouka
Jakobea
Tsukubea
Discicristata
Euglenozoa
Percolozoa
Loukozoa
Ancyromonadida
Malawimonadea
Metamonada (Anaeromonada, Trichozoa)
PodiataAmorphea(unikonts)Amoebozoa
Conosa (Archamoebae, Semiconosia)
Lobosa (Cutosea, Discosea, Tubulinea)
Obazoa
Apusomonadida
Breviatea
OpisthokontaHolomycota
Cristidiscoidea
Zoosporia
Opisthosporidia
True fungi
Holozoa
Ichthyosporea
Pluriformea
Syssomonas
Corallochytrea
Filozoa
Choanoflagellates
Filasterea
Metazoa or Animals
CRuMs
Collodictyonidae
Mantamonadidae
Rigifilida
Hemimastigophora
Spironemidae
Incertae sedis
†Acritarchs
†Grypania
†Gunflint microbiota
Major kingdoms are underlined. See also: protist. Sources and alternative views: Wikispecies.
vteElements of natureUniverse
Space
Time
Energy
Matter
particles
chemical elements
Change
Earth
Earth science
History (geological)
Structure
Geology
Plate tectonics
Oceans
Gaia hypothesis
Future
Weather
Meteorology
Atmosphere (Earth)
Climate
Clouds
Rain
Snow
Sunlight
Tides
Wind
tornado
tropical cyclone
Natural environment
Ecology
Ecosystem
Field
Radiation
Wilderness
Wildfires
Life
Origin (abiogenesis)
Evolutionary history
Biosphere
Hierarchy
Biology (astrobiology)

Biodiversity
Organism
Eukaryota
flora
plants
fauna
animals
fungi
protista
Prokaryotes
archaea
bacteria
Viruses

 Category

vteHorticulture and gardeningGardening
Allotment
Arboretum
Butterfly
Community
Forest
Foodscaping
French intensive
Garden
Garden design
computer-aided
Garden tool
Green wall
Guerrilla
Historic conservation
History
Landscape
Native
Parterre
Proplifting
Raised bed
Square foot
Sustainable
Xeriscaping
Types ofgardens
Alpine
Ancient Egypt
Back
Baroque
Biblical
Bog
Botanical
Bottle
Butterfly
Byzantine
Cactus
Colonial
Color
Communal
Garden square
Community
Container
Cottage
Dutch
East Asian
Chinese
Cantonese
Japanese
Roji
Zen
Korean
English
Fernery
Floating
Flower
French
formal
landscape
Renaissance
Front
German
Greek
Greenhouse
Hanging
Islamic
Italian
Keyhole
Kitchen
Knot
Market
Mary
Monastic
Mughal
Orchard
Indonesian home garden
Persian
Bāgh
Charbagh
Paradise
Physic
Pleasure
Prairie
Pollinator
Rain
Rock
Roman
Roof
Rose
Sacred
School
Scottish
Sculpture
Sensory
Shade
Shakespeare
Shrubbery
Spanish
Tea
Therapeutic
Trial
Tropical
Victory
Walled
Water
Wildlife
Winter
Zoological
Horticulture
Agriculture
stock-free
sustainable
urban
Arboriculture
Botany
Companion planting
Crop
most valuable
Flora
Floriculture
Canada
Taiwan
Hügelkultur
Fruticulture
Genetically modified tree
Hydroculture
Indigenous
Intercropping
Landscape architecture
Olericulture
Plant
breeding
propagation
drought tolerance
hardiness
Pomology
Postharvest physiology
Tropical
Urban
agriculture
horticulture
forestry
reforestation
Viticulture
Monoculture
Organic
Biodynamic agriculture
List of organic gardening and farming topics
Vegan organic agriculture
Plant protection
Fungicide
Herbicide
Index of pesticide articles
List of fungicides
Pesticide
Plant disease forecasting
Pruning
Weed control
Aquamog weed remover
Related articles
Community orchard
Features
Floral design
Floristry
Ikebana
Garden tourism
List of gardens

 Gardening portal
 Plants portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vteExtant life phyla/divisions by domainBacteria
Acidobacteriota
Actinomycetota
Aquificota
Armatimonadota
Atribacterota
Bacillota
Bacteroidota
Balneolota
Bdellovibrionota
Caldisericota
Calditrichota
Campylobacterota
Chlamydiota
Chlorobiota
Chloroflexota
Chrysiogenota
Coprothermobacterota
"Cyanobacteria"
Deferribacterota
Deinococcota
Dictyoglomota
Elusimicrobiota
Fibrobacterota
Fusobacteriota
Gemmatimonadota
Ignavibacteriota
Kiritimatiellota
Lentisphaerota
Mycoplasmatota
Myxococcota
Nitrospinota
Nitrospirota
Planctomycetota
Pseudomonadota
Rhodothermota
Spirochaetota
Synergistota
Thermodesulfobacteriota
Thermomicrobiota
Thermotogota
Verrucomicrobiota
Archaea
"Euryarchaeota"
"Korarchaeota"
"Nanoarchaeota"
Nitrososphaerota
Thermoproteota
Archaeal Richmond Mine acidophilic nanoorganisms
EukaryoteProtistChromista:
Heterokontophyta
Haptophyta
Cryptophyta
Ciliophora
Apicomplexa
Dinoflagellata
Radiolaria
Foraminifera
Cercozoa
Excavata:

Euglenozoa
Percolozoa
Jakobea
Metamonada
Other:

AmoebozoaFungi
Chytridiomycota
Blastocladiomycota
Neocallimastigomycota
Glomeromycota
Zygomycota
Ascomycota
Basidiomycota
Plant
Glaucophyta
Rhodophyta
Chlorophyta
Charophyta
Marchantiophyta
Anthocerotophyta
Moss
Lycopodiophyta
Pteridophyta
Cycadophyta
Ginkgophyta
Pinophyta
Gnetophyta
Flowering plant
Animal
Sponge
Ctenophora
Placozoa
Cnidaria
Xenacoelomorpha
Chordate
Hemichordate
Echinoderm
Chaetognatha
Kinorhyncha
Loricifera
Priapulida
Nematoda
Nematomorpha
Onychophora
Tardigrada
Arthropoda
Flatworm
Gastrotricha
Orthonectida
Dicyemida
Rotifera
Acanthocephala
Gnathostomulida
Micrognathozoa
Cycliophora
Nemertea
Phoronid
Bryozoa
Entoprocta
Brachiopoda
Mollusca
Annelida
Sipuncula
Incertae sedisParakaryon
vteLife, non-cellular life, and comparable structuresCellular life"Prokaryota"
Archaea
Bacteria
Mitochondrion
Plastid
Eukaryota
Animalia
Fungi
Plantae
'Protista'
Incertae sedis
Parakaryon
Nanobacterium (?)
Non-cellular lifeVirusIncl.: viroids,satellites,virophages,virusoidsRealms
Adnaviria
Duplodnaviria
Monodnaviria
Riboviria
Ribozyviria
Varidnaviria
UnassignedClassesNaldaviricetesFamilies
Alphasatellitidae
Ampullaviridae
Anelloviridae
Avsunviroidae
Bicaudaviridae
Clavaviridae
Finnlakeviridae
Fuselloviridae
Globuloviridae
Guttaviridae
Halspiviridae
Ovaliviridae
Plasmaviridae
Polydnaviridae
Portogloboviridae
Pospiviroidae
Spiraviridae
Thaspiviridae
Tolecusatellitidae
Genera
Dinodnavirus
Rhizidiovirus
Other
Nanobe (?)
Comparablestructures
Biological dark matter
Bio-like structure
Cancer cell
HeLa
Clonally transmissible cancer
Cosmid
Defective interfering particle
Earliest known life forms
LUCA
Endogenous viral element
Fosmid
Integrative and conjugative element
Phagemid
Plasmid
Prion
Fungal prion
Protocell
Coacervate
Proteinoid
Model lipid bilayer
Jeewanu
Sulphobe
Retroelements not elsewhere classified
Retron
Diversity-generating retroelement
Telomerase reverse transcriptase
Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene
Ribozyme
Spiegelman's Monster
Tandem repeat
Transposable element
Retroposon
Transpoviron

Taxon identifiers
Wikidata: Q756
Wikispecies: Plantae
AlgaeBase: 1
APNI: 54717
BioLib: 14871
CoL: P
EoL: 281
EPPO: 1PLAK
Fossilworks: 151418
GBIF: 6
iNaturalist: 47126
ISC: 107789
ITIS: 202422
MycoBank: 514430
NZOR: 3ead4965-50d6-4373-a616-240cc151c611
PPE: plantae
VicFlora: da1de22e-1d65-4197-9f4c-38ca39b964af
WoRMS: 3

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
1





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plant&oldid=1113056932"
Categories: PlantsKingdoms (biology)Hidden categories: CS1 maint: uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from July 2020Articles with 'species' microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2020Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2018Citation overkillArticles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from September 2022Articles needing additional references from June 2021All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from November 2018Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021Articles needing additional references from November 2018Articles containing Greek-language textCS1 errors: missing periodicalArticles with German-language sources (de)Articles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersPages that use a deprecated format of the chem tags



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikispeciesWikiquoteWikiversity




Languages


AcèhАдыгэбзэAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛÆngliscАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésArmãneashtiArpetanঅসমীয়াAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa BaliবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChi-ChewaChiShonaChiTumbukaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschދިވެހިބަސްDolnoserbskiडोटेलीEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFøroysktFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoГӀалгӀай贛語Gĩkũyũ客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutИронIsiXhosaIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرҚазақшаKernowekIkinyarwandaKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаКырык марыLadinLadinoЛаккуLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLa .lojban.LugandaLombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىဘာသာ မန်Bahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsNedersaksiesNēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanОлык марийଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisПерем комиភាសាខ្មែរPicardTok PisinPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaसंस्कृतम्SarduScotsSeelterskSesothoShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSiSwatiSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitTarandíneТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣLea faka-TongaᏣᎳᎩTshivendaTürkçeTürkmençeTyapУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVõroWalon文言West-VlamsWinarayWolof吴语ייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 29 September 2022, at 14:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










