



Power (social and political) - Wikipedia










































Power (social and political)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Ability to influence the behavior of others
"Public power" redirects here. For public electric utilities, see Public utility.
"Political power" redirects here. For the Steven Universe episode, see Political Power (Steven Universe).
For other uses of "Power", see Power (disambiguation).
Social and political power as a multifaceted concept. Top-left: The Great Hall of the People, the central state building used for legislative and ceremonial activities by the government of the People's Republic of China (PRC). Top-right: in the 2021 Henley Passport Index, Japan had the most visa-free access of any country through their passport agreements to 193 destinations; an example of soft power. Bottom-left: a chain gang of prisoners serving their sentences under the authority of prison institutions in Texas, USA. Bottom-right: statue of Barack Obama and Michelle Obama near Moneygall, Ireland; an example of cultural power.
Part of a series onSociology
History
Outline
Index
Key themes
Society
Globalization
Human behavior
Human environmental impact
Identity
Industrial revolutions 3 & 4
Social complexity
Social construct
Social environment
Social equality
Social equity
Social power
Social stratification
Social structure

Perspectives
Conflict theory
Critical theory
Structural functionalism
Positivism
Social constructionism
Symbolic interactionism

Branches
Aging
Architecture
Art
Astrosociology
Body
Criminology
Consciousness
Culture
Death
Demography
Deviance
Disaster
Economic
Education
Emotion (Jealousy)
Environmental
Family
Feminist
Fiscal
Food
Gender
Generations
Health
Historical
Immigration
Industrial
Internet
Jewry
Knowledge
Language
Law
Leisure
Literature
Marxist
Mathematic
Medical
Military
Music
Peace, war, and social conflict
Philosophy
Political
Public
Punishment
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science (History of science)
Social movements
Social psychology
Sociocybernetics
Sociology
Space
Sport
Technology
Terrorism
Urban
Utopian
Victimology
Visual

Methods
Quantitative
Qualitative
Comparative
Computational
Ethnographic
Conversation analysis
Historical
Interview
Mathematical
Network analysis
Social experiment
Survey

PeopleEast Asia
1900s
Fei Xiaotong
South Asia 

1800s
G.S Ghurye
1900s
Irawati Karve
M. N. Srinivas
Middle East

1400s
Ibn Khaldun
Europe

1700s
Auguste Comte
Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
1800s
Émile Durkheim
Harriet Martineau
Karl Marx
Georg Simmel
Herbert Spencer
Ferdinand Tönnies
Max Weber
1900s
Michel Foucault
Jürgen Habermas
North America

1800s
Jane Addams
Ernest Burgess
W.E.B. Du Bois
George Herbert Mead
Thorstein Veblen
1900s
James Coleman
Patricia Hill Collins
Erving Goffman
Paul Lazarsfeld
Charles Wright Mills
Robert K. Merton
Theda Skocpol
Dorothy E. Smith

Lists
Bibliography
Terminology
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline
By country

 Society portal
WikiProject Sociologyvte
In social science and politics, power is the social production of an effect that determines the capacities, actions, beliefs, or conduct of actors.[1] Power does not exclusively refer to the threat or use of force (coercion) by one actor against another, but may also be exerted through diffuse means (such as institutions).[1][2] Power may also take structural forms, as it orders actors in relation to one another (such as distinguishing between a master and a slave), and discursive forms, as categories and language may lend legitimacy to some behaviors and groups over others.[1]
The term authority is often used for power that is perceived as legitimate or socially approved by the social structure. Power can be seen as evil or unjust; however, power can also be seen as good and as something inherited or given for exercising humanistic objectives that will help, move, and empower others as well.
Scholars have distinguished between soft power and hard power.[citation needed]

Contents

1 History
2 Theories

2.1 Five bases of power

2.1.1 Legitimate power
2.1.2 Referent power
2.1.3 Expert power
2.1.4 Reward power
2.1.5 Coercive power


2.2 Principles in interpersonal relationships
2.3 Rational choice framework
2.4 Cultural hegemony
2.5 Tarnow
2.6 Foucault
2.7 Clegg
2.8 Galbraith
2.9 Gene Sharp
2.10 Björn Kraus
2.11 Unmarked categories
2.12 Counterpower
2.13 Other theories


3 Psychological research

3.1 Empathy gap

3.1.1 Past research
3.1.2 Bargaining games

3.1.2.1 Conclusion




3.2 Abusive power and control


4 Tactics

4.1 Balance of power


5 Effects

5.1 Approach/inhibition theory
5.2 Positive
5.3 Negative


6 Reactions

6.1 Tactics
6.2 Resistance to coercive influence
6.3 Kelman's compliance-identification-internalization theory of conversion


7 Power literacy
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (March 2022)
Theories[edit]
Five bases of power[edit]
Main article: French and Raven's five bases of power
In a now-classic study (1959),[3] social psychologists John R. P. French and Bertram Raven developed a schema of sources of power by which to analyse how power plays work (or fail to work) in a specific relationship.
According to French and Raven, power must be distinguished from influence in the following way: power is that state of affairs which holds in a given relationship, A-B, such that a given influence attempt by A over B makes A's desired change in B more likely. Conceived this way, power is fundamentally relative – it depends on the specific understandings A and B each apply to their relationship, and requires B's recognition of a quality in A which would motivate B to change in the way A intends. A must draw on the 'base' or combination of bases of power appropriate to the relationship, to effect the desired outcome. Drawing on the wrong power base can have unintended effects, including a reduction in A's own power.
French and Raven argue that there are five significant categories of such qualities, while not excluding other minor categories. Further bases have since been adduced – in particular by Gareth Morgan in his 1986 book, Images of Organization.[4]

Legitimate power[edit]
Main article: Legitimate power
Also called "positional power", legitimate power is the power of an individual because of the relative position and duties of the holder of the position within an organization. Legitimate power is formal authority delegated to the holder of the position. It is usually accompanied by various attributes of power such as a uniform, a title, or an imposing physical office.
In simple terms, power can be expressed[by whom?] as being upward or downward. With downward power, a company's superior influences subordinates for attaining organizational goals. When a company exhibits upward power, subordinates influence the decisions of their leader or leaders.

Referent power[edit]
Main article: Referent power
Referent power is the power or ability of individuals to attract others and build loyalty. It is based on the charisma and interpersonal skills of the power holder. A person may be admired because of specific personal trait, and this admiration creates the opportunity for interpersonal influence. Here the person under power desires to identify with these personal qualities, and gains satisfaction from being an accepted follower. Nationalism and patriotism count towards an intangible sort of referent power. For example, soldiers fight in wars to defend the honor of the country. This is the second least obvious power, but the most effective. Advertisers have long used the referent power of sports figures for products endorsements, for example. The charismatic appeal of the sports star supposedly leads to an acceptance of the endorsement, although the individual may have little real credibility outside the sports arena.[5] Abuse is possible when someone that is likable, yet lacks integrity and honesty, rises to power, placing them in a situation to gain personal advantage at the cost of the group's position. Referent power is unstable alone, and is not enough for a leader who wants longevity and respect. When combined with other sources of power, however, it can help a person achieve great success.

Expert power[edit]
Main article: Expert power
Expert power is an individual's power deriving from the skills or expertise of the person and the organization's needs for those skills and expertise. Unlike the others, this type of power is usually highly specific and limited to the particular area in which the expert is trained and qualified. When they have knowledge and skills that enable them to understand a situation, suggest solutions, use solid judgment, and generally outperform others, then people tend to listen to them. When individuals demonstrate expertise, people tend to trust them and respect what they say. As subject matter experts, their ideas will have more value, and others will look to them for leadership in that area.

Reward power[edit]
Main article: Reward power
Reward power depends on the ability of the power wielder to confer valued material rewards, it refers to the degree to which the individual can give others a reward of some kind such as benefits, time off, desired gifts, promotions or increases in pay or responsibility. This power is obvious but also ineffective if abused. People who abuse reward power can become pushy or be reprimanded for being too forthcoming or 'moving things too quickly'. If others expect to be rewarded for doing what someone wants, there is a high probability that they will do it. The problem with this basis of power is that the rewarder may not have as much control over rewards as may be required. Supervisors rarely have complete control over salary increases, and managers often cannot control all actions in isolation: even a company CEO needs permission from the board of directors for some actions. When an individual uses up available rewards, or the rewards do not have enough perceived value to others, their power weakens. One of the frustrations of using rewards is that they often need to be bigger each time if they are to have the same motivational impact: even then, if rewards are given frequently, people can become satiated by the reward, such that it loses its effectiveness.
In terms of cancel culture, the mass ostracization used to reconcile unchecked injustice and abuse of power is an "upward power." Policies for policing internet against these processes as a pathway for creating due process for handling conflicts, abuses, and harm that's done through established processes is known as "downward power."[6]

Coercive power[edit]
Main article: Coercive power
See also: Coercive control
Coercive power is the application of negative influences. It includes the ability to demote or to withhold other rewards. The desire for valued rewards or the fear of having them withheld can ensure the obedience of those under power. Coercive power tends to be the most obvious but least effective form of power as it builds resentment and resistance from the people who experience it. Threats and punishment are common tools of coercion. Implying or threatening that someone will be fired, demoted, denied privileges, or given undesirable assignments – these are characteristics of using coercive power. Extensive use of coercive power is rarely appropriate in an organizational setting, and relying on these forms of power alone will result in a very cold, impoverished style of leadership. This is a type of power commonly seen in fashion industry by coupling with legitimate power, it is referred in the industry specific literature's as "glamorization of structural domination and exploitation".[7]

Principles in interpersonal relationships[edit]
According to Laura K. Guerrero and Peter A. Andersen in Close Encounters: Communication in Relationships:[8]

Power as a Perception: Power is a perception in a sense that some people can have objective power, but still have trouble influencing others. People who use power cues and act powerfully and proactively tend to be perceived as powerful by others. Some people become influential even though they don't overtly use powerful behavior.
Power as a Relational Concept: Power exists in relationships. The issue here is often how much relative power a person has in comparison to one's partner. Partners in close and satisfying relationships often influence each other at different times in various arenas.
Power as Resource Based: Power usually represents a struggle over resources. The more scarce and valued resources are, the more intense and protracted are power struggles. The scarcity hypothesis indicates that people have the most power when the resources they possess are hard to come by or are in high demand. However, scarce resource leads to power only if it is valued within a relationship.
The Principle of Least Interest and Dependence Power: The person with less to lose has greater power in the relationship. Dependence power indicates that those who are dependent on their relationship or partner are less powerful, especially if they know their partner is uncommitted and might leave them. According to interdependence theory, quality of alternatives refers to the types of relationships and opportunities people could have if they were not in their current relationship. The principle of least interest suggests that if a difference exists in the intensity of positive feelings between partners, the partner who feels the most positive is at a power disadvantage. There's an inverse relationship between interest in relationship and the degree of relational power.
Power as Enabling or Disabling: Power can be enabling or disabling. Research[citation needed] has shown that people are more likely to have an enduring influence on others when they engage in dominant behavior that reflects social skill rather than intimidation. Personal power is protective against pressure and excessive influence by others and/or situational stress. People who communicate through self-confidence and expressive, composed behavior tend to be successful in achieving their goals and maintaining good relationships. Power can be disabling when it leads to destructive patterns of communication. This can lead to the chilling effect where the less powerful person often hesitates to communicate dissatisfaction, and the demand withdrawal pattern which is when one person makes demands and the other becomes defensive and withdraws (Mawasha, 2006). Both effects have negative consequences for relational satisfaction.
Power as a Prerogative: The prerogative principle states that the partner with more power can make and break the rules. Powerful people can violate norms, break relational rules, and manage interactions without as much penalty as powerless people. These actions may reinforce the powerful person's dependence power. In addition, the more powerful person has the prerogative to manage both verbal and nonverbal interactions. They can initiate conversations, change topics, interrupt others, initiate touch, and end discussions more easily than less powerful people. (See expressions of dominance.)
Rational choice framework[edit]
Game theory, with its foundations in the Walrasian theory of rational choice, is increasingly used in various disciplines to help analyze power relationships. One rational choice definition of power is given by Keith Dowding in his book Power.
In rational choice theory, human individuals or groups can be modelled as 'actors' who choose from a 'choice set' of possible actions in order to try to achieve desired outcomes. An actor's 'incentive structure' comprises (its beliefs about) the costs associated with different actions in the choice set, and the likelihoods that different actions will lead to desired outcomes.
In this setting we can differentiate between:

outcome power – the ability of an actor to bring about or help bring about outcomes;
social power – the ability of an actor to change the incentive structures of other actors in order to bring about outcomes.
This framework can be used to model a wide range of social interactions where actors have the ability to exert power over others. For example, a 'powerful' actor can take options away from another's choice set; can change the relative costs of actions; can change the likelihood that a given action will lead to a given outcome; or might simply change the other's beliefs about its incentive structure.
As with other models of power, this framework is neutral as to the use of 'coercion'. For example: a threat of violence can change the likely costs and benefits of different actions; so can a financial penalty in a 'voluntarily agreed' contract, or indeed a friendly offer.

Cultural hegemony[edit]
In the Marxist tradition, the Italian writer Antonio Gramsci elaborated the role of ideology in creating a cultural hegemony, which becomes a means of bolstering the power of capitalism and of the nation-state. Drawing on Niccolò Machiavelli in The Prince, and trying to understand why there had been no Communist revolution in Western Europe, while it was claimed there had been one in Russia, Gramsci conceptualised this hegemony as a centaur, consisting of two halves. The back end, the beast, represented the more classic, material image of power, power through coercion, through brute force, be it physical or economic. But the capitalist hegemony, he argued, depended even more strongly on the front end, the human face, which projected power through 'consent'. In Russia, this power was lacking, allowing for a revolution. However, in Western Europe, specifically in Italy, capitalism had succeeded in exercising consensual power, convincing the working classes that their interests were the same as those of capitalists. In this way, a revolution had been avoided.
While Gramsci stresses the significance of ideology in power structures, Marxist-feminist writers such as Michele Barrett stress the role of ideologies in extolling the virtues of family life. The classic argument to illustrate this point of view is the use of women as a 'reserve army of labour'. In wartime, it is accepted that women perform masculine tasks, while after the war the roles are easily reversed. Therefore, according to Barrett, the destruction of capitalist economic relations is necessary but not sufficient for the liberation of women.[9]

Tarnow[edit]
Eugen Tarnow considers what power hijackers have over air plane passengers and draws similarities with power in the military.[10] He shows that power over an individual can be amplified by the presence of a group. If the group conforms to the leader's commands, the leader's power over an individual is greatly enhanced while if the group does not conform the leader's power over an individual is nil.

Foucault[edit]
See also: Biopower
For Michel Foucault, the real power will always rely on the ignorance of its agents. No single human, group nor single actor runs the dispositif (machine or apparatus) but power is dispersed through the apparatus as efficiently and silently as possible, ensuring its agents to do whatever is necessary. It is because of this action that power is unlikely to be detected that it remains elusive to 'rational' investigation. Foucault quotes a text reputedly written by political economist Jean Baptiste Antoine Auget de Montyon, entitled Recherches et considérations sur la population de la France (1778), but turns out to be written by his secretary Jean-Baptise Moheau (1745–1794) and by emphasizing biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck who constantly refers to milieus as a plural adjective and sees into the milieu as an expression as nothing more than water air and light confirming the genus within the milieu, in this case the human species, relates to a function of the population and its social and political interaction in which both form an artificial and natural milieu. This milieu (both artificial and natural) appears as a target of intervention for power according to Foucault which is radically different from the previous notions on sovereignty, territory and disciplinary space inter woven into from a social and political relations which function as a species (biological species).[11] Foucault originated and developed the concept of "docile bodies" in his book Discipline and Punish. He writes, "A body is docile that may be subjected, used, transformed and improved.[12]

Clegg[edit]
Stewart Clegg proposes another three-dimensional model with his "circuits of power"[13] theory. This model likens the production and organizing of power to an electric circuit board consisting of three distinct interacting circuits: episodic, dispositional, and facilitative. These circuits operate at three levels, two are macro and one is micro. The episodic circuit is the micro level and is constituted of irregular exercise of power as agents address feelings, communication, conflict, and resistance in day-to-day interrelations. The outcomes of the episodic circuit are both positive and negative. The dispositional circuit is constituted of macro level rules of practice and socially constructed meanings that inform member relations and legitimate authority. The facilitative circuit is constituted of macro level technology, environmental contingencies, job design, and networks, which empower or disempower and thus punish or reward, agency in the episodic circuit. All three independent circuits interact at "obligatory passage points" which are channels for empowerment or disempowerment.

Galbraith[edit]
John Kenneth Galbraith summarizes the types of power as being "condign" (based on force), "compensatory" (through the use of various resources) or "conditioned" (the result of persuasion), and their sources as "personality" (individuals), "property" (their material resources) and "organizational" (whoever sits at the top of an organisational power structure).[14]

Gene Sharp[edit]
Gene Sharp, an American professor of political science, believes that power depends ultimately on its bases. Thus a political regime maintains power because people accept and obey its dictates, laws and policies. Sharp cites the insight of Étienne de La Boétie.
Sharp's key theme is that power is not monolithic; that is, it does not derive from some intrinsic quality of those who are in power. For Sharp, political power, the power of any state – regardless of its particular structural organization – ultimately derives from the subjects of the state. His fundamental belief is that any power structure relies upon the subjects' obedience to the orders of the ruler(s). If subjects do not obey, leaders have no power.[15]
His work is thought to have been influential in the overthrow of Slobodan Milošević, in the 2011 Arab Spring, and other nonviolent revolutions.[16]

Björn Kraus[edit]
Björn Kraus deals with the epistemological perspective upon power regarding the question about possibilities of interpersonal influence by developing a special form of constructivism (named relational constructivism).[17] Instead of focussing on the valuation and distribution of power, he asks first and foremost what the term can describe at all.[18] Coming from Max Weber's definition of power,[19] he realizes that the term of power has to be split into "instructive power" and "destructive power".[20]: 105 [21]: 126  More precisely, instructive power means the chance to determine the actions and thoughts of another person, whereas destructive power means the chance to diminish the opportunities of another person.[18] How significant this distinction really is, becomes evident by looking at the possibilities of rejecting power attempts: Rejecting instructive power is possible – rejecting destructive power is not. By using this distinction, proportions of power can be analyzed in a more sophisticated way, helping to sufficiently reflect on matters of responsibility.[21]: 139 f.  This perspective permits to get over an "either-or-position" (either there is power, or there isn't), which is common especially in epistemological discourses about power theories,[22][23][24] and to introduce the possibility of an "as well as-position".[21]: 120 

Unmarked categories[edit]
The idea of unmarked categories originated in feminism.[citation needed] As opposed to looking at social difference by focusing on what or whom is perceived to be different, theorists who use the idea of unmarked categories insist that one must also look at how whatever is "normal" comes to be perceived as unremarkable, and what effects this has on social relations. Attending the unmarked category is thought to be a way to analyze linguistic and cultural practices to provide insight into how social differences, including power, are produced and articulated in everyday occurrences.[25]
According to the idea of unmarked categories, when the cultural practices of people who occupy positions of relative power or can more easily exercise power seem obvious, they tend not to be explicitly articulated and therefore are perceived as default or baseline practices against which others are evaluated as different, deviant, or aberrant. The unmarked category becomes the standard against which to measure everything else. For example, it is posited[citation needed] that if a protagonist's race is not indicated, most Western[further explanation needed] readers will assume the protagonist is white; if a sexual identity is not indicated, it will be assumed the protagonist is heterosexual; if the gender of a body is not indicated, it is assumed to be male; if no disability is indicated, it will be assumed the protagonist is able-bodied. These assumptions do not, however, mean the unmarked category is superior, preferable, or more "natural," nor that the practices associated with the unmarked category require less social effort to enact.[25]
Although the unmarked category is typically not explicitly noticed and often goes overlooked, it is still necessarily visible.[26] As visible but unnoticed and unremarkable, membership in the unmarked category can be an index of power.[citation needed] For example, whiteness forms an unmarked category not commonly noticeable to the powerful,[citation needed] as they often fall within this category. Social groups can hold this view of power in terms of a variety of social distinctions, such as race, class, gender, ability, and sexuality.

Counterpower[edit]
Main article: Dual power
The term 'counter-power' (sometimes written 'counterpower') is used in a range of situations to describe the countervailing force that can be utilised by the oppressed to counterbalance or erode the power of elites. A general definition has been provided by the anthropologist David Graeber as 'a collection of social institutions set in opposition to the state and capital: from self-governing communities to radical labor unions to popular militias'.[27] Graeber also notes that counter-power can also be referred to as 'anti-power' and 'when institutions [of counter-power] maintain themselves in the face of the state, this is usually referred to as a 'dual power' situation'.[27] Tim Gee, in his 2011 book Counterpower: Making Change Happen,[28] put forward a theory that those disempowered by governments' and elite groups' power can use counterpower to counter this.[29]  In Gee's model, counterpower is split into three categories: idea counterpower, economic counterpower, and physical counterpower.[28]
Although the term has come to prominence through its use by participants in the global justice/anti-globalization movement of the 1990s onwards,[30] the word has been used for at least 60 years; for instance Martin Buber's 1949 book 'Paths in Utopia' includes the line 'Power abdicates only under the stress of counter-power'.[31][32]: 13 

Other theories[edit]
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) defined power as a man's "present means, to obtain some future apparent good" (Leviathan, Ch. 10).
The thought of Friedrich Nietzsche underlies much 20th century analysis of power. Nietzsche disseminated ideas on the "will to power," which he saw as the domination of other humans as much as the exercise of control over one's environment.
Some schools of psychology, notably that associated with Alfred Adler, place power dynamics at the core of their theory (where orthodox Freudians might place sexuality).
A generalization of power is given as "what counts as a means of determining a subject's position in a given competition".[33]
Psychological research[edit]
Recent experimental psychology suggests that the more power one has, the less one takes on the perspective of others, implying that the powerful have less empathy. Adam Galinsky, along with several coauthors, found that when those who are reminded of their powerlessness are instructed to draw Es on their forehead, they are 3 times more likely to draw them such that they are legible to others than those who are reminded of their power.[34][35] Powerful people are also more likely to take action. In one example, powerful people turned off an irritatingly close fan twice as much as less powerful people. Researchers have documented the bystander effect: they found that powerful people are three times as likely to first offer help to a "stranger in distress".[36]
A study involving over 50 college students suggested that those primed to feel powerful through stating 'power words' were less susceptible to external pressure, more willing to give honest feedback, and more creative.[37]

Empathy gap[edit]
Main article: Empathy gap (social psychology)
"Power is defined as a possibility to influence others."[38]: 1137 
The use of power has evolved from centuries.[citation needed] Gaining prestige, honor and reputation is one of the central motives for gaining power in human nature.[citation needed] Power also relates with empathy gaps because it limits the interpersonal relationship and compares the power differences. Having power or not having power can cause a number of psychological consequences. It leads to strategic versus social responsibilities.[citation needed] Research experiments were done[by whom?] as early as 1968 to explore power conflict.[38]

Past research[edit]
Earlier[when?], research proposed that increased power relates to increased rewards and leads one to approach things more frequently.[citation needed] In contrast, decreased power relates to more constraint, threat and punishment which leads to inhibitions. It was concluded[by whom?] that being powerful leads one to successful outcomes, to develop negotiation strategies and to make more self-serving offers.[citation needed]
Later[when?], research proposed that differences in power lead to strategic considerations. Being strategic can also mean to defend when one is opposed or to hurt the decision-maker. It was concluded[by whom?] that facing one with more power leads to strategic consideration whereas facing one with less power leads to a social responsibility.[38]

Bargaining games[edit]
Bargaining games were explored[by whom?] in 2003 and 2004. These studies compared behavior done in different power given[clarification needed] situations.[38]
In an ultimatum game, the person in given power offers an ultimatum and the recipient would have to accept that offer or else both the proposer and the recipient will receive no reward.[38]
In a dictator game, the person in given power offers a proposal and the recipient would have to accept that offer. The recipient has no choice of rejecting the offer.[38]

Conclusion[edit]
The dictator game gives no power to the recipient whereas the ultimatum game gives some power to the recipient. The behavior observed was that the person offering the proposal would act less strategically than would the one offering in the ultimatum game. Self-serving also occurred and a lot of pro-social behavior was observed.[38]
When the counterpart recipient is completely powerless, lack of strategy, social responsibility and moral consideration is often observed from the behavior of the proposal given (the one with the power).[38]

Abusive power and control[edit]
Main article: Abusive power and control
See also: Coercive power
One can regard power as evil or unjust; however, power can also be seen as good and as something inherited or given for exercising humanistic objectives that will help, move, and empower others as well.[citation needed] In general, power derives from the factors of interdependence between two entities and the environment.[citation needed]  The use of power need not involve force or the threat of force (coercion). An example of using power without oppression is the concept "soft power" (as compared to hard power). Much of the recent sociological debate about power revolves around the issue of its means to enable – in other words, power as a means to make social actions possible as much as it may constrain or prevent them.[citation needed]
Abusive power and control (or controlling behaviour or coercive control) involve the ways in which abusers gain and maintain power and control over victims for abusive purposes such as psychological, physical, sexual, or financial abuse. Such abuse can have various causes - such as personal gain, personal gratification, psychological projection, devaluation, envy or because some abusers enjoy exercising power and control.
Controlling abusers may use multiple tactics to exert power and control over their victims. The tactics themselves are psychologically and sometimes physically abusive. Control may be helped through economic abuse, thus limiting the victim's actions as they may then lack the necessary resources to resist the abuse.[39] Abusers aim to control and intimidate  victims or to influence them to feel that they do not have an equal voice in the relationship.[40]
Manipulators and abusers may control their victims with a range of tactics, including:[41]

positive reinforcement (such as praise, superficial charm, flattery, ingratiation, love bombing, smiling, gifts, attention)
negative reinforcement
intermittent or partial reinforcement
psychological punishment (such as nagging, silent treatment, swearing, threats, intimidation, emotional blackmail, guilt trips, inattention)
traumatic tactics (such as verbal abuse or explosive anger)
The vulnerabilities of the victim are exploited, with those who are particularly vulnerable being most often selected as targets.[41][42][43] Traumatic bonding can occur between the abuser and victim as the result of ongoing cycles of abuse in which the intermittent reinforcement of reward and punishment fosters powerful emotional bonds that are resistant to change, as well as a climate of fear.[44] An attempt may be made to normalise, legitimise, rationalise, deny, or minimise the abusive behaviour, or to blame the victim for it.[45][46][47]
Isolation, gaslighting, mind games, lying, disinformation, propaganda, destabilisation, brainwashing and divide and rule are other strategies that are often used. The victim may be plied with alcohol or drugs or deprived of sleep to help disorientate them.[48][49]
Certain personality-types[which?] feel particularly compelled to control other people.[citation needed]

Tactics[edit]
In everyday situations people use a variety of power tactics to push or prompt other people into particular actions. Many examples exist of common power tactics employed every day. Some of these tactics include bullying, collaboration, complaining, criticizing, demanding, disengaging, evading, humor, inspiring, manipulating, negotiating, socializing, and supplicating. One can classify such power tactics along three different dimensions:[50][51]

Soft and hard: Soft tactics take advantage of the relationship between the influencer and the target. They are more indirect and interpersonal (e.g., collaboration, socializing). Conversely, hard tactics are harsh, forceful, direct, and rely on concrete outcomes. However, they are not more powerful than soft tactics. In many circumstances, fear of social exclusion can be a much stronger motivator than some kind of physical punishment.
Rational and nonrational: Rational tactics of influence make use of reasoning, logic, and sound judgment, whereas nonrational tactics may rely on emotionality or misinformation. Examples of each include bargaining and persuasion, and evasion and  put-downs, respectively.
Unilateral and bilateral: Bilateral tactics, such as collaboration and negotiation, involve reciprocity on the part of both the person influencing and their target. Unilateral tactics, on the other hand, develop without any participation on the part of the target. These tactics include disengagement and the deployment of fait accomplis.
People tend to vary in their use of power tactics, with different types of people opting for different tactics. For instance, interpersonally oriented people tend to use soft and rational tactics.[50] Moreover, extroverts use a greater variety of power tactics than do introverts.[52] People will also choose different tactics based on the group situation, and based on whom they wish to influence. People also tend to shift from soft to hard tactics when they face resistance.[53][54]

Balance of power[edit]
Because power operates both relationally and reciprocally, sociologists speak of the "balance of power" between parties to a relationship:[55][56]
all parties to all relationships have some power: the sociological examination of power concerns itself with discovering and describing the relative strengths: equal or unequal, stable or subject to periodic change. Sociologists usually analyse relationships in which the parties have relatively equal or nearly equal power in terms of constraint rather than of power.[citation needed] In this context, "power" has a connotation of unilateralism. If this were not so, then all relationships could be described in terms of "power", and its meaning would be lost. Given that power is not innate and can be granted to others, to acquire power one must possess or control a form of power currency.[57][need quotation to verify][58]

Effects[edit]
Power changes those in the position of power and those who are targets of that power.[59]

Approach/inhibition theory[edit]
Developed by D. Keltner and colleagues,[60] approach/inhibition theory assumes that having power and using power alters psychological states of individuals. The theory is based on the notion that most organisms react to environmental events in two common ways. The reaction of approach is associated with action, self-promotion, seeking rewards, increased energy and movement. Inhibition, on the contrary, is associated with self-protection, avoiding threats or danger, vigilance, loss of motivation and an overall reduction in activity.
Overall, approach/inhibition theory holds that power promotes approach tendencies, while a reduction in power promotes inhibition tendencies.

Positive[edit]
Power prompts people to take action
Makes individuals more responsive to changes within a group and its environment[61]
Powerful people are more proactive, more likely to speak up, make the first move, and lead negotiation[62]
Powerful people are more focused on the goals appropriate in a given situation and tend to plan more task-related activities in a work setting[63]
Powerful people tend to experience more positive emotions, such as happiness and satisfaction, and they smile more than low-power individuals[64]
Power is associated with optimism about the future because more powerful individuals focus their attention on more positive aspects of the environment[65]
People with more power tend to carry out executive cognitive functions more rapidly and successfully, including internal control mechanisms that coordinate attention, decision-making, planning, and goal-selection[66]
Negative[edit]
Powerful people are prone to take risky, inappropriate, or unethical decisions and often overstep their boundaries[67][68]
They tend to generate negative emotional reactions in their subordinates, particularly when there is a conflict in the group[69]
When individuals gain power, their self-evaluation become more positive, while their evaluations of others become more negative[70]
Power tends to weaken one's social attentiveness, which leads to difficulty understanding other people's point of view[71]
Powerful people also spend less time collecting and processing information about their subordinates and often perceive them in a stereotypical fashion[72]
People with power tend to use more coercive tactics, increase social distance between themselves and subordinates, believe that non-powerful individuals are untrustworthy, and devalue work and ability of less powerful individuals[73]
Reactions[edit]
Tactics[edit]
A number of studies demonstrate that harsh power tactics (e.g. punishment (both personal and impersonal), rule-based sanctions, and non-personal rewards) are less effective than soft tactics (expert power, referent power, and personal rewards).[74][75] It is probably because harsh tactics generate hostility, depression, fear, and anger, while soft tactics are often reciprocated with cooperation.[76] Coercive and reward power can also lead group members to lose interest in their work, while instilling a feeling of autonomy in one's subordinates can sustain their interest in work and maintain high productivity even in the absence of monitoring.[77]
Coercive influence creates conflict that can disrupt entire group functioning. When disobedient group members are severely reprimanded, the rest of the group may become more disruptive and uninterested in their work, leading to negative and inappropriate activities spreading from one troubled member to the rest of the group. This effect is called Disruptive contagion or ripple effect and it is strongly manifested when reprimanded member has a high status within a group, and authority's requests are vague and ambiguous.[78]

Resistance to coercive influence[edit]
Coercive influence can be tolerated when the group is successful,[79] the leader is trusted, and the use of coercive tactics is justified by group norms.[80] Furthermore, coercive methods are more effective when applied frequently and consistently to punish prohibited actions.[81]
However, in some cases, group members chose to resist the authority's influence. When low-power group members have a feeling of shared identity, they are more likely to form a Revolutionary Coalition, a subgroup formed within a larger group that seeks to disrupt and oppose the group's authority structure.[82] Group members are more likely to form a revolutionary coalition and resist an authority when authority lacks referent power, uses coercive methods, and asks group members to carry out unpleasant assignments. It is because these conditions create reactance, individuals strive to reassert their sense of freedom by affirming their agency for their own choices and consequences.

Kelman's compliance-identification-internalization theory of conversion[edit]
Herbert Kelman[83][84] identified three basic, step-like reactions that people display in response to coercive influence: compliance, identification, and internalization. This theory explains how groups convert hesitant recruits into zealous followers over time.
At the stage of compliance, group members comply with authority's demands, but personally do not agree with them. If authority does not monitor the members, they will probably not obey.
Identification occurs when the target of the influence admires and therefore imitates the authority, mimics authority's actions, values, characteristics, and takes on behaviours of the person with power. If prolonged and continuous, identification can lead to the final stage – internalization.
When internalization occurs, individual adopts the induced behaviour because it is congruent with his/her value system. At this stage, group members no longer carry out authority orders but perform actions that are congruent with their personal beliefs and opinions. Extreme obedience often requires internalization.

Power literacy[edit]
Power literacy refers to how one perceives power, how it is formed and accumulates, and the structures that support it and who is in control of it. Education[85][86] can be helpful for heightening power literacy. In a 2014 TED talk Eric Liu notes that "we don't like to talk about power" as "we find it scary" and "somehow evil" with it having a "negative moral valence" and states that the pervasiveness of power illiteracy causes a concentration of knowledge, understanding and clout.[87] Joe L. Kincheloe describes a "cyber-literacy of power" that is concerned with the forces that shape knowledge production and the construction and transmission of meaning, being more about engaging knowledge than "mastering" information, and a "cyber-power literacy" that is focused on transformative knowledge production and new modes of accountability.[88]

See also[edit]

Amity-enmity complex
Authority bias
Control of time in power relationships
Discourse of power
Discipline
Power structure
Separation of powers
Speaking truth to power
Social control
Social norm
State collapse
The Anatomy of Revolution
Veto, the power to forbid an action
References[edit]


^ a b c Barnett, Michael; Duvall, Raymond (2005). "Power in International Politics". International Organization. 59 (1): 39–75. doi:10.1017/S0020818305050010. ISSN 0020-8183. JSTOR 3877878. S2CID 3613655.

^ Finnemore, Martha; Goldstein, Judith (2013), "Puzzles about Power", Back to Basics: State Power in a Contemporary World, Oxford University Press, doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199970087.003.0001, ISBN 978-0-19-997008-7

^ French, J.R.P., & Raven, B. (1959). 'The bases of social power,' in D. Cartwright (ed.) Studies in Social Power. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 259-269.

^ de Moll, Kelly E. (August 2010), Everyday Experiences of Power (PDF) (Ph.D. dissertation), Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee, p. 22.

^ Montana, Patrick J.; Charnov, Bruce H. (2008). Management (4th ed.). Hauppauge, NY: Barron's Educational Series. p. 257. ISBN 9780764139314. OCLC 175290009.

^ Schein, Larry E. Greiner, Virginia E. (1988). Power and organization development : mobilizing power to implement change (Repr. with corrections. ed.). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0201121858.

^ Marsh, Stefanie (2018-09-02). "Chanel shoes, but no salary: How one woman exposed the scandal of the French fashion industry". The Guardian.

^ Guerrero, Laura K., and Peter A. Andersen. Close Encounters: Communication in Relationships, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE, 2011. Print. p.267-261

^ Pip Jones, Introducing Social Theory, Polity Press, Cambridge, 2008, p. 93.

^ Political Theory (PDF) (Course pack), Sikkim: Eiilm University, p. 27, archived from the original (PDF) on May 17, 2014.

^ Michel Foucault, Lectures at the College de France, 1977–78: Security, Territory, Population, 2007, pp. 1–17.

^ Foucault, Michel (1995). Discipline and punish : the birth of the prison (2nd Vintage books ed.). New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0679752554.

^ Deji 2011, p. 267

^ Galbraith, John Kenneth (1983). The Anatomy of Power.

^ Sharp, Gene (May 2010). From dictatorship to democracy: A conceptual framework for liberation (PDF) (4th U.S. ed.). East Boston, MA: The Albert Einstein Institution. ISBN 978-1-880813-09-6. (See book article.)

^ Arrow, Ruaridh (21 February 2011). "Gene Sharp: Author of the nonviolent revolution rulebook". BBC News.

^ Heiko Kleve: Vom Erweitern der Möglichkeiten. In: Bernhard Pörksen (ed.): Schlüsselwerke des Konstruktivismus. VS-Verlag, Wiesbaden/Germany 2011. pp. 506–519, p. 509.

^ a b Kraus, Björn (2014). "Introducing a Model for Analyzing the Possibilities of Power, Help and Control". Social Work & Society. 12 (1). Retrieved 12 August 2014.

^ Max Weber: Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Grundriss der verstehenden Soziologie. Mohr, Tübingen/Germany 1972. S.28

^ Kraus, Björn (2011). "Soziale Arbeit – Macht – Hilfe und Kontrolle. Die Entwicklung und Anwendung eines systemisch-konstruktivistischen Machtmodells" (PDF).  In Kraus, Björn; Krieger, Wolfgang (eds.). Macht in der Sozialen Arbeit – Interaktionsverhältnisse zwischen Kontrolle, Partizipation und Freisetzung. Lage, Germany: Jacobs. pp. 95–118.

^ a b c See Björn Kraus: Erkennen und Entscheiden. Grundlagen und Konsequenzen eines erkenntnistheoretischen Konstruktivismus für die Soziale Arbeit. Beltz Juventa, Weinheim/Basel 2013.

^ Reimund Böse, Günter Schiepek: Systemische Theorie und Therapie: ein Handwörterbuch. Asanger, Heidelberg/Germany 1994.

^ Gregory Bateson: Ökologie des Geistes: anthropologische, psychologische, biologische und epistemologische Perspektiven. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main/Germany 1996.

^ Heinz von Foerster: Wissen und Gewissen. Versuch einer Brücke. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main/Germany 1996.

^ a b Cameron, Deborah (2014). "Straight talking: the sociolinguistics of heterosexuality". Langage et société. 148 (2): 75–93. doi:10.3917/ls.148.0075. Retrieved 17 Nov 2021.

^ Kitzinger, Celia (July 2005). ""Speaking as a Heterosexual": (How) Does Sexuality Matter for Talk-in-Interaction?". Research on Language and Social Interaction. 38 (3): 221–265. doi:10.1207/s15327973rlsi3803_2. S2CID 144035258. Retrieved 17 Nov 2021.

^ a b Graeber, David (2004). Fragments of an anarchist anthropology (2nd pr. ed.). Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-9728196-4-0. The examples given (self-governing communities, radical labour unions, popular militias) reflect the Idea/Economics/Physical taxonomy

^ a b Gee, Tim (2011). Counter power : making change happen. Oxford: World Changing. ISBN 978-1780260327.

^ Newton, Mark (17 November 2011). "Counterpower: Making Change Happen (book review)". The Ecologist.

^ Chesters, Graeme (September 2003). "Ideas about power: Representation and counterpower". New Internationalist (360). Counterpower is the shadow realm of alternatives, a hall of mirrors held up to the dominant logic of capitalism – and it is growing.

^ Buber, Martin (1996) [1949]. Paths in Utopia (Reprint ed.). Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. p. 104. ISBN 9780815604211.

^ Gee, Tim (2011). "Introduction" (PDF). Counter Power Making Change Happen. Oxford: New Internationalist. ISBN 978-1-78026-032-7.

^ CERBARO, Rodolfo Henrique. Competition-trapping the Concept of Power. European journal of social sciences, v. 21, n. 1, p. 148-153, 2011.

^ Collins, Lauren (26 May 2008). "Power Hour: Psychology test at the Time 100 party". New Yorker.

^ "Academics and Faculty: Adam Galinsky". Kellogg School of Management. Northwestern University. Archived from the original on 1 May 2012.

^ Henretty, Aubrey (7 May 2008). "How power shapes executive choice". Kellogg School of Management. Northwestern University. Archived from the original on 8 September 2008.

^ Deji, Olanike F. (2011). Gender and Rural Development: Introduction. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 272. ISBN 978-3-643-90103-3.

^ a b c d e f g h Handgraaf, Michel J. J.; Van Dijk, Eric; Vermunt, Riël C.; Wilke, Henk A. M.; De Dreu, Carsten K. W. (1 January 2008). "Less power or powerless? Egocentric empathy gaps and the irony of having little versus no power in social decision making". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 95 (5): 1136–1149. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.95.5.1136. PMID 18954198.

^ Economic abuse wheel. Women's Domestic Abuse Helpline. Retrieved December 13, 2016.

^ Jill Cory; Karen McAndless-Davis. When Love Hurts: A Woman's Guide to Understanding Abuse in Relationships. WomanKind Press; 1 January 2000. ISBN 978-0-9686016-0-0. p. 30.

^ a b Braiker, Harriet B. (2004). Who's Pulling Your Strings ? How to Break The Cycle of Manipulation. ISBN 978-0-07-144672-3.

^ Simon, George K (1996). In Sheep's Clothing: Understanding and Dealing with Manipulative People. ISBN 978-1-935166-30-6.

^ Kantor, Martin (2006). The Psychopathology of Everyday Life: How to Deal with Manipulative People. ISBN 978-0-275-98798-5.

^ Chrissie Sanderson. Counselling Survivors of Domestic Abuse. Jessica Kingsley Publishers; 15 June 2008. ISBN 978-1-84642-811-1

^ Crosson-Tower, Cynthia (2005). Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect. Allyn & Bacon. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-205-40183-3.

^ Monique Mattei Ferraro; Eoghan Casey; Michael McGrath; Michael McGrath (2005). Investigating Child Exploitation and Pornography: The Internet, the Law and Forensic Science. Academic Press. p. 159. ISBN 978-0121631055. Retrieved April 6, 2016.

^ 
Christiane Sanderson (2006). Counselling Adult Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. Jessica Kingsley Publishers. ISBN 978-1843103356. Retrieved April 6, 2016.

^ Sleep Deprivation Used as Abuse Tactic

^ Family and Domestic Violence - Healthy Work Healthy Living Tip Sheet

^ a b Falbo, Toni; Peplau, Letitia A. (April 1980). "Power strategies in intimate relationships". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 38 (4): 618–628. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.38.4.618. Pdf. Archived 2017-10-10 at the Wayback Machine

^ Raven, Bertram H.; Schwarzwald, Joseph; Koslowsky, Meni (February 1998). "Conceptualizing and measuring a power/interaction model of interpersonal influence". Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 28 (4): 307–332. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01708.x.

^ Bratko, Denis; Butkovic, Ana (February 2007). "Stability of genetic and environmental effects from adolescence to young adulthood: Results of Croatian longitudinal twin study of personality". Twin Research and Human Genetics. 10 (1): 151–157. doi:10.1375/twin.10.1.151. PMID 17539374. S2CID 22785107.

^ Carson, Paula P.; Carson, Kerry D.; Roe, C. William (July 1993). "Social power bases: A meta-analytic examination of interrelationships and outcomes". Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 23 (14): 1150–1169. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1993.tb01026.x.

^ Tepper, Bennett J.; Uhl-Bien, Mary; Kohut, Gary F.; Rogelberg, Steven G.; Lockhart, Daniel E.; Ensley, Michael D. (April 2006). "Subordinates' resistance and managers' evaluations of subordinates' performance". Journal of Management. 32 (2): 185–209. doi:10.1177/0149206305277801. S2CID 14637810.

^ 
Weinstein, Rebecca Jane (2001). "Threats to the Mediation Process". Mediation in the Workplace: A Guide for Training, Practice, and Administration. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 29. ISBN 9781567203363. Retrieved 12 July 2020. An imbalance of power may be obvious or subtle. An imbalance may stem from the dynamics of the personal relationship ....

^ 
Compare:
Tannenbaum, Frank (1969). "The Balance of Power in Society". The Balance of Power in Society: And Other Essays. Arkville Press. London: Simon and Schuster. p. 9. ISBN 9780029324004. Retrieved 12 July 2020. Competition, imbalance, and friction are not merely continuous phenomena in society, but in fact are evidences of vitality and 'normality.'

^ 
McCornack, Steven (2009-07-15). Reflect & Relate: An introduction to interpersonal communication. Boston/NY: Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 291. ISBN 978-0-312-48934-2.

^ 
Lehr, Fred (2020). Power Currency. Rand-Smith Publishing LLC. ISBN 9781950544240. Retrieved 12 July 2020.

^ Forsyth, D.R. (2010). Group Dynamics (5th Edition). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

^ Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D.H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach, and inhibition. Psychological Review, 110, 265-284.

^ Keltner, D., Van Kleef, G. A., Chen, S., & Kraus, M. W. (2008). A reciprocal influence model of social power: Emerging principles and lines of inquiry. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 151-192.

^ Magee, J. C., Galinsky, A. D., & Gruenfeld, D. H. (2007). Power, propensity to negotiate, and moving first in competitive interactions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 200-212.

^ Guinote, A. (2008). Power and affordances: When the situation has more power over powerful than powerless individuals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95:2, 237-252.

^ Berdahl, J. L., & Martorana, P. (2006). Effects of power on emotion and expression during a controversial discussion. European Journal of Social Psychology: Special Issue on Social Power and Group Processes, 36, 497–509.

^ Anderson, C., & Galinsky, A.D. (2006). Power, optimism, and risk-taking. European Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 511-536.

^ Smith, P.K., N.B. Jostmann, A.D. Galinsky, W.W. van Dijk. 2008.  Lacking power impairs executive functions. Psychol. Sci. 19: 441‐447.

^ Emler, N. & Cook, T. (2001). Moral integrity in leadership: Why it matters and why it may be difficult to achieve. In Roberts, B. & Hogan, R. (Eds.). Personality psychology in the workplace. Washington, DC: APA Press (pp.277-298).

^ Clark, R.D., & Sechrest, L.B. (1976). The mandate phenomenon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 1057-1061.

^ Fodor, E.M., & Riordan, J.M. (1995). Leader power motive and group conflict as influences on leader behavior and group member self-affect. Journal of Research in Personality, 29, 418-431.

^ Georgesen, J. C., & Harris, M. J. (1998). Why's my boss always holding me down? A meta-analysis of power effects on performance evaluation. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 184–195.

^ Galinsky, A. D., Magee, J. C., Inesi, M. E., & Gruenfeld, D. H. (2006). Power and perspectives not taken. Psychological Science, 17, 1068-1074.

^ Fiske, S.T. (1993a). Controlling other people: The impact of power on stereotyping. American Psychologist, 48, 621-628.

^ Kipnis. D. (1974). The powerholders. In J. T. Tedeschi (Ed.). Perspectives on social power (pp. 82- 122). Chicago; Aldine.

^ Fiske, S. T., & Berdahl, J. L. (2007). Social power. In A. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: A handbook of basic principles (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.

^ Pierro, A., Cicero, L., & Raven, B. H. (2008). Motivated compliance with bases of social power. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 1921–1944.

^ Krause D. E. (2006) Power and influence in the context of organizational innovation. In Schriesheim C. A., Neider L. L. (Eds.), Power and influence in organizations: new empirical and theoretical perspectives (A volume in research in management). Hartford, CT: Information Age. Pp. 21–58.

^ Pelletier, L. G., & Vallerand, R. J. (1996). Supervisors' beliefs and subordinates' intrinsic motivation: A behavioral confirmation analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 331–340.

^ Kounin, J., & Gump, P. (1958). The ripple effect in discipline. Elementary School Journal, 59, 158–162.

^ Michener, H. A., & Lawler, E. J. (1975). Endorsement of formal leaders: An integrative model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 216-223.

^ Michener, H. A., & Burt, M.R. (1975) Components of authority as determinants of compliance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 606-614.

^ Molm, L. D. (1994) Is Punishment Effective? Coercive Strategies in Social Exchange. Social Psychology Quarterly, 57, 75-94.

^ Lawler, E. J. (1975a). An experimental study of factors affecting the mobilization of revolutionary coalitions. Sociometry, 38, 163-179.

^ [null Kelman, H. (1958). Compliance, identification, and internalization: Three processes of attitude change. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1, 51-60].

^ Kelman, H.C. Processes of opinion change. Public Opinion Quarterly, 25, 57–78.

^ Powell, Rebecca; Rightmyer, Elizabeth (2012-04-27). Literacy for All Students: An Instructional Framework for Closing the Gap. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781136879692. Retrieved 12 February 2017.

^ Kincheloe, Joe; Steinberg, Shirley (2002-01-04). Students as Researchers: Creating Classrooms that Matter. Routledge. ISBN 9781135714710. Retrieved 12 February 2017.

^ Liu, Eric. "Transcript of "Why ordinary people need to understand power"". Retrieved 12 February 2017.

^ Kincheloe, Joe L. (2008-06-19). Knowledge and Critical Pedagogy: An Introduction. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9781402082245. Retrieved 12 February 2017.


External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to Power.




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Political power.

Dolata, Ulrich; Schrape, Jan-Felix (2018). Collectivity and Power on the Internet. A Sociological Perspective. London Cham: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-78414-4. ISBN 9783319784137.
Bitar, Amer (2020). Bedouin Visual Leadership in the Middle East: The Power of Aesthetics and Practical Implications. Springer Nature. ISBN 9783030573973.
Vatiero M. (2009), Understanding Power. A 'Law and Economics' Approach, VDM Verlag. ISBN 978-3-639-20265-6
Michael Eldred, Social Ontology: Recasting Political Philosophy Through a Phenomenology of Whoness Ontos, Frankfurt 2008 ISBN 978-3-938793-78-7
Mirko VAGNONI, Charles V and the Furyat the Prado Museum:The Power of the King's Body as Image, Eikón / Imago: Vol 6 No 2 (2017). 49 – 66. https://doi.org/10.5209/eiko.73559
Simmel, Georg Superiority and Subordination as Subject-Matter of Sociology
Simmel, Georg Superiority and Subordination as Subject-Matter of Sociology II
Kanter, R. M. (1979). Power failures in management circuits. Harvard Business Review.
Forbes: World's Most Powerful Women Define Power on YouTube
vtePower in international relationsTypes
Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Politics
Realpolitik
Sharp
Smart
Soft
Status
Small
Middle
Regional
Emerging
Least Great
Great
Potential
Super
Hyper
Geopolitics
American (Pax)
Asian
British
Soviets
Chinese
Indian
Pacific
History
List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations (1814–1919)
Theory
Balance of power
European
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement
Studies
Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power
Organizations and groups by regionAfrica
African Union
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa–Asia
Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
Americas
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR)
Asia
Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
Europe
Council of Europe (CoE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegrád Group (V4)
Eurasia
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Organization of Turkic States
North America–Europe
Arctic Council
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Africa–Asia–Europe
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa–South America
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
Oceania–Pacific
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)
Non–regional
Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
Colombia–Indonesia–Vietnam–Egypt–Turkey–South Africa (CIVETS)
Commonwealth of Nations
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico–Indonesia–Nigeria–Turkey (MINT)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)
Uniting for Consensus
Global
United Nations (UN)

vteBullyingTypes
Abusive supervision
Cyberbullying
Disability bullying
Displaced aggression
Doxing
Gay bashing
Hazing
Military bullying
Mobbing
Parental bullying of children
Peer victimization
Prison bullying
Relational aggression
School bullying
Higher education
Sexual bullying
Workplace bullying
Academia
Information technology
Legal aspects
Legal profession
Medicine
Nursing
Teaching
Toxic leader
Elements
Betrayal
Blacklisting
Bullying and emotional intelligence
Cancel culture
Character assassination
Coercion
Culture of fear
Defamation
Destabilisation
Discrediting
Embarrassment
False accusation
Gaslighting
Gossip
Harassment
Humiliation
Incivility
Intimidation
Isolation
Kiss up kick down
Mind games
Moving the goalposts
Nagging
Name calling
Personal attacks
Physical abuse
Psychological abuse
Rudeness
Sarcasm
Screaming
Smear campaign
Social exclusion
Social undermining
Taunting
Workplace incivility
Verbal abuse
Organizations
Act Against Bullying
Ban Bossy
Bullying UK
Bystander Revolution
Canadian Centre for Gender and Sexual Diversity
Ditch the Label
GRIN Campaign
It Gets Better Project
Kidscape
Society Against Violence in Education
ExpertsAcademics
Anna Costanza Baldry
Wendy Craig
Dorothy Espelage
David P. Farrington
Shelley Hymel
Heinz Leymann
Gary Namie
James O'Higgins Norman
Dan Olweus
Debra Pepler
Christina Salmivalli
Kenneth Westhues
Activists
Andrea Adams
Louise Burfitt-Dons
Tim Field
SuEllen Fried
Liam Hackett
Lizzie Velásquez
Actions
Anti-Bullying Day
Anti-Bullying Week
Anti-bullying legislation
International Day of Pink
International Stand Up to Bullying Day
Think Before You Speak
Notable suicides(List)
William Arthur Gibbs (1877)
Kelly Yeomans (1997)
Hamed Nastoh (2000)
Dawn-Marie Wesley (2000)
Nicola Ann Raphael (2001)
Ryan Halligan (2003)
Megan Meier (2006)
Sladjana Vidovic (2008)
Phoebe Prince (2010)
Tyler Clementi (2010)
Jamey Rodemeyer (2011)
Jamie Hubley (2011)
Kenneth Weishuhn (2012)
Audrie Pott (2012)
Amanda Todd (2012)
Jadin Bell (2013)
Rehtaeh Parsons (2013)
Rebecca Ann Sedwick (2013)
Leelah Alcorn (2014)
Conrad Roy (2014)
Tyrone Unsworth (2016)
Murder–suicides(incidents)
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold
Columbine, 1999
Jeff Weise
Red Lake, 2005
Seung-Hui Cho
Virginia Tech, 2007
Pekka-Eric Auvinen
Jokela High School, 2007
Elliot Rodger
Isla Vista, 2014
Related topics
Emotional blackmail
Just-world hypothesis
List of LGBT-related suicides
Machiavellianism in the workplace
Narcissism in the workplace
Personal boundaries
Personality disorders
Psychopathy in the workplace
Scapegoating
Self-esteem
Social dominance orientation
Suicide among LGBT youth
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Victimisation

vteMichel FoucaultBooks
Mental Illness and Psychology (1954)
Madness and Civilization (1961)
The Birth of the Clinic (1963)
Death and the Labyrinth (1963)
The Order of Things (1966)
This is Not a Pipe (1968)
The Archaeology of Knowledge (1969)
Discipline and Punish (1975)
The History of Sexuality (1976–2018)
Essays, lectures, dialogues and anthologies
Introduction to Kant's Anthropology (1964)
"What Is an Author?" (1969)
Foucault's lectures at the Collège de France
I, Pierre Riviere, Having Slaughtered my Mother, my Sister and my Brother (1973)
Language, Counter-Memory, Practice (1977)
Herculine Barbin (1978)
Power/Knowledge (1980)
Remarks on Marx (1980)
Le Désordre des familles (1982)
The Foucault Reader (1984)
Politics, Philosophy, Culture (1988)
Foucault Live (1996)
The Politics of Truth (1997)
Society Must Be Defended (1997)
Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth (Essential Works Volume 1) (1997)
Aesthetics, Method, Epistemology (Essential Works Volume 2) (1998)
Abnormal (1999)
Power (Essential Works Volume 3) (2000)
Fearless Speech (2001)
The Hermeneutics of the Subject (2001)
The Essential Foucault (2003)
Psychiatric Power (2003)
Security, Territory, Population (2004)
The Birth of Biopolitics (2004)
The Government of Self and Others (2008)
The Courage of Truth (2009)
Lectures on the Will to Know (2011)
On the Government of the Living (2012)
Subjectivity and Truth (2012)
Wrong-Doing, Truth-Telling (2013)
On the Punitive Society (2015)
Concepts
Anti-psychiatry
Author function
Biopolitics
Biopower
Carceral archipelago
Cultural imperialism
Disciplinary institution
Discontinuity
Discourse analysis
Dispositif
Ecogovernmentality
Episteme
Genealogy
Governmentality
Heterotopia
Interdiscourse
Limit-experience
Parrhesia
Power (social and political)
Postsexualism
Sapere aude
Influence
Cogito and the History of Madness (Derrida)
Foucauldian discourse analysis
Foucault (Deleuze)
The Passion of Michel Foucault (Miller)
Giorgio Agamben
Gary Gutting
Thomas Lemke
James Miller
Paul Rabinow
Claude Raffestin
Nikolas Rose
Related articles
Bibliography
Foucault–Habermas debate
Chomsky–Foucault debate
Daniel Defert
François Ewald
Alan Sheridan

Authority control: National libraries 
Spain
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Power_(social_and_political)&oldid=1106676629"
Categories: Power (social and political)Baruch SpinozaBullyingConcepts in political philosophyMajority–minority relationsMichel FoucaultSocial conceptsSociological terminologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2022Articles to be expanded from March 2022All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2021Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2021Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from March 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2018Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2020Commons category link is locally definedArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with EMU identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansالعربيةBân-lâm-gúБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БългарскиBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiЭрзяньEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFrysk한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаKiswahiliКыргызчаLatinaLietuviųMagyarმარგალურიMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄Nederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀپښتوPolskiPortuguêsRuna SimiРусскийScotsSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogУкраїнськаVènetoTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 25 August 2022, at 21:45 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










