



René Descartes - Wikipedia










































René Descartes

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist (1596–1650)
"Descartes" redirects here. For other uses, see Descartes (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "René Descartes" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


René DescartesPortrait after Frans Hals[note 1]Born31 March 1596 (1596-03-31)La Haye en Touraine, Touraine, Kingdom of FranceDied11 February 1650 (1650-02-12) (aged 53)Stockholm, Swedish EmpireNationalityFrenchEducation
Collège Royal Henry-Le-Grand (1607–1614)
University of Poitiers (LL.B., 1616)
University of Franeker (no degree)
Leiden University (no degree)
Era17th-century philosophyAge of EnlightenmentRegionWestern philosophy
Dutch philosophy
French philosophy
School
Rationalism
Cartesianism
Mechanism
Innatism[2]: 257 
Foundationalism[3]
Conceptualism[4]: 43 
Augustinianism[5]
Indirect realism[6]: 136 
Correspondence theory of truth[7]
Corpuscularianism[8]
Theological voluntarism[note 2]
ThesisUntitled LL.B. thesis (1616)Main interestsEpistemology, metaphysics, mathematics, physics, cosmologyNotable ideas
List

Cogito ergo sum
Method of doubt
Subjectivity
Method of normals
Analytic geometry
Cartesian coordinate system
Mind–body problem
Cartesian dualism
interactionism
trialism
Cartesian circle
Foundationalism
Mathesis universalis
Folium of Descartes
Dream argument
Evil demon
Conservation of momentum (quantitas motus)
Balloonist theory
Descartes' Rule of Signs
Wax argument
Trademark argument
Causal adequacy principle
Res cogitans/res extensa distinction
Conatus


Influences
PlatoAristotleArchimedesAnselmElisabeth of the PalatinateAugustineStoicsAquinasOckhamSuárezMersenneSextus EmpiricusMontaigneJacobus GoliusBeeckmanHarvey[9]Viète[10]Duns Scotus[note 2]Teresa of Ávila[12]Sanches[13]Arriaga[14]

Influenced
Virtually all subsequent Western philosophy, especially Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Malebranche, Arnauld, Bossuet,[15] Pascal, Huygens, Newton, Voltaire, Rousseau, Hume, Gibbon, Kant, Schopenhauer, Marx, Darwin, Freud, Nietzsche, Husserl, Chomsky

Signature
Part of a series onRené Descartes
Philosophy
Cartesianism
Rationalism
Foundationalism
Mechanism
Doubt and certainty
Dream argument
Cogito, ergo sum
Evil demon
Trademark argument
Causal adequacy principle
Mind–body dichotomy
Analytic geometry
Coordinate system
Cartesian circle · Folium
Rule of signs
Cartesian diver
Balloonist theory
Wax argument
Res cogitans
Res extensa

Works
Rules for the Direction of the Mind
The Search for Truth
The World
Discourse on the Method
La Géométrie
Meditations on First Philosophy
Principles of Philosophy
Passions of the Soul

People
Christina, Queen of Sweden
Baruch Spinoza
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Francine Descartes
vte
René Descartes (/deɪˈkɑːrt/ or UK: /ˈdeɪkɑːrt/; French: [ʁəne dekaʁt] (listen); Latinized: Renatus  Cartesius;[note 3][16] 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650[17][18][19]: 58 ) was a French philosopher, scientist, and mathematician, widely considered a seminal figure in the emergence of modern philosophy and science. Mathematics was central to his method of inquiry, and he connected the previously separate fields of geometry and algebra into analytic geometry. Descartes spent much of his working life in the Dutch Republic, initially serving the Dutch States Army, later becoming a central intellectual of the Dutch Golden Age.[20] Although he served a Protestant state and was later counted as a deist by critics, Descartes considered himself a devout Catholic.
Many elements of Descartes' philosophy have precedents in late Aristotelianism, the revived Stoicism of the 16th century, or in earlier philosophers like Augustine. In his natural philosophy, he differed from the schools on two major points: first, he rejected the splitting of corporeal substance into matter and form; second, he rejected any appeal to final ends, divine or natural, in explaining natural phenomena.[21] In his theology, he insists on the absolute freedom of God's act of creation. Refusing to accept the authority of previous philosophers, Descartes frequently set his views apart from the philosophers who preceded him. In the opening section of the Passions of the Soul, an early modern treatise on emotions, Descartes goes so far as to assert that he will write on this topic "as if no one had written on these matters before." His best known philosophical statement is "cogito, ergo sum" ("I think, therefore I am"; French: Je pense, donc je suis), found in Discourse on the Method (1637; in French and Latin) and Principles of Philosophy (1644, in Latin).[note 4]
Descartes has often been called the father of modern philosophy, and is largely seen as responsible for the increased attention given to epistemology in the 17th century.[22][note 5] He laid the foundation for 17th-century continental rationalism, later advocated by Spinoza and Leibniz, and was later opposed by the empiricist school of thought consisting of Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. The rise of early modern rationalism – as a highly systematic school of philosophy in its own right for the first time in history – exerted an immense and profound influence on modern Western thought in general, with the birth of two influential rationalistic philosophical systems of Descartes (Cartesianism) and Spinoza (Spinozism). It was the 17th-century arch-rationalists like Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz who have given the "Age of Reason" its name and place in history. Leibniz, Spinoza,[23] and Descartes were all well-versed in mathematics as well as philosophy, and Descartes and Leibniz contributed greatly to science as well.[24]
Descartes' Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) continues to be a standard text at most university philosophy departments. Descartes' influence in mathematics is equally apparent; the Cartesian coordinate system was named after him. He is credited as the father of analytic geometry—used in the discovery of infinitesimal calculus and analysis. Descartes was also one of the key figures in the Scientific Revolution.

 Coat of arms of the Descartes family.
Contents

1 Life

1.1 Early life
1.2 Career

1.2.1 France
1.2.2 Netherlands
1.2.3 Sweden


1.3 Death


2 Philosophical work

2.1 Mind–body dualism
2.2 Physiology and psychology
2.3 Moral philosophy
2.4 Religion
2.5 Natural science

2.5.1 On animals




3 Historical impact

3.1 Emancipation from Church doctrine
3.2 Mathematical legacy

3.2.1 Influence on Newton's mathematics


3.3 Contemporary reception
3.4 Purported Rosicrucianism


4 Bibliography

4.1 Writings
4.2 Collected editions
4.3 Early editions of specific works
4.4 Collected English translations
4.5 Translation of single works


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References

7.1 Citations
7.2 Sources


8 External links

8.1 General
8.2 Bibliographies
8.3 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
8.4 Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
8.5 Other




Life[edit]
Early life[edit]
 The house where Descartes was born in La Haye en Touraine
René Descartes was born in La Haye en Touraine, Province of Touraine (now Descartes, Indre-et-Loire), France, on 31 March 1596.[25] René Descartes was conceived about halfway through August of 1595. His mother, Jeanne Brochard, died a few days after giving birth to a still-born child in May 1597.[26][25] Descartes' father, Joachim, was a member of the Parlement of Brittany at Rennes.[27]: 22  René lived with his grandmother and with his great-uncle. Although the Descartes family was Roman Catholic, the Poitou region was controlled by the Protestant Huguenots.[28] In 1607, late because of his fragile health, he entered the Jesuit Collège Royal Henry-Le-Grand at La Flèche,[29][30] where he was introduced to mathematics and physics, including Galileo's work.[31][32] While there, Descartes first encountered hermetic mysticism. Although he was briefly a Free Mason, he later abandoned mysticism in favor of reasoned inquiry. After graduation in 1614, he studied for two years (1615–16) at the University of Poitiers, earning a Baccalauréat and Licence in canon and civil law in 1616,[31] in accordance with his father's wishes that he should become a lawyer.[33] From there, he moved to Paris.
In Discourse on the Method, Descartes recalls:[34]: 20–21 

I entirely abandoned the study of letters. Resolving to seek no knowledge other than that of which could be found in myself or else in the great book of the world, I spent the rest of my youth traveling, visiting courts and armies, mixing with people of diverse temperaments and ranks, gathering various experiences, testing myself in the situations which fortune offered me, and at all times reflecting upon whatever came my way to derive some profit from it.
 Graduation registry for Descartes at the University of Poitiers, 1616
In accordance with his ambition to become a professional military officer in 1618, Descartes joined, as a mercenary, the Protestant Dutch States Army in Breda under the command of Maurice of Nassau,[31] and undertook a formal study of military engineering, as established by Simon Stevin.[35]: 66  Descartes, therefore, received much encouragement in Breda to advance his knowledge of mathematics.[31] In this way, he became acquainted with Isaac Beeckman,[31] the principal of a Dordrecht school, for whom he wrote the Compendium of Music (written 1618, published 1650).[36] Together, they worked on free fall, catenary, conic section, and fluid statics. Both believed that it was necessary to create a method that thoroughly linked mathematics and physics.[37]
While in the service of the Catholic Duke Maximilian of Bavaria from 1619,[38] Descartes was present at the Battle of the White Mountain near Prague, in November 1620.[39][40]
According to Adrien Baillet, on the night of 10–11 November 1619 (St. Martin's Day), while stationed in Neuburg an der Donau, Descartes shut himself in a room with an "oven" (probably a cocklestove)[41] to escape the cold. While within, he had three dreams,[42] and believed that a divine spirit revealed to him a new philosophy. However, it is speculated that what Descartes considered to be his second dream was actually an episode of exploding head syndrome.[43] Upon exiting, he had formulated analytic geometry and the idea of applying the mathematical method to philosophy. He concluded from these visions that the pursuit of science would prove to be, for him, the pursuit of true wisdom and a central part of his life's work.[44][45] Descartes also saw very clearly that all truths were linked with one another, so that finding a fundamental truth and proceeding with logic would open the way to all science. Descartes discovered this basic truth quite soon: his famous "I think, therefore I am."[37]

Career[edit]
France[edit]
In 1620, Descartes left the army. He visited Basilica della Santa Casa in Loreto, then visited various countries before returning to France, and during the next few years, he spent time in Paris. It was there that he composed his first essay on method: Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii (Rules for the Direction of the Mind).[37] He arrived in La Haye in 1623, selling all of his property to invest in bonds, which provided a comfortable income for the rest of his life.[35]: 132 [46]: 94  Descartes was present at the siege of La Rochelle by Cardinal Richelieu in 1627.[46]: 128  In the autumn of that year, in the residence of the papal nuncio Guidi di Bagno, where he came with Mersenne and many other scholars to listen to a lecture given by the alchemist, Nicolas de Villiers, Sieur de Chandoux, on the principles of a supposed new philosophy,[47] Cardinal Bérulle urged him to write an exposition of his new philosophy in some location beyond the reach of the Inquisition.[48]

Netherlands[edit]
 In Amsterdam, Descartes lived at Westermarkt 6 (Maison Descartes, left).
Descartes returned to the Dutch Republic in 1628.[42] In April 1629, he joined the University of Franeker, studying under Adriaan Metius, either living with a Catholic family or renting the Sjaerdemaslot. The next year, under the name "Poitevin", he enrolled at Leiden University, which at the time was a Protestant University.[49] He studied both mathematics with Jacobus Golius, who confronted him with Pappus's hexagon theorem, and astronomy with Martin Hortensius.[50] In October 1630, he had a falling-out with Beeckman, whom he accused of plagiarizing some of his ideas. In Amsterdam, he had a relationship with a servant girl, Helena Jans van der Strom, with whom he had a daughter, Francine, who was born in 1635 in Deventer. She was baptized a Protestant[51][52] and died of scarlet fever at the age of 5.
Unlike many moralists of the time, Descartes did not deprecate the passions but rather defended them;[citation needed] he wept upon Francine's death in 1640.[53] According to a recent biography by Jason Porterfield, "Descartes said that he did not believe that one must refrain from tears to prove oneself a man."[54] Russell Shorto speculates that the experience of fatherhood and losing a child formed a turning point in Descartes's work, changing its focus from medicine to a quest for universal answers.[55]
Despite frequent moves,[note 6] he wrote all of his major work during his 20-plus years in the Netherlands, initiating a revolution in mathematics and philosophy.[note 7] In 1633, Galileo was condemned by the Italian Inquisition, and Descartes abandoned plans to publish Treatise on the World, his work of the previous four years. Nevertheless, in 1637, he published parts of this work in three essays:[56] "Les Météores" (The Meteors), "La Dioptrique" (Dioptrics) and La Géométrie (Geometry), preceded by an introduction, his famous Discours de la méthode (Discourse on the Method).[56] In it, Descartes lays out four rules of thought, meant to ensure that our knowledge rests upon a firm foundation:[57]

The first was never to accept anything for true which I did not know to be such; that is to say, carefully to avoid precipitancy and prejudice, and to comprise nothing more in my judgment than what was presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly as to exclude all ground of doubt.
In La Géométrie, Descartes exploited the discoveries he made with Pierre de Fermat, having been able to do so because his paper, Introduction to Loci, was published posthumously in 1679. This later became known as Cartesian Geometry.[58]
Descartes continued to publish works concerning both mathematics and philosophy for the rest of his life. In 1641, he published a metaphysics treatise, Meditationes de Prima Philosophia (Meditations on First Philosophy), written in Latin and thus addressed to the learned. It was followed in 1644 by Principia Philosophiae (Principles of Philosophy), a kind of synthesis of the Discourse on the Method and Meditations on First Philosophy. In 1643, Cartesian philosophy was condemned at the University of Utrecht, and Descartes was obliged to flee to the Hague, settling in Egmond-Binnen.
Christia Mercer suggested that Descartes may have been influenced by Spanish author and Roman Catholic nun Teresa of Ávila, who, fifty years earlier, published The Interior Castle, concerning the role of philosophical reflection in intellectual growth.[12][59]
Descartes began (through Alfonso Polloti, an Italian general in Dutch service) a six-year correspondence with Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia, devoted mainly to moral and psychological subjects.[60] Connected with this correspondence, in 1649 he published Les Passions de l'âme (The Passions of the Soul), which he dedicated to the Princess. A French translation of Principia Philosophiae, prepared by Abbot Claude Picot, was published in 1647. This edition was also dedicated to Princess Elisabeth. In the preface to the French edition, Descartes praised true philosophy as a means to attain wisdom. He identifies four ordinary sources to reach wisdom and finally says that there is a fifth, better and more secure, consisting in the search for first causes.[61]

Sweden[edit]
By 1649, Descartes had become one of Europe's most famous philosophers and scientists.[56] That year, Queen Christina of Sweden invited him to her court to organize a new scientific academy and tutor her in his ideas about love. Descartes accepted, and moved to Sweden in the middle of winter.[62] She was interested in and stimulated Descartes to publish The Passions of the Soul.[63]
He was a guest at the house of Pierre Chanut, living on Västerlånggatan, less than 500 meters from Tre Kronor in Stockholm. There, Chanut and Descartes made observations with a Torricellian mercury barometer. Challenging Blaise Pascal, Descartes took the first set of barometric readings in Stockholm to see if atmospheric pressure could be used in forecasting the weather.[64]

Death[edit]
(left) The tomb of Descartes (middle, with detail of the inscription), in the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, Paris; (right) memorial to Descartes, erected in the 1720s, in the Adolf Fredriks kyrka
Descartes arranged to give lessons to Queen Christina after her birthday, three times a week at 5 am, in her cold and draughty castle. It soon became clear they did not like each other; she did not care for his mechanical philosophy, nor did he share her interest in Ancient Greek. By 15 January 1650, Descartes had seen Christina only four or five times. On 1 February, he contracted pneumonia and died on 11 February.[65] The cause of death was pneumonia according to Chanut, but peripneumonia according to Christina's physician Johann van Wullen who was not allowed to bleed him.[66] (The winter seems to have been mild,[67] except for the second half of January which was harsh as described by Descartes himself; however, "this remark was probably intended to be as much Descartes' take on the intellectual climate as it was about the weather.")[63]
E. Pies has questioned this account, based on a letter by the Doctor van Wullen; however, Descartes had refused his treatment, and more arguments against its veracity have been raised since.[68] In a 2009 book, German philosopher Theodor Ebert argues that Descartes was poisoned by a Catholic missionary who opposed his religious views.[69][70][71]
As a Catholic[72][73][74] in a Protestant nation, he was interred in a graveyard used mainly for orphans in Adolf Fredriks kyrka in Stockholm. His manuscripts came into the possession of Claude Clerselier, Chanut's brother-in-law, and "a devout Catholic who has begun the process of turning Descartes into a saint by cutting, adding and publishing his letters selectively."[75][76]: 137–154  In 1663, the Pope placed Descartes' works on the Index of Prohibited Books. In 1666, sixteen years after his death, his remains were taken to France and buried in Saint-Étienne-du-Mont. In 1671, Louis XIV prohibited all lectures in Cartesianism. Although the National Convention in 1792 had planned to transfer his remains to the Panthéon, he was reburied in the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés in 1819, missing a finger and the skull.[note 8] His skull is on display in the Musée de l'Homme in Paris.[77]

Philosophical work[edit]
 René Descartes at work
Further information: Cartesianism
In his Discourse on the Method, he attempts to arrive at a fundamental set of principles that one can know as true without any doubt. To achieve this, he employs a method called hyperbolical/metaphysical doubt, also sometimes referred to as methodological skepticism or Cartesian doubt: he rejects any ideas that can be doubted and then re-establishes them in order to acquire a firm foundation for genuine knowledge.[78] Descartes built his ideas from scratch which he does in The Meditations on First Philosophy. He relates this to architecture: the top soil is taken away to create a new building or structure. Descartes calls his doubt the soil and new knowledge the buildings. To Descartes, Aristotle's foundationalism is incomplete and his method of doubt enhances foundationalism.[79]
Initially, Descartes arrives at only a single first principle that he thinks. This is expressed in the Latin phrase in the Discourse on Method "Cogito, ergo sum" (English: "I think, therefore I am").[80]  Descartes concluded, if he doubted, then something or someone must be doing the doubting; therefore, the very fact that he doubted proved his existence. "The simple meaning of the phrase is that if one is skeptical of existence, that is in and of itself proof that he does exist."[81] These two first principles—I think and I exist—were later confirmed by Descartes' clear and distinct perception (delineated in his Third Meditation from The Meditations): as he clearly and distinctly perceives these two principles, Descartes reasoned, ensures their indubitability.
Descartes concludes that he can be certain that he exists because he thinks. But in what form? He perceives his body through the use of the senses; however, these have previously been unreliable. So Descartes determines that the only indubitable knowledge is that he is a thinking thing. Thinking is what he does, and his power must come from his essence. Descartes defines "thought" (cogitatio) as "what happens in me such that I am immediately conscious of it, insofar as I am conscious of it". Thinking is thus every activity of a person of which the person is immediately conscious.[82] He gave reasons for thinking that waking thoughts are distinguishable from dreams, and that one's mind cannot have been "hijacked" by an evil demon placing an illusory external world before one's senses.[79]

And so something that I thought I was seeing with my eyes is grasped solely by the faculty of judgment which is in my mind.[83]: 109 
In this manner, Descartes proceeds to construct a system of knowledge, discarding perception as unreliable and, instead, admitting only deduction as a method.[84]

Mind–body dualism[edit]
Further information: Mind–body problem and Mind–body dualism
 L'homme (1664)
Descartes, influenced by the automatons on display throughout the city of Paris, began to investigate the connection between the mind and body, and how the two interact.[citation needed] His main influences for dualism were theology and physics.[85] The theory on the dualism of mind and body is Descartes' signature doctrine and permeates other theories he advanced. Known as Cartesian dualism (or mind–body dualism), his theory on the separation between the mind and the body went on to influence subsequent Western philosophies.[86] In Meditations on First Philosophy, Descartes attempted to demonstrate the existence of God and the distinction between the human soul and the body. Humans are a union of mind and body;[87] thus Descartes's dualism embraced the idea that mind and body are distinct but closely joined. While many contemporary readers of Descartes found the distinction between mind and body difficult to grasp, he thought it was entirely straightforward. Descartes employed the concept of modes, which are the ways in which substances exist. In Principles of Philosophy, Descartes explained, "we can clearly perceive a substance apart from the mode which we say differs from it, whereas we cannot, conversely, understand the mode apart from the substance". To perceive a mode apart from its substance requires an intellectual abstraction,[88] which Descartes explained as follows:

The intellectual abstraction consists in my turning my thought away from one part of the contents of this richer idea the better to apply it to the other part with greater attention. Thus, when I consider a shape without thinking of the substance or the extension whose shape it is, I make a mental abstraction.[88]

According to Descartes, two substances are really distinct when each of them can exist apart from the other. Thus, Descartes reasoned that God is distinct from humans, and the body and mind of a human are also distinct from one another.[89] He argued that the great differences between body (an extended thing) and mind (an un-extended, immaterial thing) make the two ontologically distinct. According to Descartes' indivisibility argument, the mind is utterly indivisible: because "when I consider the mind, or myself in so far as I am merely a thinking thing, I am unable to distinguish any part within myself; I understand myself to be something quite single and complete."[90]
Moreover, in The Meditations, Descartes discusses a piece of wax and exposes the single most characteristic doctrine of Cartesian dualism: that the universe contained two radically different kinds of substances—the mind or soul defined as thinking, and the body defined as matter and unthinking.[91] The Aristotelian philosophy of Descartes' days held that the universe was inherently purposeful or teleological. Everything that happened, be it the motion of the stars or the growth of a tree, was supposedly explainable by a certain purpose, goal or end that worked its way out within nature. Aristotle called this the "final cause," and these final causes were indispensable for explaining the ways nature operated. Descartes' theory of dualism supports the distinction between traditional Aristotelian science and the new science of Kepler and Galileo, which denied the role of a divine power and "final causes" in its attempts to explain nature. Descartes' dualism provided the philosophical rationale for the latter by expelling the final cause from the physical universe (or res extensa) in favor of the mind (or res cogitans). Therefore, while Cartesian dualism paved the way for modern physics, it also held the door open for religious beliefs about the immortality of the soul.[92]
Descartes' dualism of mind and matter implied a concept of human beings. A human was, according to Descartes, a composite entity of mind and body. Descartes gave priority to the mind and argued that the mind could exist without the body, but the body could not exist without the mind. In The Meditations, Descartes even argues that while the mind is a substance, the body is composed only of "accidents".[93] But he did argue that mind and body are closely joined:[94]

Nature also teaches me, by the sensations of pain, hunger, thirst and so on, that I am not merely present in my body as a pilot in his ship, but that I am very closely joined and, as it were, intermingled with it, so that I and the body form a unit. If this were not so, I, who am nothing but a thinking thing, would not feel pain when the body was hurt, but would perceive the damage purely by the intellect, just as a sailor perceives by sight if anything in his ship is broken.[94]

Descartes' discussion on embodiment raised one of the most perplexing problems of his dualism philosophy: What exactly is the relationship of union between the mind and the body of a person?[94] Therefore, Cartesian dualism set the agenda for philosophical discussion of the mind–body problem for many years after Descartes' death.[95] Descartes was also a rationalist and believed in the power of innate ideas.[96] Descartes argued the theory of innate knowledge and that all humans were born with knowledge through the higher power of God. It was this theory of innate knowledge that was later combated by philosopher John Locke (1632–1704), an empiricist.[97] Empiricism holds that all knowledge is acquired through experience.

Physiology and psychology[edit]
In The Passions of the Soul, published in 1649,[98] Descartes discussed the common contemporary belief that the human body contained animal spirits. These animal spirits were believed to be light and roaming fluids circulating rapidly around the nervous system between the brain and the muscles. These animal spirits were believed to affect the human soul, or passions of the soul. Descartes distinguished six basic passions: wonder, love, hatred, desire, joy and sadness. All of these passions, he argued, represented different combinations of the original spirit, and influenced the soul to will or want certain actions. He argued, for example, that fear is a passion that moves the soul to generate a response in the body. In line with his dualist teachings on the separation between the soul and the body, he hypothesized that some part of the brain served as a connector between the soul and the body and singled out the pineal gland as connector.[99] Descartes argued that signals passed from the ear and the eye to the pineal gland, through animal spirits. Thus different motions in the gland cause various animal spirits. He argued that these motions in the pineal gland are based on God's will and that humans are supposed to want and like things that are useful to them. But he also argued that the animal spirits that moved around the body could distort the commands from the pineal gland, thus humans had to learn how to control their passions.[100]
Descartes advanced a theory on automatic bodily reactions to external events, which influenced 19th-century reflex theory. He argued that external motions, such as touch and sound, reach the endings of the nerves and affect the animal spirits. For example, heat from fire affects a spot on the skin and sets in motion a chain of reactions, with the animal spirits reaching the brain through the central nervous system, and in turn, animal spirits are sent back to the muscles to move the hand away from the fire.[100] Through this chain of reactions, the automatic reactions of the body do not require a thought process.[96]
Above all, he was among the first scientists who believed that the soul should be subject to scientific investigation. He challenged the views of his contemporaries that the soul was divine, thus religious authorities regarded his books as dangerous.[101] Descartes' writings went on to form the basis for theories on emotions and how cognitive evaluations were translated into affective processes. Descartes believed that the brain resembled a working machine and unlike many of his contemporaries, he believed that mathematics and mechanics could explain the most complicated processes of the mind.[citation needed] In the 20th century, Alan Turing advanced computer science based on mathematical biology as inspired by Descartes. His theories on reflexes also served as the foundation for advanced physiological theories, more than 200 years after his death. The physiologist Ivan Pavlov was a great admirer of Descartes.[102]

Moral philosophy[edit]
For Descartes, ethics was a science, the highest and most perfect of them. Like the rest of the sciences, ethics had its roots in metaphysics.[84] In this way, he argues for the existence of God, investigates the place of man in nature, formulates the theory of mind–body dualism, and defends free will. However, as he was a convinced rationalist, Descartes clearly states that reason is sufficient in the search for the goods that we should seek, and virtue consists in the correct reasoning that should guide our actions. Nevertheless, the quality of this reasoning depends on knowledge, because a well-informed mind will be more capable of making good choices, and it also depends on mental condition. For this reason, he said that a complete moral philosophy should include the study of the body.[103]: 189  He discussed this subject in the correspondence with Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia, and as a result wrote his work The Passions of the Soul, that contains a study of the psychosomatic processes and reactions in man, with an emphasis on emotions or passions.[104] His works about human passion and emotion would be the basis for the philosophy of his followers (see Cartesianism), and would have a lasting impact on ideas concerning what literature and art should be, specifically how it should invoke emotion.[105]
Humans should seek the sovereign good that Descartes, following Zeno, identifies with virtue, as this produces blessedness. For Epicurus, the sovereign good was pleasure, and Descartes says that, in fact, this is not in contradiction with Zeno's teaching, because virtue produces a spiritual pleasure, that is better than bodily pleasure. Regarding Aristotle's opinion that happiness (eudaimonia) depends on both moral virtue and also on the goods of fortune such as a moderate degree of wealth, Descartes does not deny that fortunes contribute to happiness but remarks that they are in great proportion outside one's own control, whereas one's mind is under one's complete control.[104] The moral writings of Descartes came at the last part of his life, but earlier, in his Discourse on the Method, he adopted three maxims to be able to act while he put all his ideas into doubt. This is known as his "Provisional Morals".

Religion[edit]
Part of a series onCatholic philosophy  Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham
Ethics
Cardinal virtues
Just price
Just war
Principle of Double Effect
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Social teaching
Virtue ethics

Metaphysics
Conceptualism
Realism
Moderate realism
Nominalism
Quiddity (essence / nature)
Haecceity
Quinque Viae
Predestination
Free Will
Divine Attributes

Schools
Augustinianism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Nouvelle théologie
Occamism
Scholasticism
Neo
Scotism
Thomism
Analytic
Salamanca

Philosophers
Ancient
Ambrose
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Benedict of Nursia
Boethius
Clement of Alexandria
Cyprian
Cyril of Alexandria
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Irenaeus
Jerome
John Cassian
John Chrysostom
John Climacus
John of Damascus
Justin Martyr
Maximus the Confessor
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Origen
Paul the Apostle
Tertullian


Postclassical
Peter Abelard
Albertus Magnus
Anselm of Canterbury
Roger Bacon
Bede
Bernard of Clairvaux
Berengar of Tours
Bonaventure
Catherine of Siena
Duns Scotus
John Scotus Eriugena
Pope Gregory I
Gregory of Rimini
Giles of Rome
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Isidore of Seville
James of Viterbo
Jean Buridan
Meister Eckhart
Nicholas of Cusa
Nicole Oresme
Paul of Venice
Paschasius Radbertus
Peter Lombard
Roscellinus
Symeon the New Theologian
Thierry of Chartres
Thomas Aquinas
William of Ockham


Modern
Arnauld
Azpilcueta
Bellarmine
Bossuet
Brentano
Vico
Botero
Cajetan
Cortés
Sales
Soto
Descartes
Erasmus
Fénelon
Gracián
Kołłątaj
Krasicki
La Mennais
Liguori
Malebranche
Maistre
Meinong
Mercado
Molina
More
Newman
Pascal
Chateaubriand
Rosmini
Ávila
Suárez
Vitoria


Contemporary
Mortimer J. Adler
Peter Geach
G. E. M. Anscombe
Robert Barron
Pope Benedict XVI
Maurice Blondel
G. K. Chesterton
Yves Congar
Frederick Copleston
Henri de Lubac
John Finnis
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Étienne Gilson
René Girard
Gustavo Gutiérrez
Nicolás Gómez Dávila
Romano Guardini
John Haldane
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Pope John Paul II
Bernard Lonergan
Alasdair MacIntyre
Gabriel Marcel
Jean-Luc Marion
Jacques Maritain
Marshall McLuhan
Emmanuel Mounier
Josef Pieper
Karl Rahner
Edith Stein
Charles Taylor
Hans Urs von Balthasar



 Catholicism portal Philosophy portalvte
In the third and fifth Meditation, Descartes offers proofs of a benevolent God (the trademark argument and the ontological argument respectively). Because God is benevolent, Descartes has faith in the account of reality his senses provide him, for God has provided him with a working mind and sensory system and does not desire to deceive him. From this supposition, however, Descartes finally establishes the possibility of acquiring knowledge about the world based on deduction and perception. Regarding epistemology, therefore, Descartes can be said to have contributed such ideas as a rigorous conception of foundationalism and the possibility that reason is the only reliable method of attaining knowledge. Descartes, however, was very much aware that experimentation was necessary to verify and validate theories.[84]
Descartes invokes his causal adequacy principle[106] to support his trademark argument for the existence of God, quoting Lucretius in defence: "Ex nihilo nihil fit", meaning "Nothing comes from nothing" (Lucretius).[107] Oxford Reference summarises the argument, as follows, "that our idea of perfection is related to its perfect origin (God), just as a stamp or trademark is left in an article of workmanship by its maker."[108] In the fifth Meditation, Descartes presents a version of the ontological argument which is founded on the possibility of thinking the "idea of a being that is supremely perfect and infinite," and suggests that "of all the ideas that are in me, the idea that I have of God is the most true, the most clear and distinct."[109]
Descartes considered himself to be a devout Catholic,[72][73][74] and one of the purposes of the Meditations was to defend the Catholic faith. His attempt to ground theological beliefs on reason encountered intense opposition in his time. Pascal regarded Descartes' views as a rationalist and mechanist, and accused him of deism: "I cannot forgive Descartes; in all his philosophy, Descartes did his best to dispense with God. But Descartes could not avoid prodding God to set the world in motion with a snap of his lordly fingers; after that, he had no more use for God," while a powerful contemporary, Martin Schoock, accused him of atheist beliefs, though Descartes had provided an explicit critique of atheism in his Meditations. The Catholic Church prohibited his books in 1663.[110][111][112]: 274 
Descartes also wrote a response to external world skepticism. Through this method of skepticism, he does not doubt for the sake of doubting but to achieve concrete and reliable information. In other words, certainty. He argues that sensory perceptions come to him involuntarily, and are not willed by him. They are external to his senses, and according to Descartes, this is evidence of the existence of something outside of his mind, and thus, an external world. Descartes goes on to show that the things in the external world are material by arguing that God would not deceive him as to the ideas that are being transmitted, and that God has given him the "propensity" to believe that such ideas are caused by material things. Descartes also believes a substance is something that does not need any assistance to function or exist. Descartes further explains how only God can be a true "substance". But minds are substances, meaning they need only God for it to function. The mind is a thinking substance. The means for a thinking substance stem from ideas.[113]
Descartes steered clear of theological questions, restricting his attention to showing that there is no incompatibility between his metaphysics and theological orthodoxy. He avoided trying to demonstrate theological dogmas metaphysically. When challenged that he had not established the immortality of the soul merely in showing that the soul and the body are distinct substances, he replied, "I do not take it upon myself to try to use the power of human reason to settle any of those matters which depend on the free will of God."[114]

Natural science[edit]
Descartes is often regarded as the first thinker to emphasize the use of reason to develop the natural sciences.[115] For him, philosophy was a thinking system that embodied all knowledge, as he related in a letter to a French translator:[84]

Thus, all Philosophy is like a tree, of which Metaphysics is the root, Physics the trunk, and all the other sciences the branches that grow out of this trunk, which are reduced to three principals, namely, Medicine, Mechanics, and Ethics. By the science of Morals, I understand the highest and most perfect which, presupposing an entire knowledge of the other sciences, is the last degree of wisdom.
On animals[edit]
Descartes denied that animals had reason or intelligence.[116] He argued that animals did not lack sensations or perceptions, but these could be explained mechanistically.[117] Whereas humans had a soul, or mind, and were able to feel pain and anxiety, animals by virtue of not having a soul could not feel pain or anxiety. If animals showed signs of distress then this was to protect the body from damage, but the innate state needed for them to suffer was absent.[118] Although Descartes' views were not universally accepted, they became prominent in Europe and North America, allowing humans to treat animals with impunity. The view that animals were quite separate from humanity and merely machines allowed for the maltreatment of animals, and was sanctioned in law and societal norms until the middle of the 19th century.[119]: 180–214  The publications of Charles Darwin would eventually erode the Cartesian view of animals.[120]: 37  Darwin argued that the continuity between humans and other species opened the possibilities that animals did not have dissimilar properties to suffer.[121]: 177 

Historical impact[edit]
Emancipation from Church doctrine[edit]
 Cover of Meditations
Descartes has often been dubbed the father of modern Western philosophy, the thinker whose approach has profoundly changed the course of Western philosophy and set the basis for modernity.[22][122] The first two of his Meditations on First Philosophy, those that formulate the famous methodic doubt, represent the portion of Descartes's writings that most influenced modern thinking.[123] It has been argued that Descartes himself did not realize the extent of this revolutionary move.[124] In shifting the debate from "what is true" to "of what can I be certain?", Descartes arguably shifted the authoritative guarantor of truth from God to humanity (even though Descartes himself claimed he received his visions from God)—while the traditional concept of "truth" implies an external authority, "certainty" instead relies on the judgment of the individual.
In an anthropocentric revolution, the human being is now raised to the level of a subject, an agent, an emancipated being equipped with autonomous reason. This was a revolutionary step that established the basis of modernity, the repercussions of which are still being felt: the emancipation of humanity from Christian revelational truth and Church doctrine; humanity making its own law and taking its own stand.[125][126][127] In modernity, the guarantor of truth is not God anymore but human beings, each of whom is a "self-conscious shaper and guarantor" of their own reality.[128][129] In that way, each person is turned into a reasoning adult, a subject and agent,[128] as opposed to a child obedient to God. This change in perspective was characteristic of the shift from the Christian medieval period to the modern period, a shift that had been anticipated in other fields, and which was now being formulated in the field of philosophy by Descartes.[128][130]
This anthropocentric perspective of Descartes's work, establishing human reason as autonomous, provided the basis for the Enlightenment's emancipation from God and the Church. According to Martin Heidegger, the perspective of Descartes's work also provided the basis for all subsequent anthropology.[131] Descartes's philosophical revolution is sometimes said to have sparked modern anthropocentrism and subjectivism.[22][132][133][134]

Mathematical legacy[edit]
 A Cartesian coordinates graph, using his invented x and y axes
One of Descartes's most enduring legacies was his development of Cartesian or analytic geometry, which uses algebra to describe geometry. Descartes "invented the convention of representing unknowns in equations by x, y, and z, and knowns by a, b, and c". He also "pioneered the standard notation" that uses superscripts to show the powers or exponents; for example, the 2 used in x2 to indicate x squared.[135][136]: 19  He was first to assign a fundamental place for algebra in the system of knowledge, using it as a method to automate or mechanize reasoning, particularly about abstract, unknown quantities.[137]: 91–114  European mathematicians had previously viewed geometry as a more fundamental form of mathematics, serving as the foundation of algebra. Algebraic rules were given geometric proofs by mathematicians such as Pacioli, Cardan, Tartaglia and Ferrari. Equations of degree higher than the third were regarded as unreal, because a three-dimensional form, such as a cube, occupied the largest dimension of reality. Descartes professed that the abstract quantity a2 could represent length as well as an area. This was in opposition to the teachings of mathematicians such as François Viète, who insisted that a second power must represent an area. Although Descartes did not pursue the subject, he preceded Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in envisioning a more general science of algebra or "universal mathematics," as a precursor to symbolic logic, that could encompass logical principles and methods symbolically, and mechanize general reasoning.[138]: 280–281 
Descartes's work provided the basis for the calculus developed by Newton and Leibniz, who applied the infinitesimal calculus to the tangent line problem, thus permitting the evolution of that branch of modern mathematics.[139] His rule of signs is also a commonly used method to determine the number of positive and negative roots of a polynomial.
The beginning to Descartes's interest in physics is accredited to the amateur scientist and mathematician Isaac Beeckman, who was at the forefront of a new school of thought known as mechanical philosophy. With this foundation of reasoning, Descartes formulated many of his theories on mechanical and geometric physics.[140] Descartes discovered an early form of the law of conservation of momentum (a measure of the motion of an object), and envisioned it as pertaining to motion in a straight line, as opposed to perfect circular motion, as Galileo had envisioned it.[140][141] He outlined his views on the universe in his Principles of Philosophy, where he describes his three laws of motion[disambiguation needed].[142] (Newton's own laws of motion would later be modeled on Descartes' exposition.[140])
Descartes also made contributions to the field of optics. He showed by using geometric construction and the law of refraction (also known as Descartes's law, or more commonly Snell's law outside France) that the angular radius of a rainbow is 42 degrees (i.e., the angle subtended at the eye by the edge of the rainbow and the ray passing from the sun through the rainbow's centre is 42°).[143] He also independently discovered the law of reflection, and his essay on optics was the first published mention of this law.[144]

Influence on Newton's mathematics[edit]
Current popular opinion holds that Descartes had the most influence of anyone on the young Isaac Newton, and this is arguably one of his most important contributions. Decartes' influence extended not directly from his original French edition of La Géométrie, however, but rather from Frans van Schooten's expanded second Latin edition of the work.[145]: 100  Newton continued Descartes' work on cubic equations, which freed the subject from fetters of the Greek perspectives. The most important concept was his very modern treatment of single variables.[146]: 109–129   Newton rejected Descartes' vortex theory of planetary motion in favor of his law of universal gravitation, and most of the second book of Newton's Principia is devoted to his counterargument.

Contemporary reception[edit]
In commercial terms, The Discourse appeared during Descartes's lifetime in a single edition of 500 copies, 200 of which were set aside for the author. Sharing a similar fate was the only French edition of The Meditations, which had not managed to sell out by the time of Descartes's death. A concomitant Latin edition of the latter was, however, eagerly sought out by Europe's scholarly community and proved a commercial success for Descartes.[147]: xliii–xliv 
Although Descartes was well known in academic circles towards the end of his life, the teaching of his works in schools was controversial. Henri de Roy (Henricus Regius, 1598–1679), Professor of Medicine at the University of Utrecht, was condemned by the Rector of the university, Gijsbert Voet (Voetius), for teaching Descartes's physics.[148]

Purported Rosicrucianism[edit]
The membership of Descartes to the Rosicrucians is debated.[149]
The initials of his name have been linked to the R.C. acronym widely used by Rosicrucians.[150] Furthermore, in 1619 Descartes moved to Ulm which was a well renowned international center of the Rosicrucian movement.[150]
During his journey in Germany, Descartes met Johannes Faulhaber who had previously expressed his personal commitment to join the brotherhood.[151]
Descartes dedicated the work titled The Mathematical Treasure Trove of Polybius, Citizen of the World to "learned men throughout the world 
and especially to the distinguished B.R.C. (Brothers  of the Rosy Cross) in Germany". The work wasn't completed and its publication is uncertain.[152]

Bibliography[edit]
Writings[edit]
1618. Musicae Compendium. A treatise on music theory and the aesthetics of music, which Descartes dedicated to early collaborator Isaac Beeckman (written in 1618, first published—posthumously—in 1650).[153]: 127–129 
1626–1628. Regulae ad directionem ingenii (Rules for the Direction of the Mind). Incomplete. First published posthumously in Dutch translation in 1684 and in the original Latin at Amsterdam in 1701 (R. Des-Cartes Opuscula Posthuma Physica et Mathematica). The best critical edition, which includes the Dutch translation of 1684, is edited by Giovanni Crapulli (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966).
c. 1630. De solidorum elementis. Concerns the classification of Platonic solids and three-dimensional figurate numbers. Said by some scholars to prefigure Euler's polyhedral formula. Unpublished; discovered in Descartes' estate in Stockholm 1650, soaked for three days in the Seine in a shipwreck while being shipped back to Paris, copied in 1676 by Leibniz, and lost. Leibniz's copy, also lost, was rediscovered circa 1860 in Hannover.[154]
1630–1631. La recherche de la vérité par la lumière naturelle (The Search for Truth by Natural Light) unfinished dialogue published in 1701.[155]: 264ff 
1630–1633. Le Monde (The World) and L'Homme (Man). Descartes's first systematic presentation of his natural philosophy. Man was published posthumously in Latin translation in 1662; and The World posthumously in 1664.
1637. Discours de la méthode (Discourse on the Method). An introduction to the Essais, which include the Dioptrique, the Météores and the Géométrie.
1637. La Géométrie (Geometry). Descartes's major work in mathematics. There is an English translation by Michael Mahoney (New York: Dover, 1979).
1641. Meditationes de prima philosophia (Meditations on First Philosophy), also known as Metaphysical Meditations. In Latin; a second edition, published the following year, included an additional objection and reply, and a Letter to Dinet. A French translation by the Duke of Luynes, probably done without Descartes's supervision, was published in 1647. Includes six Objections and Replies.
1644. Principia philosophiae (Principles of Philosophy), a Latin textbook at first intended by Descartes to replace the Aristotelian textbooks then used in universities. A French translation, Principes de philosophie by Claude Picot, under the supervision of Descartes, appeared in 1647 with a letter-preface to Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia.
1647. Notae in programma (Comments on a Certain Broadsheet). A reply to Descartes's one-time disciple Henricus Regius.
1648. La description du corps humain (The Description of the Human Body). Published posthumously by Clerselier in 1667.
1648. Responsiones Renati Des Cartes... (Conversation with Burman). Notes on a Q&A session between Descartes and Frans Burman on 16 April 1648. Rediscovered in 1895 and published for the first time in 1896. An annotated bilingual edition (Latin with French translation), edited by Jean-Marie Beyssade, was published in 1981 (Paris: PUF).
1649. Les passions de l'âme (Passions of the Soul). Dedicated to Princess Elisabeth of the Palatinate.
1657. Correspondance (three volumes: 1657, 1659, 1667). Published by Descartes's literary executor Claude Clerselier. The third edition, in 1667, was the most complete; Clerselier omitted, however, much of the material pertaining to mathematics.
In January 2010, a previously unknown letter from Descartes, dated 27 May 1641, was found by the Dutch philosopher Erik-Jan Bos when browsing through Google. Bos found the letter mentioned in a summary of autographs kept by Haverford College in Haverford, Pennsylvania. The college was unaware that the letter had never been published. This was the third letter by Descartes found in the last 25 years.[156][157]





Handwritten letter by Descartes, December 1638






Principia philosophiae, 1644




Collected editions[edit]

Oeuvres de Descartes edited by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, Paris: Léopold Cerf, 1897–1913, 13 volumes; new revised edition, Paris: Vrin-CNRS, 1964–1974, 11 volumes (the first 5 volumes contains the correspondence). [This edition is traditionally cited with the initials AT (for Adam and Tannery) followed by a volume number in Roman numerals; thus AT VII refers to Oeuvres de Descartes volume 7.]
Étude du bon sens, La recherche de la vérité et autres écrits de jeunesse (1616–1631) edited by Vincent Carraud and Gilles Olivo, Paris: PUF, 2013.
Descartes, Œuvres complètes, new edition by Jean-Marie Beyssade and Denis Kambouchner, Paris: Gallimard, published volumes:
I: Premiers écrits. Règles pour la direction de l'esprit, 2016.
III: Discours de la Méthode et Essais, 2009.
VIII.1: Correspondance, 1 edited by Jean-Robert Armogathe, 2013.
VIII.2: Correspondance, 2 edited by Jean-Robert Armogathe, 2013.
René Descartes. Opere 1637–1649, Milano, Bompiani, 2009, pp. 2531. Edizione integrale (di prime edizioni) e traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G. Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I. Agostini, M. Marrone, M. Savini ISBN 978-88-452-6332-3.
René Descartes. Opere 1650–2009, Milano, Bompiani, 2009, pp. 1723. Edizione integrale delle opere postume e traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G. Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I. Agostini, M. Marrone, M. Savini ISBN 978-88-452-6333-0.
René Descartes. Tutte le lettere 1619–1650, Milano, Bompiani, 2009 IIa ed., pp. 3104. Nuova edizione integrale dell'epistolario cartesiano con traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di G. Belgioioso con la collaborazione di I. Agostini, M. Marrone, F.A. Meschini, M. Savini e J.-R. Armogathe ISBN 978-88-452-3422-4.
René Descartes, Isaac Beeckman, Marin Mersenne. Lettere 1619–1648, Milano, Bompiani, 2015 pp. 1696. Edizione integrale con traduzione italiana a fronte, a cura di Giulia Beglioioso e Jean Robert-Armogathe ISBN 978-88-452-8071-9.

Early editions of specific works[edit]

Discours de la methode Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 1637
Renati Des-Cartes Principia philosophiæ Archived 9 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 1644
Le monde de Mr. Descartes ou le traité de la lumiere Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 1664
Geometria Archived 24 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine, 1659
Meditationes de prima philosophia Archived 24 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine, 1670
Opera philosophica Archived 27 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine, 1672

Collected English translations[edit]

1955. The Philosophical Works, E.S. Haldane and G.R.T. Ross, trans. Dover Publications. This work is traditionally cited with the initials HR (for Haldane and Ross) followed by a volume number in Roman numerals; thus HR II refers to volume 2 of this edition.
1988. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes in 3 vols. Cottingham, J., Stoothoff, R., Kenny, A., and Murdoch, D., trans. Cambridge University Press. This work is traditionally cited with the initials CSM (for Cottingham, Stoothoff, and Murdoch) or CSMK (for Cottingham, Stoothoff, Murdoch, and Kenny) followed by a volume number in Roman numeral; thus CSM II refers to volume 2 of this edition.
1998. René Descartes: The World and Other Writings. Translated and edited by Stephen Gaukroger. Cambridge University Press. (This consists mainly of scientific writings, on physics, biology, astronomy, optics, etc., which were very influential in the 17th and 18th centuries, but which are routinely omitted or much abridged in modern collections of Descartes's philosophical works.)

Translation of single works[edit]

1628. Regulae ad directionem ingenii. Rules for the Direction of the Natural Intelligence. A Bilingual Edition of the Cartesian Treatise on Method Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, ed. & trans. G. Heffernan (Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1998).
1633. The World, or Treatise on Light Archived 21 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine, tr. by Michael S. Mahoney.
1633. Treatise of Man, tr. by T. S. Hall. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972.
1637. Discourse on the Method, Optics, Geometry and Meteorology, trans. P. J. Olscamp, Revised edition (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2001).
1637. The Geometry of René Descartes Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, trans. D. E. Smith & Marcia Latham (Chicago: Open Court, 1925).
1641. Meditations on First Philosophy, tr. by J. Cottingham, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. Latin original. Alternative English title: Metaphysical Meditations. Includes six Objections and Replies. A second edition published the following year, includes an additional Objection and Reply and a Letter to Dinet. HTML Online Latin-French-English Edition Archived 27 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
1644. Principles of Philosophy Archived 30 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine, trans. V. R. Miller & R. P. Miller: (Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1982).
1648. Descartes' Conversation with Burman, tr. by J. Cottingham, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
1649. Passions of the Soul Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, trans. S. H. Voss (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1989). Dedicated to Elisabeth of the Palatinate.
1619–1648. René Descartes, Isaac Beeckman, Marin Mersenne. Lettere 1619–1648, ed. by Giulia Beglioioso and Jean Robert-Armogathe, Milano, Bompiani, 2015 pp. 1696. ISBN 978-88-452-8071-9

See also[edit]


Mathematics portal
Philosophy portal

3587 Descartes, asteroid
Cartesian circle
Cartesian doubt
Cartesian materialism (not a view that was held by or formulated by Descartes)
Descartes number
Cartesian plane
Descartes Prize
Descartes-Huygens Prize
Cartesian product
Cartesian product of graphs
Cartesian theater
Cartesian tree
Descartes crater and Highlands on the Moon (Apollo 16 landing site)
Descartes' rule of signs
Descartes's theorem (4 tangent circles)
Descartes' theorem on total angular defect
Folium of Descartes
Bucket argument
Paris Descartes University
List of things named after René Descartes

Notes[edit]


^ Although the uncertain authorship of this most iconic portrait of Descartes was traditionally attributed to Frans Hals, there is no record of their meeting. During the 20th century the assumption was widely challenged.[1]

^ a b Étienne Gilson argued in La Liberté chez Descartes et la Théologie (Alcan, 1913, pp. 132–147) that Duns Scotus was not the source of Descartes's Voluntarism. Although there exist doctrinal differences between Descartes and Scotus "it is still possible to view Descartes as borrowing from a Scotist Voluntarist tradition".[11]

^ Adjectival form: Cartesian /kɑːrˈtiːziən, -ˈtiːʒən/

^ This idea had already been proposed by Spanish philosopher Gómez Pereira a hundred years ago in the form: "I know that I know something, anyone who knows exists, then I exist" (nosco me aliquid noscere, & quidquid noscit, est, ergo ego sum). Pereira, Gómez. 1749 [1554]. "De Immortalitate Animae." Antoniana Margarita. p. 277.Santos López, Modesto. 1986. "Gómez Pereira, médico y filósofo medinense." In Historia de Medina del Campo y su Tierra, volumen I: Nacimiento y expansión, edited by E. L. Sanz.

^ See also: Epistemological turn.

^ While in the Netherlands he changed his address frequently, living among other places in Dordrecht (1628), Franeker (1629), Amsterdam (1629–1630), Leiden (1630), Amsterdam (1630–1632), Deventer (1632–1634), Amsterdam (1634–1635), Utrecht (1635–1636), Leiden (1636), Egmond (1636–1638), Santpoort (1638–1640), Leiden (1640–1641), Endegeest (a castle near Oegstgeest) (1641–1643), and finally for an extended time in Egmond-Binnen (1643–1649).

^ He had lived with Henricus Reneri in Deventer and Amsterdam, and had met with Constantijn Huygens and Vopiscus Fortunatus Plempius; Descartes was interviewed by Frans Burman at Egmond-Binnen in 1648. Henricus Regius, Jan Stampioen, Frans van Schooten, Comenius and Gisbertus Voetius were his main opponents.

^ The remains are, two centuries later, still resting between two other graves—those of the scholarly monks Jean Mabillon and Bernard de Montfaucon—in a chapel of the abbey.


References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Nadler, Steven, The Philosopher, The Priest, and The Painter: A Portrait of Descartes Archived 15 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013), pp. 174–198.

^ Tad M. Schmaltz, Radical Cartesianism: The French Reception of Descartes, Cambridge University Press, 2002, p. 257 Archived 15 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Fumerton, Richard (21 February 2000). "Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018.

^ Bostock, D., Philosophy of Mathematics: An Introduction, Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, p. 43 Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine: "All of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume supposed that mathematics is a theory of our ideas, but none of them offered any argument for this conceptualist claim, and apparently took it to be uncontroversial."

^ Gutting, Gary (1999). Pragmatic Liberalism and the Critique of Modernity. Cambridge University Press. p. 116. ISBN 9780521649735. Modernity begins with Descartes's mutation of Augustinianism. Taylor emphasizes that "Descartes is in many ways profoundly Augustinian".

^ Yolton, J. W., Realism and Appearances: An Essay in Ontology, Cambridge University Press, 2000, p. 136.

^ "The Correspondence Theory of Truth" Archived 25 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)

^ Gaukroger, S., Descartes: An Intellectual Biography, Clarendon Press, 1995, p. 228 Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine.

^ H. Ben-Yami, Descartes' Philosophical Revolution: A Reassessment, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015, p. 76.

^ H. Ben-Yami, Descartes' Philosophical Revolution: A Reassessment, Palgrave Macmillan, 2015, p. 179: "[Descartes'] work in mathematics was apparently influenced by Viète's, despite his denial of any acquaintance with the latter's work."

^ John Schuster, Descartes-Agonistes: Physico-mathematics, Method & Corpuscular-Mechanism 1618–33, Springer, 2012, p. 363 Archived 15 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine, n.. 26.

^ a b Mercer, C., "Descartes' debt to Teresa of Ávila, or why we should work on women in the history of philosophy" Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Philosophical Studies 174, 2017.

^ Pérez, Rolando (2020), "Francisco Sanches",  in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 26 September 2022, retrieved 12 January 2022

^ "Rodrigo de Arriaga". Scholasticon (in French).

^ "Jacques Bénigne Bossuet, French prelate and historian (1627–1704)" Archived 29 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine from the Encyclopædia Britannica, 10th Edition (1902)

^ Wells, John (3 April 2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0.

^ "Descartes". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2019.

^ "Descartes, René[dead link]" (US English). Lexico. Oxford University Press. 2020.

^ Colie, Rosalie L. (1957). Light and Enlightenment. Cambridge University Press. p. 58.

^ Nadler, Steven. 2015. The Philosopher, the Priest, and the Painter: A Portrait of Descartes. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-16575-2.

^ Carlson, Neil R. (2001). Physiology of Behavior. Needham Heights, Massachusetts: Pearson: Allyn & Bacon. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-205-30840-8.

^ a b c Bertrand Russell (2004) History of western philosophy Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine pp. 511, 516–17.

^ Moorman, R. H. 1943. "The Influence of Mathematics on the Philosophy of Spinoza Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine." National Mathematics Magazine 18(3):108–15.

^ Grondin, J., Introduction to Metaphysics: From Parmenides to Levinas (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2004), p. 126 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and Mathematicians: The History of Math Discoveries Around the World; Vol. 1. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich.: U X L. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ "Scepticism, Scholasticism, and the origins of Descartes's philosophy (Chapter 2)". Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022.

^ Rodis-Lewis, Geneviève (1992). "Descartes' Life and the Development of His Philosophy".  In Cottingham, John (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes. Cambridge University Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-521-36696-0. Archived from the original on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2016.

^ "All-history.org". Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2014.

^ Clarke, Desmond M. (2006). Descartes : a biography. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-511-16899-3. OCLC 67705926.

^ "Descartes, Rene | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 27 July 2021.

^ a b c d e Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and Mathematicians: The History of Math Discoveries Around the World; Vol. 1. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich.: U X L. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ Porter, Roy (1999) [1997]. "The New Science". The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present. Great Britain: Harper Collins. p. 217. ISBN 978-0-00-637454-1.

^ Baird, Forrest E.; Kaufmann, Walter (2008). From Plato to Derrida. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp. 373–377. ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1.

^ Descartes. [1637] 2011. Discourse on the Method. Zhubei: Hyweb Technology. p. 20–21 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b Gaukroger, Stephen. 1995. Descartes: An Intellectual Biography Archived 5 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

^ McQuillan, J. C. 2016. Early Modern Aesthetics. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 45 Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b c Durandin, Guy. 1970. Les Principes de la Philosophie. Introduction et notes. Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin.

^ "René Descartes - Biography". Maths History. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2020.

^ Parker, N. Geoffrey. 2007. "Battle of White Mountain Archived 9 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine" (revised). Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Jeffery, R. 2018. Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia: The Philosopher Princess. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. p. 68 Archived 8 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Rothkamm, J., Institutio Oratoria: Bacon, Descartes, Hobbes, Spinoza (Leiden & Boston: Brill, 2009), p. 40 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and mathematicians : the history of math discoveries around the world; Vol. 1. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich.: U X L. p. 101. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ Otaiku AI (2018). "Did René Descartes have Exploding Head Syndrome?". J. Clin. Sleep Med. 14 (4): 675–8. doi:10.5664/jcsm.7068. PMC 5886445. PMID 29609724.

^ Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1961). The Story of Civilization: Part VII, the Age of Reason Begins. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 637. ISBN 978-0-671-01320-2.

^ Clarke (2006), pp. 58–59.

^ a b Shea, William R. 1991. The Magic of Numbers and Motion. Science History Publications.

^ Matton, Sylvain, ed. 2013. Lettres sur l'or potable suivies du traité De la connaissance des vrais principes de la nature et des mélanges et de fragments d'un Commentaire sur l'Amphithéâtre de la Sapience éternelle de Khunrath, by Nicolas de Villiers. Paris: Préface de Vincent Carraud.

^ Moote, A. L. 1989. Louis XIII, the Just. Oakland: University of California Press. pp. 271–72 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "A bird's eye view". Archived from the original on 21 September 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2022.

^ Grayling, A. C. 2006. Descartes: The Life of René Descartes and Its Place in His Times. Simon & Schuster. pp. 151–52.

^ Cogito, Ergo Sum: The Life of René Descartes. David R. Godine Publisher. 2007. ISBN 9781567923353. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022.

^ The Wisdom of the Enlightenment. Rowman & Littlefield. 15 February 2022. ISBN 9781633887947. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022.

^ Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1961). The Story of Civilization: Par VII, the Age of reason Begins. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster. p. 638. ISBN 978-0-671-01320-2.

^ Porterfield, J., René Descartes (New York: Rosen Publishing, 2018), p. 66 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Russell Shorto, Descartes' Bones: A Skeletal History of the Conflict Between Faith and Reason ISBN 978-0-385-51753-9 (New York: Random House, 2008)

^ a b c Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and mathematicians: the history of math discoveries around the world. Vol. 1. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, MI: U X L. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ Descartes, Discourse on the Method (Zhubei: Hyweb Technology: 2011), p. 88 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "Pierre de Fermat | Biography & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 15 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017.

^ Craig, D. J., "She Thinks, Therefore I Am" Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Columbia Magazine, Fall 2017.

^ Harth, E., Cartesian Women: Versions and Subversions of Rational Discourse in the Old Regime, (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992), pp. 67–77 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Blom, John J., Descartes, His Moral Philosophy and Psychology. New York University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-8147-0999-0

^ Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and mathematicians : the history of math discoveries around the world. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, Mich.: U X L. pp. 103–4. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ a b Smith, Kurt (Fall 2010). "Descartes' Life and Works". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 23 March 2021. Retrieved 2 May 2005.

^ Modern meteorology: a series of six lectures: delivered under the auspices of the Meteorological Society in 1878, 1879, p. 73.

^ Bruno, Leonard C. (2003) [1999]. Math and mathematicians: the history of math discoveries around the world. Baker, Lawrence W. Detroit, MI: U X L. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-7876-3813-9. OCLC 41497065.

^ "Il y a des preuves que René Descartes a été assassiné". L'Obs (in French). 12 February 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2020.

^ ""Severity of winter seasons in the northern Baltic Sea between 1529 and 1990: reconstruction and analysis" by S. Jevrejeva (2001), p. 6, Table 3" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2020.

^ Pies Е., Der Mordfall Descartes, Solingen, 1996, and Ebert Т., Der rätselhafte Tod des René Descartes, Aschaffenburg, Alibri, 2009. French translation: L'Énigme de la mort de Descartes, Paris, Hermann, 2011

^ "Descartes was "poisoned by Catholic priest" – The Guardian, Feb 14 2010". The Guardian. 14 February 2010. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2014.

^ "Was Descartes murdered in Stockholm?". Stockholm News. 22 February 2010. Archived from the original on 15 December 2014.[self-published source]

^ Ebert, Theodor (2009). Der rätselhafte Tod des René Descartes (in German). Alibri Verlag. ISBN 978-3-86569-048-7. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2020.

^ a b Garstein, Oskar (1992). Rome and the Counter-Reformation in Scandinavia: The Age of Gustavus Adolphus and Queen Christina of Sweden, 1622-1656. BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-09395-9. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2020.

^ a b Rodis-Lewis, Geneviève (1999). Descartes: His Life and Thought. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-8627-2. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2020.

^ a b Oppy, Graham; Trakakis, N. N. (11 September 2014). Early Modern Philosophy of Religion: The History of Western Philosophy of Religion, volume 3. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-54645-0. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2020.

^ "Andrefabre.e-monsite.com". Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2014.

^ Watson, R., Cogito, Ergo Sum: The Life of René Descartes (Boston: David R. Godine, 2002), pp. 137–154 Archived 25 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "5 historical figures whose heads have been stolen". Strange Remains. 23 July 2015. Archived from the original on 22 December 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2016.

^ Copenhaver, Rebecca. "Forms of skepticism". Archived from the original on 8 January 2005. Retrieved 15 August 2007.

^ a b Newman, Lex (2016).  Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2017.

^ "Cogito, ergo sum | philosophy". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 16 June 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2021.

^ "Ten books: Chosen by Raj Persuade". The British Journal of Psychiatry. Archived from the original on 10 November 2003. Retrieved 13 November 2007.

^ Descartes, René (1644). The Principles of Philosophy. Vol. IX.

^ Bardt, C., Material and Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019), p. 109 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b c d Descartes, René. "Letter of the Author to the French Translator of the Principles of Philosophy serving for a preface". Translated by Veitch, John. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018. Retrieved 6 December 2011.

^ Watson, Richard A. (January 1982). "What Moves the Mind: An Excursion in Cartesian Dualism". American Philosophical Quarterly. University of Illinois Press. 19 (1): 73–81. JSTOR 20013943.

^ Gobert, R. D., The Mind-Body Stage: Passion and Interaction in the Cartesian Theater Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013).

^ David Cunning (2014). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes' Meditations. Cambridge University Press. p. 277. ISBN 978-1-107-72914-8.

^ a b David Cunning (2014). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes' Meditations. Cambridge University Press. p. 278. ISBN 978-1-107-72914-8.

^ David Cunning (2014). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes' Meditations. Cambridge University Press. p. 279. ISBN 978-1-107-72914-8.

^ David Cunning (2014). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes' Meditations. Cambridge University Press. p. 280. ISBN 978-1-107-72914-8.

^ Georges Dicker (2013). Descartes: An Analytic and Historical Introduction. OUP. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-19-538032-3.

^ Georges Dicker (2013). Descartes: An Analytic and Historical Introduction. OUP. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-19-538032-3.

^ Georges Dicker (2013). Descartes: An Analytic and Historical Introduction. OUP. p. 301. ISBN 978-0-19-538032-3.

^ a b c Georges Dicker (2013). Descartes: An Analytic and Historical Introduction. OUP. p. 303. ISBN 978-0-19-538032-3.

^ Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy (online): Descartes and the Pineal Gland.

^ a b Eric Shiraev (2010). A History of Psychology: A Global Perspective: A Global Perspective. Sage. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-4129-7383-0.

^ Baldwin, Bird T. (April 1913). "John Locke's Contributions to Education" (PDF). The Sewanee Review. The Johns Hopkins University Press. 21 (2): 177–187. JSTOR 27532614. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2020.

^ "17th and 18th Century Theories of Emotions > Descartes on the Emotions (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 3 September 2006. Retrieved 29 July 2021.

^ Eric Shiraev (2010). A History of Psychology: A Global Perspective: A Global Perspective. Sage. p. 86. ISBN 978-1-4129-7383-0.

^ a b Eric Shiraev (2010). A History of Psychology: A Global Perspective: A Global Perspective. Sage. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-4129-7383-0.

^ Goudriaan, Aza (3 September 2020). "The Concept of Heresy and the Debates on Descartes's Philosophy". Church History and Religious Culture. 100 (2–3): 172–186. doi:10.1163/18712428-10002001. ISSN 1871-241X. S2CID 225257956. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022.

^ Eric Shiraev (2010). A History of Psychology: A Global Perspective. Sage. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-4129-7383-0.

^ Pickavé, M., & Shapiro, L., eds., Emotion and Cognitive Life in Medieval and Early Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), p. 189 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b Blom, John J., Descartes. His moral philosophy and psychology. New York University Press. 1978. ISBN 0-8147-0999-0

^ Jacob, Margaret C. (2009). The Scientific Revolution A Brief History with Documents. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's. pp. 16, 17. ISBN 978-0-312-65349-1.

^ Dicker, G., Descartes: An Analytical and Historical Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 118ff Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Carus, Lucretius (1947). De Rerum Natura. Oxford University Press. pp. 146–482.

^ "Trademark argument". Oxford Reference. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2021.

^ Descartes, Rene "Meditations on First Philosophy, 3rd Ed., Translated from Latin by: Donald A. Cress

^ Descartes, René. (2009). Encyclopædia Britannica 2009 Deluxe Edition. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Edward C. Mendler, False Truths: The Error of Relying on Authority, p. 16

^ Peterson, L. L., American Trinity: Jefferson, Custer, and the Spirit of the West (Helena, MT: Sweetgrass Books, 2017), p. 274 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "Descartes, Rene | Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 22 February 2017.

^ Gaukroger, Stephen (1995). Descartes - An Intellectual Biography. Oxford University Press Inc., New York: Clarendon Press. pp. 355–356. ISBN 978-0-19-823994-9.

^ Grosholz, Emily (1991). Cartesian method and the problem of reduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-824250-5. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2020. But contemporary debate has tended to...understand [Cartesian method] merely as the 'method of doubt'...I want to define Descartes' method in broader terms...to trace its impact on the domains of mathematics and physics as well as metaphysics.

^ Waddicor, M. H., Montesquieu and the Philosophy of Natural Law (Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1970), p. 63 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "Animal Consciousness, No. 2. Historical background". Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy. 23 December 1995. Archived from the original on 6 September 2008. Retrieved 16 December 2014.

^ Parker, J. V., Animal Minds, Animal Souls, Animal Rights (Lanham: University Press of America, 2010), pp. 16 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, 88 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, 99 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Gaukroger, S., Descartes' System of Natural Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 180–214 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Spencer, J., "'Love and Hatred are Common to the Whole Sensitive Creation': Animal Feeling in the Century before Darwin," in A. Richardson, ed., After Darwin: Animals, Emotions, and the Mind (Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, 2013),
p. 37 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Workman, L. (2013). Charles Darwin: The Shaping of Evolutionary Thinking. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 177. ISBN 978-1-137-31323-2. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2019.

^ Heidegger [1938] (2002), p. 76 quotation: Descartes... that which he himself founded... modern (and that means, at the same time, Western) metaphysics.

^ Schmaltz, Tad M. Radical Cartesianism: The French Reception of Descartes Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine p. 27 quotation: The Descartes most familiar to twentieth-century philosophers is the Descartes of the first two Meditations, someone proccupied with hyperbolic doubt of the material world and the certainty of knowledge of the self that emerges from the famous cogito argument.

^ Roy Wood Sellars (1949) Philosophy for the future: the quest of modern materialism quotation: Husserl has taken Descartes very seriously in a historical as well as in a systematic sense [...] [in The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, Husserl] finds in the first two Meditations of Descartes a depth which it is difficult to fathom, and which Descartes himself was so little able to appreciate that he let go "the great discovery" he had in his hands.

^ Martin Heidegger [1938] (2002) The Age of the World Picture quotation: For up to Descartes...a particular sub-iectum...lies at the foundation of its own fixed qualities and changing circumstances. The superiority of a sub-iectum...arises out of the claim of man to a...self-supported, unshakeable foundation of truth, in the sense of certainty. Why and how does this claim acquire its decisive authority? The claim originates in that emancipation of man in which he frees himself from obligation to Christian revelational truth and Church doctrine to a legislating for himself that takes its stand upon itself.

^ Ingraffia, Brian D. (1995) Postmodern theory and biblical theology: vanquishing God's shadow Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine p. 126

^ Norman K. Swazo (2002) Crisis theory and world order: Heideggerian reflections Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine pp. 97–99

^ a b c Lovitt, Tom (1977) introduction to Martin Heidegger's The question concerning technology, and other essays, pp. xxv–xxvi

^ Briton, Derek The modern practice of adult education: a postmodern critique p. 76

^ Martin Heidegger The Word of Nietzsche: God is Dead pp. 88–90

^ Heidegger [1938] (2002), p. 75 quotation: With the interpretation of man as subiectum, Descartes creates the metaphysical presupposition for future anthropology of every kind and tendency.

^ Schwartz, B. I., China and Other Matters (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996), p. 95 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, quotation: ... the kind of anthropocentric subjectivism which has emerged from the Cartesian revolution.

^ Charles B. Guignon Heidegger and the problem of knowledge Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine p. 23

^ Husserl, Edmund (1931) Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology quotation: When, with the beginning of modern times, religious belief was becoming more and more externalized as a lifeless convention, men of intellect were lifted by a new belief: their great belief in an autonomous philosophy and science. [...] in philosophy, the Meditations were epoch-making in a quite unique sense, and precisely because of their going back to the pure ego cogito. Descartes work has been used, in fact to inaugurates an entirely new kind of philosophy. Changing its total style, philosophy takes a radical turn: from naïve objectivism to transcendental subjectivism.

^ René Descartes, Discourse de la Méthode (Leiden, Netherlands): Jan Maire, 1637, appended book: La Géométrie, book one, p. 299. Archived 8 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine From p. 299: " ... Et aa, ou a2, pour multiplier a par soy mesme; Et a3, pour le multiplier encore une fois par a, & ainsi a l'infini; ... " ( ... and aa, or a2, in order to multiply a by itself; and a3, in order to multiply it once more by a, and thus to infinity; ... )

^ Sorell, T., Descartes: A Very Short Introduction (2000). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 19 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Gaukroger, S., "The nature of abstract reasoning: philosophical aspects of Descartes' work in algebra", in J. Cottingham, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Descartes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 91–114 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Morris Kline, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Vol. 1 (1972). New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 280–281 Archived 16 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Gullberg, Jan (1997). Mathematics From The Birth of Numbers. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04002-9.

^ a b c Slowik, Edward (22 August 2017). "Descartes' Physics".  In Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2018.

^ Alexander Afriat, "Cartesian and Lagrangian Momentum" Archived 9 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine (2004).

^ René Descartes (1664). Principia Philosophiae. Part II, §§37–40.

^ Tipler, P.A. and G. Mosca (2004). Physics For Scientists And Engineers. W.H. Freeman. ISBN 978-0-7167-4389-7.

^ "René Descartes". Encarta. Microsoft. 2008. Archived from the original on 7 September 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2007.

^ Westfall, R. S., Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980), p. 100 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Whiteside, D. T., "Newton the Mathematician", in Z. Bechler, ed., Contemporary Newtonian Research (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 1982), pp. 109–129 Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Maclean, I., introduction to Descartes, R., A Discourse on the Method of Correctly Conducting One's Reason and Seeking Truth in the Sciences (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), pp. xliii–xliv Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Cottingham, John; Murdoch, Dugald; Stoothof, Robert (1984). "Comments on a Certain Broadsheet". The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Cambridge University Press. p. 293. ISBN 978-0-521-28807-1. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020.

^ "The Rosicrucian history". www.rosicrucian.org. Archived from the original on 22 January 2015. Retrieved 13 May 2021.

^ a b Bond, Steven (24 June 2011). ""R.C.": Rosicrucianism and Cartesianism in Joyce and Beckett". Miranda (4–2011). doi:10.4000/miranda.1939. ISSN 2108-6559. OCLC 5497224736. Archived from the original on 2 June 2018.

^ Henri, John; Nolan, Lawrence (26 January 2015).  Nolan, Lawrence (ed.). "Rosicrucian". The Cambridge Descartes Lexicon. Cambridge University Press: 659–660. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511894695.224. ISBN 9780511894695. Archived from the original on 10 June 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2021.

^ Mansikka, Tomas (21 April 2018). "Esotericism in reverse. Descartes and the poetic imagination in the seventeenth century" (pdf). Approaching Religion. 8 (1): 84. doi:10.30664/ar.66731. ISSN 1799-3121. OCLC 8081521487. Retrieved 13 May 2021.

^ Cook, H. J., in Porter, R., & Teich, M., eds., The Scientific Revolution in National Context (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 127–129 Archived 16 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Federico, Pasquale Joseph (1982). Descartes on Polyhedra: A Study of the "De solidorum elementis". Sources in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences. Vol. 4. Springer.

^ Cottingham, J., Murdoch, D., & Stoothof, R., trans. and eds., The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, Vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1984), pp. 264ff Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Vlasblom, Dirk (25 February 2010). "Unknown letter from Descartes found". NRC.nl (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 8 November 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2012.

^ Vlasblom, Dirk. "Hoe Descartes in 1641 op andere gedachten kwam". NRC.nl (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 27 October 2016.


Sources[edit]

Agostini, Siegrid; Leblanc, Hélène, eds. (2015). Examina Philosophica. I Quaderni di Alvearium (PDF). Vol. Le fondement de la science. Les dix premières années de la philosophie cartésienne (1619–1628). Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2016.
Boyer, Carl (1985). A History of Mathematics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02391-5.
Carriero, John (2008). Between Two Worlds. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13561-8.
Chomsky, Noam (1966). Cartesian Linguistics: A Chapter in the History of Rationalist Thought. New York, NY: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-1-877275-34-0.; (2009) Third Edition, edited with a new introduction by James McGilvray, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-70817-3.
Clarke, Desmond (2006). Descartes: A Biography. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-82301-2.
Costabel, Pierre (1987). René Descartes – Exercices pour les éléments des solides. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. ISBN 978-2-13-040099-8.
Cottingham, John (1992). The Cambridge Companion to Descartes. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-36696-0.
Duncan, Steven M. (2008). The Proof of the External World: Cartesian Theism and the Possibility of Knowledge. Cambridge, England: James Clarke & Co. ISBN 978-0-227-17267-4. Archived from the original on 23 December 2008.
Farrell, John. "Demons of Descartes and Hobbes." Paranoia and Modernity: Cervantes to Rousseau (Cornell UP, 2006), chapter 7.
Garber, Daniel (1992). Descartes' Metaphysical Physics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-28219-0.
Garber, Daniel; Ayers, Michael (1998). The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53721-6.
Gaukroger, Stephen (1995). Descartes: An Intellectual Biography. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-823994-9.
Gillespie, A. (2006). Descartes' Demon: A Dialogical Analysis of 'Meditations on First Philosophy.' Theory & Psychology, 16, 761–781.
Grayling, A. C. (2005). Descartes: The Life and Times of a Genius. New York, NY: Walker Publishing Co., Inc. ISBN 978-0-8027-1501-2.
Heidegger, Martin [1938] (2002) The Age of the World Picture in Off the Beaten Track Archived 21 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine pp. 57–85
Keeling, S. V. (1968). Descartes. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Melchert, Norman (2002). The Great Conversation: A Historical Introduction to Philosophy. New York, NY: McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-19-517510-3.
Monnoyeur, Françoise (November 2017), Matière et espace dans le système cartésien, Paris, Harmattan, 266 pages. ISBN 978-2-343-13394-2.
Moreno Romo, Juan Carlos, Vindicación del cartesianismo radical, Anthropos, Barcelona, 2010.
Moreno Romo, Juan Carlos (Coord.), Descartes vivo. Ejercicios de hermenéutica cartesiana, Anthropos, Barcelona, 2007.
Naaman-Zauderer, Noa (2010). Descartes' Deontological Turn: Reason, Will and Virtue in the Later Writings. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-76330-1.
Negri, Antonio (2007) The Political Descartes, Verso.
Ozaki, Makoto (1991). Kartenspiel, oder Kommentar zu den Meditationen des Herrn Descartes. Berlin: Klein Verlag. ISBN 978-3-927199-01-9.
Sasaki Chikara (2003). Descartes's Mathematical Thought Archived 5 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine. (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 237.) xiv + 496 pp., bibl., indexes. Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Schäfer, Rainer (2006). Zweifel und Sein – Der Ursprung des modernen Selbstbewusstseins in Descartes' cogito. Wuerzburg: Koenigshausen&Neumann. ISBN 978-3-8260-3202-8.
Serfati, Michel, 2005, "Géometrie" in Ivor Grattan-Guinness, ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 1–22.
Sorrell, Tom (1987). Descartes. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-287636-2.
Vrooman, Jack Rochford (1970). René Descartes: A Biography. Putnam Press.
Watson, Richard A. (2012). "René Descartes". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. Archived from the original on 7 May 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2012.
Watson, Richard A. (2007). Cogito, Ergo Sum: a life of René Descartes. David R Godine. 2002, reprint 2007. ISBN 978-1-56792-335-3. Was chosen by the New York Public library as one of "25 Books to Remember from 2002"
Woo, B. Hoon (2013). "The Understanding of Gisbertus Voetius and René Descartes on the Relationship of Faith and Reason, and Theology and Philosophy". Westminster Theological Journal. 75 (1): 45–63. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2014.

External links[edit]


René Descartes  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource




Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Descartes, René".

General[edit]
The Correspondence of René Descartes in EMLO
Works by René Descartes at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about René Descartes at Internet Archive
Works by René Descartes at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Detailed biography of Descartes at MacTutor
Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "René Descartes" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
John Cottingham translation of Meditations and Objections and Replies.
René Descartes (1596–1650) Published in Encyclopedia of Rhetoric and Composition (1996)
A site containing Descartes's main works, including correspondence, slightly modified for easier reading
Descartes Philosophical Writings tr. by Norman Kemp Smith at archive.org
Studies in the Cartesian philosophy (1902) by Norman Kemp Smith at archive.org
The Philosophical Works Of Descartes Volume II (1934) at archive.org
Descartes featured on the 100 French Franc banknote from 1942.
Free scores by René Descartes at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)
René Descartes at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
Centro Interdipartimentale di Studi su Descartes e il Seicento
Livre Premier, La Géométrie, online and analyzed by A. Warusfel, BibNum[click "à télécharger" for English analysis]
Bibliographies[edit]
Bibliografia cartesiana/Bibliographie cartésienne on-line (1997–2012)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy[edit]
Descartes
Life and works
Epistemology
Mathematics
Physics
Ethics
Modal Metaphysics
Ontological Argument
Theory of Ideas
Pineal Gland
Law Thesis
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy[edit]
Descartes
Descartes: Ethics
Descartes: Mind-Body Distinction
Descartes: Scientific Method
Other[edit]
Bernard Williams interviewed about Descartes on Men of ideas

Articles related to René Descartes
vteAge of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Lumières
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Universality
Weimar Classicism
ThinkersEngland
Joseph Addison
Anthony Ashley-Cooper
Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Anthony Collins
Edward Gibbon
William Godwin
James Harrington
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
John Milton
Isaac Newton
Alexander Pope
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Joshua Reynolds
Algernon Sidney
Matthew Tindal
John Trenchard
Mary Wollstonecraft
France
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
René Louis d'Argenson
Pierre Bayle
Pierre Beaumarchais
Nicolas Chamfort
Émilie du Châtelet
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
René Descartes
Denis Diderot
Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle
Olympe de Gouges
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Baron d'Holbach
Louis de Jaucourt
Julien Offray de La Mettrie
Antoine Lavoisier
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Maréchal
Jean Meslier
Montesquieu
Étienne-Gabriel Morelly
Blaise Pascal
François Quesnay
Guillaume Thomas François Raynal
Marquis de Sade
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Firmin Abauzit
Charles Bonnet
Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui
Jean-Louis de Lolme
Pierre Prévost
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Antoine-Jacques Roustan
Horace Bénédict de Saussure
Jacob Vernes
Jacob Vernet
Germany
Justus Henning Böhmer
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Immanuel Kant
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg
Moses Mendelssohn
Samuel von Pufendorf
Friedrich Schiller
Christian Thomasius
Gabriel Wagner
Christian Felix Weiße
Adam Weishaupt
Christoph Martin Wieland
Thomas Wizenmann
Christian Wolff
Greece
Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais
Ireland
George Berkeley
Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke
Jonathan Swift
John Toland
Italy
Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Ferdinando Galiani
Luigi Galvani
Antonio Genovesi
Francesco Mario Pagano
Giovanni Salvemini
Pietro Verri
Giambattista Vico
Netherlands
Balthasar Bekker
Pieter de la Court
Petrus Cunaeus
Hugo Grotius
François Hemsterhuis
Christiaan Huygens
Adriaan Koerbagh
Frederik van Leenhof
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Bernard Nieuwentyt
Baruch Spinoza
Jan Swammerdam
Hendrik Wyermars
Poland
Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Stanisław Staszic
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski
Portugal
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Ion Budai-Deleanu
Dinicu Golescu
Petru Maior
Samuil Micu-Klein
Gheorghe Șincai
Russia
Catherine II
Denis Fonvizin
Antiochus Kantemir
Mikhail Kheraskov
Mikhail Lomonosov
Nikolay Novikov
Alexander Radishchev
Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Dositej Obradović
Avram Mrazović
Spain
José Cadalso
Charles III
Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro
Leandro Fernández de Moratín
Valentin de Foronda
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos
Martín Sarmiento
Diego de Torres Villarroel
Scotland
James Beattie
Joseph Black
Hugh Blair
James Boswell
James Burnett
Robert Burns
William Cullen
Adam Ferguson
Thomas Gordon
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
James Hutton
James Mill
John Millar
Isaac Newton
William Ogilvie
John Playfair
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Dugald Stewart
United States
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine

Romanticism →
 Category

vteMetaphysicsMetaphysicians
Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Christian Wolff
Bernard Bolzano
Hermann Lotze
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
G. E. Moore
Gilles Deleuze
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
W. V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
D. M. Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Héctor-Neri Castañeda
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
Alexius Meinong
Ernst Mally
Edward N. Zalta
more ...
Theories
Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Platonic realism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Truthmaker theory
Type theory
Concepts
Abstract object
Anima mundi
Category of being
Causality
Causal closure
Choice
Cogito, ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Nature
Necessity
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical object
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Relation
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...
Related topics
Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Mereology
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology

 Category
 Philosophy portal

vteEpistemologyEpistemologists
Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
Gilles Deleuze
Keith DeRose
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
Anil Gupta
Susan Haack
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Peter Klein
Saul Kripke
Hilary Kornblith
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
John McDowell
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Duncan Pritchard
James Pryor
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Reid
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Wilfrid Sellars
Susanna Siegel
Ernest Sosa
P. F. Strawson
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle
more...
Theories
Coherentism
Constructivism
Contextualism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representational realism
Skepticism
Transcendental idealism
Concepts
A priori knowledge
A posteriori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Epistemic injustice
Gettier problem
Induction
Internalism and externalism
Justification
Knowledge
Objectivity
Privileged access
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Procedural knowledge
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...
Related articles
Outline of epistemology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Metaepistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology

Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion

vtePhilosophy of mindPhilosophers
Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Feyerabend
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...
Theories
Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neurophenomenology
Neutral monism
Occasionalism
Parallelism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology
Physicalism
identity theory
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Substance dualism
Concepts
Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...
Related
Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self

Category
Philosophers category
Project
Task Force

vtePhilosophy of scienceConcepts
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Functional contextualism
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific pluralism
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science
Metatheoryof science
Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism
Rationalism / Empiricism
Received view / Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism
Philosophy of
Physics
thermal and statistical
Motion
Chemistry
Biology
Geography
Social science
Technology
Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time
Related topics
Alchemy
Criticism of science
Descriptive science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
Hard and soft science
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Normative science
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Science studies
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance
Philosophers of science by eraAncient
Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans
Epicurus
Medieval
Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby
Early modern
Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume
Late modern
Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson
Contemporary
Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett

Category
 Philosophy portal
 Science portal

vtePhilosophy of religionConcepts in religion
Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
or religious belief
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto
Conceptions of God
Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover
God in
Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Baháʼí Faith
Wicca
Existence of GodFor
Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological
Kalam
Contingency
Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological
Natural law
Watchmaker analogy
Transcendental
Against
747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot
Theology
Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism
Christian
Atheistic
Feminist theology
Thealogy
Womanist theology
Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism
Religious
Secular
Christian
Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism
Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic
New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...
Religious language
Eschatological verification
Language game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism
Problem of evil
Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy
Philosophersof religion(by date active)Ancient andmedieval
Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaudapada
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Maimonides
Adi Shankara
Thomas Aquinas
Early modern
Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder
18001850
Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel
Thomas Carlyle
William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir
18801900
Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James
Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal
1920postwar
George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr
Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
Frithjof Schuon
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew
197019902010
William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams
Ravi Zacharias
Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad
Alexander Pruss
Related topics
Criticism of religion
Desacralization of knowledge
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religion
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Faith and rationality
more...

 Portal
 Category

vteConsciousnessFiguresPhilosophy
Alfred North Whitehead
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Bertrand Russell
Brian O'Shaughnessy
Charles Augustus Strong
Christopher Peacocke
Colin McGinn
Daniel Dennett
David Chalmers
David Hume
David Papineau
David Pearce
Donald Davidson
Douglas Hofstadter
Edmund Husserl
Frank Jackson
Fred Dretske
Galen Strawson
George Berkeley
George Henry Lewes
Georges Rey
Gottfried Leibniz
Immanuel Kant
John Eccles
John Locke
John Polkinghorne
John Searle
Joseph Levine
Karl Popper
Keith Frankish
Kenneth M. Sayre
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Max Velmans
Michael Tye
Martin Heidegger
Ned Block
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
Philip Goff
René Descartes
Thomas Metzinger
Thomas Nagel
William Kingdon Clifford
William Lycan
William Seager
Psychology
Carl Gustav Jung
Donald D. Hoffman
Franz Brentano
Gustav Fechner
Kurt Koffka
Max Wertheimer
Sigmund Freud
Wilhelm Wundt
William James
Wolfgang Köhler
Neuroscience
Anil Seth
Antonio Damasio
Benjamin Libet
Bernard Baars
Christof Koch
Francis Crick
Francisco Varela
Gerald Edelman
Giulio Tononi
Karl Pribram
Lawrence Weiskrantz
Michael Gazzaniga
Michael Graziano
Patrick Wilken
Roger Sperry
Stanislas Dehaene
Steven Laureys
Stuart Hameroff
Wolf Singer
Others
Annaka Harris
David Bohm
Eugene Wigner
Erwin Schrödinger
Marvin Minsky
Max Planck
Roger Penrose
Susan Blackmore
Victor J. Stenger
Wolfgang Pauli
TheoriesPhilosophy of mind
Anomalous monism
Computationalism
Double-aspect theory
Eliminative materialism
Emergentism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Mind–body dualism
Monism
Neutral monism
New mysterianism
Panpsychism
Parallelism
Physicalism
Property dualism
Qualia
Reflexive monism
Revisionary materialism
Solipsism
Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory)
Science
Attention schema theory
Dynamic core hypothesis
Damasio's theory of consciousness
Electromagnetic theories of consciousness
Global workspace theory
Holonomic brain theory
Integrated information theory
Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis
Multiple drafts model
Orchestrated objective reduction
Topics
Agnosia
Altered state of consciousness
Animal consciousness
Artificial consciousness
Attention
Awareness
Binding problem
Binocular rivalry
Blindsight
Brain
Cartesian theater
Consciousness after death
Disorders of consciousness
Divided consciousness
Dual consciousness (split-brain)
Experience
Explanatory gap
Free will
Flash suppression
Hallucination
Hard problem of consciousness
Heterophenomenology
Higher consciousness
Illusion
Introspection illusion
Knowledge argument
Locked-in syndrome
Mind
Mind–body problem
Minimally conscious state
Neural correlates of consciousness
Neurophenomenology
Ontology
Phenomenology
Philosophical zombie
Philosophy of mind
Primary consciousness
Problem of other minds
Reentry
Qualia
Quantum mind
Sakshi
Purusha
Secondary consciousness
Sentience
Sentiocentrism
Sociology of human consciousness
Soul
Stream of consciousness
Subconscious
Subjective character of experience
Subjectivity
Unconscious mind
Unconsciousness
Upanishads
Visual masking
Von Neumann–Wigner interpretation
Yogachara
Works
A Universe of Consciousness
Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness
Consciousness and Cognition
Consciousness Explained
Cosmic Consciousness
How the Self Controls Its Brain
Journal of Consciousness Studies
Online Consciousness Conference
Psyche
The Astonishing Hypothesis
The Conscious Mind
The Emperor's New Mind
The Science of Consciousness
Understanding Consciousness
"What Is it Like to Be a Bat?"
Wider than the Sky

 Category
 Commons

vteCatholic philosophyEthics
Cardinal virtues
Divine command
Just price
Just war
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Seven virtues
Social teaching
Theological virtues
Virtue ethics
SchoolsMedieval
Augustinianism
Scholasticism
Thomism
Scotism
Occamism
Modern
Salamanca
Christian humanism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Neo-scholasticism
Analytical Thomism
Universals
Augustinian realism
Nominalism
Conceptualism
Moderate realism
Scotistic realism
Other
Theological intellectualism
Theological voluntarism
Foundationalism
Philosophers
Clement
Augustine
Boethius
Dionysius
Isidore
Eriugena
Alcuin
Anselm
Abelard
Lombard
Albertus
Bonaventure
Aquinas
Llull
Scotus
Occam
Ficino
Pico
Erasmus
Cusa
Luis
More
Suárez
Descartes
Gassendi
Montaigne
Pascal
Krasicki
Kołłątaj
Staszic
Newman
Scheler
Chesterton
Maritain
Stein
Mortimer
Rahner
Anscombe
MacIntyre
Wojtyła
Ratzinger
Malebranche
Concepts
Actus Essendi
Actus primus
Actus purus
Aevum
Augustinian values
Cardinal virtues
Cartesian dualism
Cogito, ergo sum
Dehellenization
Differentia
Disputation
Divine illumination
Double truth
Evil demon
Formal distinction
Guardian angel
Haecceity
Head of a pin
Homo unius libri
Infused righteousness
Memento mori
Occam's razor
Ontological argument
Pascal's wager
Peripatetic axiom
Principle of double effect
Quiddity
Quinque viae
Ressentiment
Rota Fortunae
Seven deadly sins
Stratification of emotional life
Theodicy
Augustinian
Irenaean
Trademark argument
Univocity
Utopia
Related
Catholic theology
Platonism
Aristotelianism
Neoplatonism
Islamic philosophy
Doctor of the Church
Renaissance
Rationalism
Empiricism
Phenomenology

 Catholicism portal
 Philosophy portal

vteHistory of Catholic theologyKey figuresGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
Timeline
History of the papacy
Papal primacy
Ecumenical councils
Catholic Bible
Vulgate
Biblical canon
History of Christian theology
Early Church
Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian
Constantine toPope Gregory I
Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I
Early Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena
High Middle Ages
Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon
Mysticism and reforms
Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Bridget of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
ReformationCounter-Reformation
Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales
Baroque period toFrench Revolution
Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Pierre Gassendi
René Descartes
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
António Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri
19th century
Joseph Görres
Félicité de La Mennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben
Émile Boutroux
Modernism
Neo-scholasticism
Léon Bloy
Désiré-Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von Hügel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux
20th century
G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Daniel-Rops
Jean Guitton
Josemaría Escrivá
Nouvelle théologie
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Frederick Copleston
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
René Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen
21st century
Pope John Paul II
Alice von Hildebrand
Carlo Maria Martini
Pope Benedict XVI
Alasdair MacIntyre
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Michał Heller
Peter Kreeft
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík
Aidan Nichols
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron
Edward Feser

 Catholicism portal

Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Romania
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
RKD Artists (Netherlands)
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Netherlands
2
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Mathematics Genealogy Project
zbMATH
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
RISM (France)
1
RERO (Switzerland)
1
2
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
1
Trove (Australia)
1





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=René_Descartes&oldid=1114999627"
Categories: René DescartesCartesianism1596 births1650 deaths17th-century French mathematicians17th-century French philosophers17th-century French scientists17th-century French writers17th-century Latin-language writers17th-century male writers17th-century non-fiction writers17th-century philosophersAge of EnlightenmentAphoristsAugustinian philosophersBurials at Saint-Germain-des-Prés (abbey)Catholic philosophersConsciousness researchers and theoristsConstructed language creatorsCritics of animal rightsDeaths from pneumonia in SwedenEnlightenment philosophersEpistemologistsFounders of philosophical traditionsFrench emigrants to the Dutch RepublicFrench ethicistsFrench expatriates in SwedenFrench expatriates in the Dutch RepublicFrench logiciansFrench mercenariesFrench music theoristsFrench philosophersFrench Roman CatholicsGeometric algebraHistory of algebraHistory of cartographyHistory of educationHistory of education in EuropeHistory of ethicsHistory of geometryHistory of logicHistory of mathematicsHistory of measurementHistory of philosophyHistory of scienceHumor researchersIntellectual historyLeiden University alumniMetaphilosophersMetaphysiciansMetaphysics writersMilitary personnel of the Thirty Years' WarMind–body problemMoral philosophersNatural philosophersOntologistsPeople from Indre-et-LoirePeople of the Age of EnlightenmentPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of culturePhilosophers of educationPhilosophers of ethics and moralityPhilosophers of historyPhilosophers of logicPhilosophers of mathematicsPhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of psychologyPhilosophers of sciencePhilosophers of social sciencePhilosophy writersRationalistsRationality theoristsSocial criticsSocial philosophersTheorists on Western civilizationUniversity of Poitiers alumniWestern philosophyWriters about activism and social changeWriters about religion and scienceWriters who illustrated their own writingHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2022All accuracy disputesAccuracy disputes from August 2015CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from July 2022All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from February 2022Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing French-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2021Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2021Pages using sidebar with the child parameterAll articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from August 2022CS1: long volume valueArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceComposers with IMSLP linksArticles with International Music Score Library Project linksArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BIBSYS identifiersArticles with BNC identifiersArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNMM identifiersArticles with CANTICN identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with ICCU identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with NLG identifiersArticles with NLK identifiersArticles with NLR identifiersArticles with NSK identifiersArticles with NTA identifiersArticles with PLWABN identifiersArticles with SELIBR identifiersArticles with VcBA identifiersArticles with RKDartists identifiersArticles with ULAN identifiersArticles with BPN identifiersArticles with DTBIO identifiersArticles with CINII identifiersArticles with MGP identifiersArticles with ZBMATH identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with MusicBrainz identifiersArticles with RISM identifiersArticles with RERO identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersAC with 39 elementsArticles with multiple identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàCebuanoČeštinaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalego贛語한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიҚазақшаKernowekIkinyarwandaKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLadinLadinoLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLa .lojban.LombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPicardPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤسرائیکیScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaclḥitTaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeТыва дылУкраїнськаاردوVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalon文言Winaray吴语ייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 09:41 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










