



Shia Islam - Wikipedia

































Shia Islam

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Second-most populous Islamic denomination
"Shia" and "Shias" redirect here. For other uses, see Shia (disambiguation).


Part of a series onShia Islam
Beliefs and practices
Monotheism
Holy Books
Prophethood
Succession to Muhammad
Imamate
Angels
Judgment Day
Mourning of Muharram
Intercession
Clergy
The Four Companions
Arbaʽeen Pilgrimage

Days of remembrance
Ashura
Arba'een
Mawlid
Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Adha
Eid al-Ghadir
Eid al-Mubahala
Mourning of Muharram
Omar Koshan

History
Verse of Purification
Two things
Mubahala
Khumm
Fatimah's house
First Fitna
Second Fitna
Battle of Karbala
Origin
Persecution

Branches and sects
Twelvers
Ja'fari
Akhbari
Usuli
Shaykhi
Alawites
Zaydi Shi'a
Isma'ili
Musta'li
Tayyibi
Alavi
Dawoodi
Sulaymani
Hafizi
Nizari
Khoja
Satpanth
Batini
Alevism
Bektashi
Bektashism and folk religion
Qizilbash
Alians
Hurufism
Extinct Shi'a sects

Ahl al-Kisa
Muhammad
Ali
Fatimah
Hasan
Husayn

Holy women
Fatimah
Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Umm Salama
Zaynab bint Ali
Umm Kulthum bint Ali
Umm ul-Banin
Fatimah bint Hasan
Sukayna bint Husayn
Rubab
Shahrbanu
Fatimah bint Musa
Hakimah Khātūn
Narjis
Fatimah bint Asad
Umm Farwah bint al-Qasim
Sayyida Ruqayya bint Ali
Sayyida Nafisa

 Shia Islam portalvte
Part of a series on IslamAqidah
Five Pillars of Islam
Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj

SunniSix articles of belief
God
Prophets
Holy books
Angels
The Last Judgement
Predestination
Sunni theological traditions

Traditionalist
Hanbalis1
Ahl al-Hadith
Ilm al-Kalam
Ash'ari
Maliki
Shafi‘i2
Maturidi
Hanafi3

Shi'aTheology of Twelvers4
Tawhid
Adalah
Prophecy
Imamah
Qiyamah
Ancillaries of the Faith

Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj
Khums
Jihad
Commanding what is just
Forbidding what is evil
Tawalli
Tabarri
Seven pillars of Ismailism5

Walayah
Tawhid
Salah
Zakat
Sawm
Hajj
Jihad
Other Shia concepts of Aqidah

Imamate
Batin

Other variants
Murji'ah
Karramiyya
Mu'attila
Jabriyyah6
Muhakkima
Khawarij7
Ibadi8
Taṣawwuf9
Qadariyah
Muʿtazila10
Alevism11
Quraniyya

Including:1Salafis (Ahl-i Hadith & Wahhabis)2Al-Ahbash & Barelvis 3Deobandis & Millî Görüş 4Alawites, Qizilbash & Bektashism; 6Jahmīyya 5Sevener-Qarmatians, Assassins & Druzes 7Ajardi, Azariqa, Bayhasiyya, Najdat & Sūfrī 8Wahbiyyah, Nukkari & Azzabas9Mevlevis, Süleymancıs & various Ṭarīqah 10Bahshamiyya, Bishriyya & Ikhshîdiyya 11Bektashis & Qalandaris  Islam portalvte
Shīʿa Islam or Shīʿīsm is the second-largest branch of Islam. It holds that the Islamic prophet Muhammad designated ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib as his successor (khalīfa) and the Imam (spiritual and political leader) after him,[1] most notably at the event of Ghadir Khumm, but was prevented from succeeding Muhammad as the leader of the Muslims as a result of the choice made by some of Muhammad's other companions (ṣaḥāba) at Saqifah. This view primarily contrasts with that of Sunnī Islam, whose adherents believe that Muhammad did not appoint a successor before his death and consider Abū Bakr, who was appointed caliph by a group of senior Muslims at Saqifah, to be the first rightful (rāshidūn) caliph after Muhammad.[2] Adherents of Shīʿa Islam are called Shīʿa Muslims, Shīʿītes, or simply Shīʿa or Shia.[3]
Shīʿa Islam is based on a ḥadīth report concerning Muhammad's pronouncement at Ghadir Khumm.[4][5] Shīʿa Muslims believe that ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, should have been the designated successor to Muhammad as Islam's spiritual and political leader.[6] This belief later developed into the concept of Imamah, the idea that certain descendants of Muhammad, the Ahl al-Bayt, are rightful rulers or Imams,[7] whom Shīʿa Muslims believe possess special spiritual and political authority over the Muslim community.[8] Although there are many Shīʿa subsects, modern Shīʿa Islam has been divided into two main groupings: Twelvers and Ismāʿīlīs, with Twelver Shīʿas being the largest and most influential group among Shīʿa Muslims.[9][10][11]
Shīʿa Islam is the second largest branch of Islam, followed by 10–15% of all Muslims.[12] Twelver Shīʿīsm is the largest branch of Shīʿa Islam,[13] comprising about 85% of all Shīʿa Muslims.[14]

Contents

1 Terminology
2 Beliefs and practices

2.1 Theology

2.1.1 Profession of faith (Shahada)
2.1.2 Infallibility (Ismah)
2.1.3 Occultation (Ghaybah)
2.1.4 Ḥadīth tradition
2.1.5 Holy Relics (Tabarruk)


2.2 Other doctrines

2.2.1 Doctrine about necessity of acquiring knowledge
2.2.2 Doctrine concerning prayer


2.3 Practices

2.3.1 Holidays
2.3.2 Holy sites




3 Demographics

3.1 Significant populations worldwide


4 Major denominations or branches

4.1 Twelver

4.1.1 Doctrine
4.1.2 Books
4.1.3 The Twelve Imams
4.1.4 Jurisprudence
4.1.5 Islamists


4.2 Ismāʿīlī (Sevener)

4.2.1 Ismāʿīlī Imams
4.2.2 Pillars
4.2.3 Contemporary leadership


4.3 Zaydī (Fiver)

4.3.1 Doctrine
4.3.2 Jurisprudence
4.3.3 Timeline




5 History

5.1 Succession of ʿAlī

5.1.1 The Party of ʿAlī
5.1.2 The event of Dhul Asheera
5.1.3 Event of Ghadir Khumm


5.2 Caliphate of ʿAlī
5.3 Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī
5.4 Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī
5.5 Imamate of the Ahl al-Bayt
5.6 Imam Mahdi, last Imam of the Shīʿa
5.7 Dynasties

5.7.1 Fatimid Caliphate
5.7.2 Safavid Empire




6 Persecution of Shīʿa Muslims
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Citations
8.3 Sources


9 Further reading
10 External links


Terminology
Collectively, adherents of Shīʿa Islam are called the Shīʿah (Arabic: شِيعَة; /ˈʃiːə/), which is short for Shīʿatu ʿAlī (Arabic: شِيعَة عَلِيّ; /ˈʃiːʕatu ˈʕaliː/) meaning "followers of Ali", "faction of Ali", or "partisans of Ali";[15][16] Shīʿī (شِيعِيّ) denotes both the singular noun and the adjective form, while Shīyāʿ (شِيَاع) refers to the plural noun.[17] Shīʿa or Shia and Shīʿīsm/Shīʿīte or Shiism/Shiite are the forms used in English and other European languages for adherents, mosques, traditions, and things associated with the Shīʿa branch of Islam.[18][19]
The term was first used during Muhammad's lifetime.[20] At present, the word refers to the Muslims who believe that the leadership of the Muslim community after Muhammad belongs to ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, and his successors. Nawbakhti states that the term Shīʿa refers to a group of Muslims who at the time of Muhammad and after him regarded ʿAlī as the Imam and caliph.[21] Al-Shahrastani expresses that the term Shīʿa refers to those who believe that ʿAlī is designated as the heir, Imam, and caliph by Muhammad[22] and that ʿAlī's authority is maintained through his descendants.[23] For the adherents of Shīʿa Islam, this conviction is implicit in the Quran and the history of Islam. Shīʿa Muslim scholars emphasize that the notion of authority is linked to the family of the Abrahamic prophets as the Quranic verses 3:33 and 3:34 show: "Indeed, God chose Adam and Noah and the family of Abraham and the family of 'Imran over the worlds – (33) Descendants, some of them from others. And God is Hearing and Knowing. (34)"[24]

Beliefs and practices
Theology
Main article: Shia Islamic beliefs and practices
Shīʿa Islam is the second largest branch of Islam, followed by 10–15% of all Muslims,[12] considered to be vast and inclusive of many different denominations and subgroups.[15] Shīʿa Islam embodies a completely independent system of religious interpretation and political authority in the Muslim world.[25][26] The original Shīʿa identity referred to the followers of Imam ʿAlī,[27] and Shīʿa theology was formulated after the hijra (8th century CE).[28] The first Shīʿa governments and societies were established by the end of the 9th century CE. The 10th century CE has been referred to by the scholar of Islamic studies Louis Massignon as "the Shiite Ismaili century in the history of Islam".[29]

Profession of faith (Shahada)
 Kalema at Qibla of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo, Egypt, displaying the phrase Ali-un-Waliullah (علي ولي الله: "ʿAlī is the Wali (custodian) of God")
The Shīʿa version of the Shahada, the Islamic profession of faith, differs from that of the Sunnīs.[30] The Sunnī version of the Shahada states "There is no god except God, Muhammad is the messenger of God", but to this declaration of faith Shīʿa Muslims append the phrase Ali-un-Waliullah (علي ولي الله: "ʿAlī is the Wali (custodian) of God"). The basis for the Shīʿa belief in ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib as the Wali of God is derived from the Quranic verse 5:55, the "Verse of Wilayah".[citation needed]
This additional phrase to the declaration of faith embodies the Shīʿa emphasis on the inheritance of authority through Muhammad's family and lineage. The three clauses of the Shīʿa version of the Shahada thus address the fundamental Islamic beliefs of Tawḥīd (unity and oneness of God), Nubuwwah (the prophethood of Muhammad), and Imamah (the Imamate, leadership of the faith).[31]

Infallibility (Ismah)
Main article: Ismah
 ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, cousin and son-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, is credited as the first male convert to Islam.
Ismah is the concept of infallibility or "divinely bestowed freedom from error and sin" in Islam.[32] Muslims believe that Muhammad, along with other prophets and messengers in Islam, possessed ismah. Twelver and Ismāʿīlī Shīʿa Muslims also attribute the quality to Imams as well as to Fāṭimah, daughter of Muhammad, in contrast to the Zaydī Shīʿas, who don't attribute ismah to the Imams.[33] Though initially beginning as a political movement, infallibility and sinlessness of the Imams later evolved as a distinct belief of (non-Zaydī) Shīʿīsm.[34]
According to Shīʿa Muslim theologians, infallibility is considered a rational, necessary precondition for spiritual and religious guidance. They argue that since God has commanded absolute obedience from these figures, they must only order that which is right. The state of infallibility is based on the Shīʿa interpretation of the verse of purification.[35][36] Thus, they are the most pure ones, the only immaculate ones preserved from, and immune to, all uncleanness.[37] It doesn't mean that supernatural powers prevent them from committing a sin, but due to the fact that they have absolute belief in God, they refrain from doing anything that is a sin.[32]
They also have a complete knowledge of God's will. They are in possession of all knowledge brought by the angels to the prophets (nabī) and the messengers (rāsūl). Their knowledge encompasses the totality of all times. Thus, they are believed to act without fault in religious matters.[38] Shīʿa Muslims regard ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib as the successor of Muhammad not only ruling over the entire Muslim community in justice, but also interpreting the Islamic faith, practices, and its esoteric meaning. Hence he was regarded as being free from error and sin (infallible), and appointed by God by divine decree (nass) to be the first Imam.[citation needed] ʿAlī is regarded as a "perfect man" (al-insan al-kamil) similar to Muhammad, according to the Shīʿa viewpoint.[39]

Occultation (Ghaybah)
Main articles: Occultation (Islam) and Reappearance of Hujjat Allah al-Mahdi
Further information: Major Occultation, Minor Occultation, and The Fourteen Infallibles
 Jamkaran Mosque in Qom, Iran is a popular pilgrimage site for Shīʿa Muslims. Local belief holds that the 12th Shīʿīte Imam—the promised Mahdi according to Twelvers—once appeared and offered prayers at Jamkaran.
The Occultation is an eschatological belief held in various denominations of Shīʿa Islam concerning a messianic figure, the hidden and last Imam known as "the Mahdi", that one day shall return on Earth and fill the world with justice. According to the doctrine of Twelver Shīʿīsm, the main goal of Imam Mahdi will be to establish an Islamic state and to apply Islamic laws that were revealed to Muhammad. The Quran doesn't contain verses on the Imamate, which is the basic doctrine of Shīʿa Islam.[40] Some Shīʿa subsects, such as the Zaydī Shīʿas and Nizārī Ismāʿīlīs, don't believe in the idea of the Occultation. The groups which do believe in it differ as to which lineage of the Imamate is valid, and therefore which individual has gone into Occultation. They believe there are many signs that will indicate the time of his return.
Twelver Shīʿa Muslims believe that the prophesied Mahdi and twelfth Imam, Hujjat Allah al-Mahdi, is already on Earth in Occultation, and will return at the end of time. Ṭayyibi Ismāʿīlīs and Fatimid/Bohra/Dawoodi Bohra believe the same but for their 21st Ṭayyib, At-Tayyib Abi l-Qasim, and also believe that a Da'i al-Mutlaq ("Unrestricted Missionary") maintains contact with him. Sunnī Muslims believe that the future Mahdi has not yet arrived on Earth.[41]

Ḥadīth tradition
Shīʿa Muslims believe that the status of ʿAlī is supported by numerous ḥadīth, including the Hadith of the pond of Khumm, Hadith of the two weighty things, Hadith of the pen and paper, Hadith of the invitation of the close families, and Hadith of the Twelve Successors. In particular, the Hadith of the Cloak is often quoted to illustrate Muhammad's feeling towards ʿAlī and his family by both Sunnī and Shīʿa scholars. Shīʿa Muslims prefer to study and read the ḥadīth attributed to the Ahl al-Bayt and close associates, and most have their own separate ḥadīth canon.[42][43]

Holy Relics (Tabarruk)
It is believed that the armaments and sacred items of all of the prophets, including Muhammad, were handed down in succession to the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, the 6th Shīʿīte Imam, in Kitab al-Kafi mentions that "with me are the arms of the Messenger of Allah. It is not disputable."[44]
Further, he claims that with him is the sword of the Messenger of God, his coat of arms, his Lamam (pennon) and his helmet. In addition, he mentions that with him is the flag of the Messenger of God, the victorious. With him is the Staff of Moses, the ring of Solomon, son of David, and the tray on which Moses used to offer his offerings. With him is the name that whenever the Messenger of God would place it between the Muslims and pagans no arrow from the pagans would reach the Muslims. With him is the similar object that angels brought.[44]
Al-Ṣādiq also narrated that the passing down of armaments is synonymous to receiving the Imamat (leadership), similar to how the Ark of Covenant in the house of the Israelites signaled prophethood.[44] Imam Ali al-Ridha narrates that wherever the armaments among us would go, knowledge would also follow and the armaments would never depart from those with knowledge (Imamat).[44]

Other doctrines
Doctrine about necessity of acquiring knowledge
According to Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar, God gives humans the faculty of reason and argument. Also, God orders humans to spend time thinking carefully on creation while he refers to all creations as his signs of power and glory. These signs encompass all of the universe. Furthermore, there is a similarity between humans as the little world and the universe as the large world. God does not accept the faith of those who follow him without thinking and only with imitation, but also God blames them for such actions. In other words, humans have to think about the universe with reason and intellect, a faculty bestowed on us by God. Since there is more insistence on the faculty of intellect among Shīʿa Muslims, even evaluating the claims of someone who claims prophecy is on the basis of intellect.[45][46]

Doctrine concerning prayer
Main article: Salah
Praying in Shīʿa Islam has an important place, as Muhammad described it as a weapon of the believer. In fact, Duʼa considered as something that is a feature of Shia community in a sense. Performing Duʼa in Shīʿa Islam has a special ritual. Because of this, there are many books written on the instructions and conditions of praying among Shīʿa Muslims. Shīʿīte clergymen always invited their followers to recite Duʼa. For instance, ʿAlī has been considered with the subject of Duʼa because of his leadership in monotheism.[citation needed]

Practices
 Shīʿa Muslims gathered in prayer at the Shrine of Imam Ḥusayn in Karbala, Iraq
Shīʿa religious practices, such as prayers, differ only slightly from the Sunnīs. While all Muslims pray five times daily, Shīʿa Muslims have the option of combining Dhuhr with Asr and Maghrib with Isha', as there are three distinct times mentioned in the Quran. The Sunnīs tend to combine only under certain circumstances.[citation needed]

Holidays
Main article: Shia days of remembrance
Shīʿa Muslims celebrate the following annual holidays:

Eid ul-Fitr, which marks the end of fasting during the month of Ramadan
Eid al-Adha, which marks the end of the Hajj or pilgrimage to Mecca
Eid al-Ghadeer, which is the anniversary of the Ghadir Khum, the occasion when Muhammad announced Ali's Imamate before a multitude of Muslims.[47] Eid al-Ghadeer is held on the 18th of Dhu al-Hijjah.
The Mourning of Muharram and the Day of Ashura for Shīʿa Muslims commemorate the martyrdom of Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī, brother of Ḥasan and grandson of Muhammad, who was killed by Yazid ibn Muawiyah in Karbala (central Iraq). Ashura is a day of deep mourning which occurs on the 10th of Muharram.
Arba'een commemorates the suffering of the women and children of Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī's household. After Ḥusayn was killed, they were marched over the desert, from Karbala (central Iraq) to Shaam (Damascus, Syria). Many children (some of whom were direct descendants of Muhammad) died of thirst and exposure along the route. Arbaein occurs on the 20th of Safar, 40 days after Ashura.
Mawlid, Muhammad's birth date. Unlike Sunnī Muslims, who celebrate the 12th of Rabi' al-awwal as Muhammad's day of birth or death (because they assert that his birth and death both occur in this week), Shīʿa Muslims celebrate Muhammad's birthday on the 17th of the month, which coincides with the birth date of Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, the 6th Shīʿīte Imam.[48]
Fāṭimah's birthday on 20th of Jumada al-Thani. This day is also considered as the "'women and mothers' day"[49]
ʿAlī's birthday on 13th of Rajab.
Mid-Sha'ban is the birth date of the 12th and final Twelver imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi. It is celebrated by Shia Muslims on the 15th of Sha'aban.
Laylat al-Qadr, anniversary of the night of the revelation of the Quran.
Eid al-Mubahila celebrates a meeting between the Ahl al-Bayt (household of Muhammad) and a Christian deputation from Najran. Al-Mubahila is held on the 24th of Dhu al-Hijjah.
Holy sites
Main article: Holiest sites in Shia Islam
After the four holy cities of Islam (Mecca, Medina, Jerusalem, and Damascus), the cities of Najaf, Karbala, and Qom are the most revered by Shīʿa Muslims.[50][51] The Sanctuary of Imām ʿAlī in Najaf, the Shrine of Imam Ḥusayn in Karbala, and the Shrine of Fāṭimah al-Maʿṣūmah in Qom are very essential for Shīʿa Muslims. Other venerated pilgrimage sites include the Imam Reza shrine in Mashhad, the Kadhimiya Mosque in Kadhimiya, Al-Askari Mosque in Samarra, the Sahla Mosque, the Great Mosque of Kufa, the Jamkaran Mosque in Qom, and the Tomb of Daniel in Susa.
Most of the Shīʿa sacred places and heritage sites in Saudi Arabia have been destroyed by the Al Saud-Wahhabi armies of the Ikhwan, the most notable being the tombs of the Imams located in the Al-Baqi' cemetery in 1925.[52] In 2006, a bomb destroyed the shrine of Al-Askari Mosque.[53] (See: Anti-Shi'ism).

Demographics
Main article: Islam by country
 Islam by country     Sunnī     Shīʿa   Ibadi
 Map of the Muslim world's schools of jurisprudence.[54]
It is estimated that either 10–20%[55] or 10–13%[56][57][58] of the global Muslim population are Shīʿas. They may number up to 200 million as of 2009.[57] As of 1985, Shīʿa Muslims are estimated to be 21% of the Muslim population in South Asia, although the total number is difficult to estimate.[59]
Shīʿa Muslims form a majority of the population in various regions of the Muslim world, including Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Iran, and Iraq,[60][61] as well as a plurality in Lebanon. Shīʿa Muslims constitute 36.3% of the entire population (and 38.6% of the Muslim population) of the Middle East.[62]
Estimates have placed the proportion of Shīʿa Muslims in Lebanon between 27% and 45% of the population,[60][63] 30%–35% of the citizen population in Kuwait (no figures exist for the non-citizen population),[64][65] over 20% in Turkey,[57][66] 5–20% of the population in Pakistan,[67][57] and 10–19% of Afghanistan's population.[68][69]
Saudi Arabia hosts a number of distinct Shīʿa communities, including the Twelver Baharna in the Eastern Province and Nakhawila of Medina, and the Ismāʿīlī Sulaymani and Zaydī Shīʿas of Najran. Estimations put the number of Shīʿīte citizens at 2–4 million,[citation needed] accounting for roughly 15% of the local population.[70] Approximately 40% of the population of Yemen are Shīʿa Muslims.[71][72]
Significant Shīʿa communities also exist in the coastal regions of West Sumatra and Aceh in Indonesia (see Tabuik).[73] The Shīʿa presence is negligible elsewhere in Southeast Asia, where Muslims are predominantly Shāfiʿī Sunnīs.
A significant Shīʿa minority is present in Nigeria, made up of modern-era converts to a Shīʿīte movement centered around Kano and Sokoto states.[57][58][74] Several African countries like Kenya,[75] South Africa,[76] Somalia,[77] etc. hold small minority populations of various Shīʿa subsects, primarily descendants of immigrants from South Asia during the colonial period, such as the Khoja.[78]

Significant populations worldwide
Figures indicated in the first three columns below are based on the October 2009 demographic study by the Pew Research Center report, Mapping the Global Muslim Population.[57][58]


Nations with over 100,000 Shia[57][58]


Country

Article

Shia population in 2009 (Pew)[57][58]

Percent of Muslim population that is Shia in 2009 (Pew)[57][58]

Percent of global Shia population in 2009 (Pew)[57][58]

Population estimate ranges and notes


 Iran

Islam in Iran

66,000,000–69,500,000

90–95

37–40




 Pakistan

Shia Islam in the Indian subcontinent

25,272,000

15

15

A 2010 estimate was that Shia made up about 10–15% of Pakistan's population.[79]


 Iraq

Shi'a Islam in Iraq

19,000,000–24,000,000

55–65

10–11




 India

Shia Islam in the Indian subcontinent

12,300,000–18,500,000

10–15

9–14




 Yemen

Shia Islam in Yemen

7,000,000–8,000,000

35–40

~5

Majority following Zaydi Shia sect.


 Turkey

Shi'a Islam in Turkey

6,000,000–9,000,000

~10–15

~3–4

Majority following Alevi Shia sect.


 Azerbaijan

Islam in Azerbaijan

4,575,000–5,590,000

45–55

2–3

Azerbaijan is majority Shia.[80][81][82] A 2012 work noted that in Azerbaijan, among believers of all faiths, 10% identified as Sunni, 30% identified as Shia, and the remainder of followers of Islam simply identified as Muslim.[82]


Afghanistan

Shi'a Islam in Afghanistan

3,000,000

15

~2

A reliable census has not been taken in Afghanistan in decades, but about 20% of Afghan population is Shia, mostly among ethnic Tajik and Hazara minorities.[83]


 Syria

Islam in Syria

2,400,000

13

~2

Majority following Alawites Shia sect.


 Lebanon

Shi'a Islam in Lebanon

2,100,000

 31.2

<1

In 2020, the CIA World Factbook stated that Shia Muslims constitute 31.2% of Lebanon's population.[84]


 Saudi Arabia

Shi'a Islam in Saudi Arabia

2,000,000

~6






 Nigeria

Shi'a Islam in Nigeria

<2,000,000

<1

<1

Estimates range from as low as 2% of Nigeria's Muslim population to as high as 17% of Nigeria's Muslim population.[a] Some, but not all, Nigerian Shia are affiliated with the banned Islamic Movement in Nigeria, an Iranian-inspired Shia organization led by Ibrahim Zakzaky.[85]


 Tanzania

Islam in Tanzania

~1,500,000

~2.5

<1




 Kuwait

Shi'a Islam in Kuwait

500,000–700,000

20–25

<1

Among Kuwait's estimated 1.4 million citizens, about 30% are Shia (including Ismaili and Ahmadi, whom the Kuwaiti government count as Shia). Among Kuwait's large expatriate community of 3.3 million noncitizens, about 64% are Muslim, and among expatriate Muslims, about 5% are Shia.[87]


 Bahrain

Islam in Bahrain

400,000–500,000

65–70

<1




 Tajikistan

Shi'a Islam in Tajikistan

~400,000

~4

<1

Shi'a Muslims in Tajikistan are predominantly Nizari Ismaili


 Germany

Islam in Germany

~400,000

~0.5

<1




 United Arab Emirates

Islam in the United Arab Emirates

~300,000

~3

<1




 United States

Islam in the United StatesShia Islam in the Americas

~225,000

~0.07

<1

Shi'a form a majority amongst Arab Muslims in many American cities, e.g. Lebanese Shi'a forming the majority in Detroit.[88]


 United Kingdom

Islam in the United Kingdom

~125,000

~0.2

<1




 Qatar

Islam in Qatar

~100,000

~3.5

<1




 Oman

Islam in Oman

~100,000

~2

<1

As of 2015, about 5% of Omanis are Shia (compared to about 50% Ibadi and 45% Sunni).[89]


Major denominations or branches
Main article: Islamic schools and branches § Shīʿa Islam
Further information: List of extinct Shia sects and Schools of Islamic theology § Shīʿa schools of theology
The Shīʿa community throughout its history split over the issue of the Imamate. The largest branch are the Twelvers, followed by the Zaydīs and the Ismāʿīlīs. Each subsect of Shīʿīsm follows its own line of Imamate. All mainstream Twelver and Ismāʿīlī Shīʿa Muslims follow the same school of thought, the Jaʽfari jurisprudence, named after Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, the 6th Shīʿīte Imam. Shīʿīte clergymen and jurists usually carry the title of mujtahid (i.e., someone authorized to issue legal opinions in Shīʿa Islam).

Twelver
Main article: Twelver
Twelver Shīʿīsm or Ithnāʿashariyyah is the largest branch of Shīʿa Islam, and the terms Shīʿa Muslim and Shīʿa often refer to the Twelvers by default. The designation Twelver is derived from the doctrine of believing in twelve divinely ordained leaders, known as "the Twelve Imams". Twelver Shīʿas are otherwise known as Imami or Jaʿfari; the latter term derives from Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, the 6th Shīʿīte Imam, who elaborated the Twelver jurisprudence.[90] Twelver Shīʿas constitute the majority of the population in Iran (90%),[91] Azerbaijan (85%),[15][92] Bahrain (70%), Iraq (65%), and Lebanon (65% of Muslims).[93][94][95]

Doctrine
 Names of the 12 Imams (descendants of Imam ʿAlī) written in the calligraphic form of the name ʿAlī in Arabic: علي
Twelver doctrine is based on five principles.[96] These five principles known as Usul ad-Din are as follow:[97]

Monotheism: God is one and unique;
Justice: the concept of moral rightness based on ethics, fairness, and equity, along with the punishment of the breach of these ethics;
Prophethood: the institution by which God sends emissaries, or prophets, to guide humankind;
Leadership: a divine institution which succeeded the institution of Prophethood. Its appointees (Imams) are divinely appointed;
Resurrection and Last Judgment: God's final assessment of humanity.
More specifically, these principles are known as Usul al-Madhhab (principles of the Shīʿa branch of Islam) according to Twelver Shīʿas, which differ from Daruriyat al-Din ("Necessities of Religion"), which are principles in order for one to be a Muslim. Daruriyat al-Din don't include leadership (Imamah), as it is not a requirement in order for one to be recognized as a Muslim. However, this category, according to Twelver scholars like Ayatollah Abu al-Qasim al-Khoei, does include belief in God, prophethood, the Day of Resurrection, and other "necessities" (such as the belief in angels). In this regard, Twelver Shīʿas draw a distinction in terms of believing in the main principles of Islam on the one hand, and specifically Shīʿīte doctrines like the Imamate on the other.[citation needed]

Books
Besides the Quran, which is the sacred text common to all Muslims, Twelver Shīʿas derive scriptural and authoritative guidance from collections of sayings and traditions (ḥadīth) attributed to Muhammad and the Twelve Imams. Below is a list of some of the most prominent of these books:

Nahj al-Balagha by Ash-Sharif Ar-Radhi[98] – the most famous collection of sermons, letters & narration attributed to Ali, the first Imam regarded by Shias
Kitab al-Kafi by Muhammad ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni[99]
Wasa'il al-Shiʻah by al-Hurr al-Amili
The Twelve Imams
Main articles: Imamate in Twelver doctrine, Sunni reports about there being 12 successors to the Prophet, and Hadith of the Twelve Successors
Further information: Occultation (Islam), Reappearance of Hujjat Allah al-Mahdi, and The Fourteen Infallibles
 Calligraphic representation of the 12 Imams along with the name of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.
The Twelve Imams are the spiritual and political successors to Muhammad for the Twelvers.[citation needed] According to the theology of Twelvers, the successor of Muhammad is an infallible human individual who not only rules over the Muslim community with justice but also is able to keep and interpret the divine law (sharīʿa) and its esoteric meaning. The words and deeds of Muhammad and the Twelve Imams are a guide and model for the Muslim community to follow; as a result, they must be free from error and sin, and Imams must be chosen by divine decree (nass) through Muhammad.[100][101] In Twelver Shīʿīsm, each Imam was the son of the previous Imam, with the exception of Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī, who was the brother of Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī.[citation needed] The twelfth and final Imam is Hujjat Allah al-Mahdi, who is believed by Twelvers to be currently alive and hidden in Occultation.[102]

Jurisprudence
Main article: Ja'fari jurisprudence
Further information: Shia clergy
The Twelver jurisprudence is called Jaʽfari jurisprudence. In this school of Islamic jurisprudence, the sunnah is considered to be comprehensive of the oral traditions of Muhammad and their implementation and interpretation by the Twelve Imams. There are three schools of Jaʿfari jurisprudence: Usuli, Akhbari, and Shaykhi; the Usuli school is by far the largest of the three. Twelver groups that don't follow the Jaʿfari jurisprudence include Alevis, Bektashi, and Qizilbash.
The five pillars of Islam to the Jaʿfari jurisprudence are known as Usul ad-Din:

Tawḥīd: unity and oneness of God;
Nubuwwah: prophethood of Muhammad;
Muʿad: resurrection and final judgment;
ʿAdl: justice of God;
Imamah: the rightful place of the Shīʿīte Imams.
In Jaʿfari jurisprudence, there are eight secondary pillars, known as Furu ad-Din, which are as follows:[97]

Salat (prayer);
Sawm (fasting);
Hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca;
Zakāt (alms giving to the poor);
Jihād (struggle) for the righteous cause;
Directing others towards good;
Directing others away from evil;
Khums (20% tax on savings yearly, after deduction of commercial expenses).
According to Twelvers, defining and interpretation of Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh) is the responsibility of Muhammad and the Twelve Imams. Since the 12th Imam is currently in Occultation, it is the duty of Shīʿīte clerics to refer to the Islamic literature, such as the Quran and ḥadīth, and identify legal decisions within the confines of Islamic law to provide means to deal with current issues from an Islamic perspective. In other words, clergymen in Twelver Shīʿīsm are believed to be the guardians of fiqh, which is believed to have been defined by Muhammad and his twelve successors. This process is known as ijtihad and the clerics are known as marjaʿ, meaning "reference"; the labels Allamah and Ayatollah are in use for Twelver clerics.

Islamists
Islamist Shīʿīsm (Persian: تشیع اخوانی) is a new denomination within Twelver Shīʿīsm greatly inspired by the political ideology of the Muslim Brotherhood and mysticism of Ibn Arabi. It sees Islam as a political system and differs from the other mainstream Usuli and Akhbari groups in favoring the idea of the establishment of an Islamic state in Occultation under the rule of the 12th Imam.[103][104] Hadi Khosroshahi was the first person to identify himself as ikhwani (Islamist) Shīʿa Muslim.[105] Because of the concept of the hidden Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi, Shīʿa Islam is inherently secular in the age of Occultation, therefore Islamist Shīʿa Muslims had to borrow ideas from Sunnī Islamists and adjust them in accordance with the doctrine of Shīʿīsm.[106] Its foundations were laid during the Persian Constitutional Revolution at the start of 20th century in Qajar Iran (1905–1911), when Fazlullah Nouri supported the Persian king Ahmad Shah Qajar against the will of Muhammad Kazim Khurasani, the Usuli marjaʿ of the time.[107]

Ismāʿīlī (Sevener)
Main article: Isma'ilism
Ismāʿīlīs, otherwise known as Sevener, derive their name from their acceptance of Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar as the divinely appointed spiritual successor (Imam) to Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, the 6th Shīʿīte Imam, wherein they differ from the Twelvers, who recognize Mūsā al-Kāẓim, younger brother of Ismāʿīl, as the true Imam.
After the death or Occultation of Muhammad ibn Imam Ismāʿīl in the 8th century CE, the teachings of Ismāʿīlīsm further transformed into the belief system as it is known today, with an explicit concentration on the deeper, esoteric meaning (bāṭin) of the Islamic faith. With the eventual development of Twelver Shīʿīsm into the more literalistic (zahīr) oriented Akhbari and later Usuli schools of thought, Shīʿīsm further developed in two separate directions: the metaphorical Ismāʿīlī group focusing on the mystical path and nature of God and the divine manifestation in the personage of the "Imam of the Time" as the "Face of God", with the more literalistic Twelver group focusing on divine law (sharī'ah) and the deeds and sayings (sunnah) attributed to Muhammad and his successors (the Ahl al-Bayt), who as A'immah were guides and a light (nūr) to God.[108]

 Shāh Karim al-Husayni, known as the Aga Khan IV, is the 49th and current Imam of Nizārī Ismāʿīlīs.
Though there are several subsects amongst the Ismāʿīlīs, the term in today's vernacular generally refers to the Shīʿa Imami Ismāʿīlī Nizārī community, often referred to as the Ismāʿīlīs by default, who are followers of the Aga Khan and the largest group within Ismāʿīlīsm. Another Shīʿa Imami Ismāʿīlī community are the Dawudi Bohras, led by a Da'i al-Mutlaq ("Unrestricted Missionary") as representative of a hidden Imam. While there are many other branches with extremely differing exterior practices, much of the spiritual theology has remained the same since the days of the faith's early Imams. In recent centuries, Ismāʿīlīs have largely been an Indo-Iranian community,[109] but they can also be found in India, Pakistan, Syria, Palestine, Saudi Arabia,[110] Yemen, Jordan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, East and South Africa, and in recent years several Ismāʿīlīs have emigrated to China,[111] Western Europe (primarily in the United Kingdom), Australia, New Zealand, and North America.[112]

Ismāʿīlī Imams
Main article: List of Ismaili imams
In the Nizārī Ismāʿīlī interpretation of Shīʿa Islam, the Imam is the guide and the intercessor between humans and God, and the individual through whom God is recognized. He is also responsible for the esoteric interpretation of the Quran (taʾwīl). He is the possessor of divine knowledge and therefore the "Prime Teacher". According to the "Epistle of the Right Path", a Persian Ismāʿīlī prose text from the post-Mongol period of Ismāʿīlī history, by an anonymous author, there has been a chain of Imams since the beginning of time, and there will continue to be an Imam present on the Earth until the end of time. The worlds would not exist in perfection without this uninterrupted chain of Imams. The proof (hujja) and gate (bāb) of the Imam are always aware of his presence and are witness to this uninterrupted chain.[113]
After the death of Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar, many Ismāʿīlīs believed that one day the eschatological figure of Imam Mahdi, whom they believed to be Muhammad ibn Imam Ismāʿīl, would return and establish an age of justice. One group included the violent Qarmatians, who had a stronghold in Bahrain. In contrast, some Ismāʿīlīs believed the Imamate did continue, and that the Imams were in Occultation and still communicated and taught their followers through a network of Da'i ("Missionaries").
In 909 CE, Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah, a claimant to the Ismāʿīlī Imamate, established the Fatimid Caliphate. During this period, three lineages of Imams were formed. The first branch, known today as the Druze, began with Al-Ḥākim bi-Amr Allāh.[114] Born in 985 CE, he ascended as ruler at the age of eleven. When in 1021 CE his mule returned without him, soaked in blood, a religious group that was forming in his lifetime broke off from mainstream Ismāʿīlīsm and didn't acknowledge his successor.[114] Later to be known as the Druze, they believe Al-Ḥākim to be God incarnate[115] and the prophesied Mahdi on Earth, who would one day return and bring justice to the world.[116] The Druze faith further split from Ismāʿīlīsm as it developed into a distinct monotheistic Abrahamic religion and ethno-religious group with its own unique doctrines,[114] and finally separated from both Ismāʿīlīsm and Islam altogether.[114] Thus, the Druze don't identify themselves as Muslims,[114] and aren't considered as such by Muslims either.[114][117][118][119][120]
The second split occurred between Nizārī and Musta‘lī Ismāʿīlīs following the death of Ma'ad al-Mustansir Billah in 1094 CE. His rule was the longest of any caliph in any Islamic empire. Upon his passing away, his sons, Nizār (the older) and Al-Musta‘lī (the younger), fought for political and spiritual control of the dynasty. Nizār was defeated and jailed, but according to the Nizārī tradition his son escaped to Alamut, where the Iranian Ismāʿīlī had accepted his claim.[121] From here on, the Nizārī Ismāʿīlī community has continued with a present, living Imam.
The Musta‘lī Ismāʿīlīs split between the Ṭayyibi and the Ḥāfiẓi; Ṭayyibi Ismāʿīlīs, also known as "Bohras", are further divided between Dawudi Bohras, Sulaymani Bohras, and Alavi Bohras. The former denomination claims that At-Tayyib Abi l-Qasim, son of Al-Amir bi-Ahkami l-Lah, and the Imams following him went into a period of anonymity (Dawr-e-Satr) and appointed a Da'i al-Mutlaq ("Unrestricted Missionary") to guide the community, in a similar manner as the Ismāʿīlīs had lived after the death of Muhammad ibn Imam Ismāʿīl. The latter denomination claims that the ruling Fatimid caliph was the Imam, and they died out with the fall of the Fatimid Empire.

Pillars
Ismāʿīlīs have categorized their practices which are known as seven pillars:




Walayah (Guardianship)
Taharah (Purity)


Salat (Prayer)
Zakāt (Charity)


Sawm (Fasting)
Hajj (Pilgrimage)


Jihad (Struggle)

Contemporary leadership
The Nizārīs place importance on a scholarly institution because of the existence of a present Imam. The Imam of the Age defines the jurisprudence, and his guidance may differ with Imams previous to him because of different times and circumstances. For Nizārī Ismāʿīlīs, the current Imam is Karim al-Husayni Aga Khan IV. The Nizārī line of Imams has continued to this day as an uninterrupted chain.
Divine leadership has continued in the Bohra branch through the institution of the "Missionary" (Da'i). According to the Bohra tradition, before the last Imam, At-Tayyib Abi l-Qasim, went into seclusion, his father, the 20th Al-Amir bi-Ahkami l-Lah, had instructed Al-Hurra Al-Malika the Malika (Queen consort) in Yemen to appoint a vicegerent after the seclusion—the Da'i al-Mutlaq ("Unrestricted Missionary"), who as the Imam's vicegerent has full authority to govern the community in all matters both spiritual and temporal while the lineage of Musta‘lī-Ṭayyibi Imams remains in seclusion (Dawr-e-Satr). The three branches of Musta‘lī Ismāʿīlīs (Dawudi Bohras, Sulaymani Bohras, and Alavi Bohras) differ on who the current "Unrestricted Missionary" is.

Zaydī (Fiver)
Main article: Zaydism
 Gold dinar of al-Ḥādī ila'l-Ḥaqq Yaḥyā, the first Zaydī Imam of Yemen, minted in 910–911 CE.
 The Zaydī State of Yemen under the rule of Imam Al-Mutawakkil Ismāʿīl bin al-Qāsim (1644–1676)
Zaydīsm, otherwise known as Zaydīyyah or Zaydī, is a branch of Shīʿa Islam named after Zayd ibn ʿAlī. Followers of the Zaydī school of jurisprudence are called Zaydīs or occasionally Fivers. However, there is also a group called Zaydī Wasītīs who are Twelvers (see below). Zaydīs constitute roughly 42–47% of the population of Yemen.[122][123]

Doctrine
The Zaydīs, Twelvers, and Ismāʿīlīs all recognize the same first four Imams; however, the Zaydīs consider Zayd ibn ʿAlī as the 5th Imam. After the time of Zayd ibn ʿAlī, the Zaydīs believed that any descendant (Sayyid) of Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī or Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī could become the next Imam, after fulfilling certain conditions.[124] Other well-known Zaydī Imams in history were Yahya ibn Zayd, Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya, and Ibrahim ibn Abdullah.
The Zaydī doctrine of Imamah doesn't presuppose the infallibility of the Imam, nor the belief that the Imams are supposed to receive divine guidance. Moreover, Zaydīs don't believe that the Imamate must pass from father to son but believe it can be held by any Sayyid descended from either Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī or Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī (as was the case after the death of the former). Historically, Zaydīs held that Zayd ibn ʿAlī was the rightful successor of the 4th Imam since he led a rebellion against the Umayyads in protest of their tyranny and corruption. Muhammad al-Baqir did not engage in political action, and the followers of Zayd ibn ʿAlī maintained that a true Imam must fight against corrupt rulers.

Jurisprudence
In matters of Islamic jurisprudence, Zaydīs follow the teachings of Zayd ibn ʿAlī, which are documented in his book Majmu'l Fiqh (in Arabic: مجموع الفِقه). Al-Ḥādī ila'l-Ḥaqq Yaḥyā, the first Zaydī Imam and founder of the Zaydī State in Yemen, is regarded as the codifier of Zaydī jurisprudence, and as such most Zaydī Shīʿas today are known as Hadawis.

Timeline
The Idrisids (Arabic: الأدارسة) were Arab[125] Zaydī Shīʿas[126][127][128][129][130][131] whose dynasty, named after its first sultan, Idris I, ruled in the western Maghreb from 788 to 985 CE. Another Zaydī State was established in the region of Gilan, Deylaman, and Tabaristan (northern Iran) in 864 CE by the Alavids;[132] it lasted until the death of its leader at the hand of the Samanids in 928 CE. Roughly forty years later, the Zaydī State was revived in Gilan and survived under Hasanid leaders until 1126 CE. Afterwards, from the 12th to 13th centuries, the Zaydī Shīʿas of Deylaman, Gilan, and Tabaristan then acknowledged the Zaydī Imams of Yemen or rival Zaydī Imams within Iran.[133]
The Buyids were initially Zaydī Shīʿas,[134] as were the Banu Ukhaidhir rulers of al-Yamama in the 9th and 10th centuries.[135] The leader of the Zaydī community took the title of caliph; thus, the ruler of Yemen was known by this title. Al-Hadi Yahya bin al-Hussain bin al-Qasim ar-Rassi, a descendant of Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī, founded the Zaydī Imamate at Sa'dah in 893–897 CE, and the Rassid dynasty continued to rule over Yemen until the middle of the 20th century, when the republican revolution of 1962 deposed the last Zaydī Imam. (See: Arab Cold War). The founding Zaydī branch in Yemen was the Jarudiyya; however, with increasing interaction with the Ḥanafī and Shāfiʿī schools of Sunnī jurisprudence, there was a shift from the Jarudiyya group to the Sulaimaniyya, Tabiriyya, Butriyya, and Salihiyya.[136] Zaydī Shīʿas form the second dominant religious group in Yemen. Currently, they constitute about 40–45% of the population in Yemen; Jaʿfaris and Ismāʿīlīs constitute the 2–5%.[137] In Saudi Arabia, it is estimated that there are over 1 million Zaydī Shīʿas, primarily based in the western provinces.
Currently, the most prominent Zaydī political movement is the Houthi movement in Yemen,[138] known by the name of Shabab al-Mu'mineen ("Believing Youth") or Ansar Allah ("Partisans of God").[139] In 2014–2015, Houthis took over the Yemeni government in Sana'a, which led to the fall of the Saudi Arabian-backed government of Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi.[138][139][140] Houthis and their allies gained control of a significant part of Yemen's territory, and resisted the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen seeking to restore Hadi in power.[138][139] (See: Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict). Both the Houthis and the Saudi Arabian-led coalition were being attacked by the Sunnī Islamist militant group and Salafi-jihadist terrorist organization ISIL/ISIS/IS/Daesh.[141][142][143][144][145][146]

History
Main article: History of Shia Islam
Further information: Origin of Shia Islam
Succession of ʿAlī
Main articles: Shia view of Ali and Succession to Muhammad
Further information: Ali in the Quran
Shīʿa Muslims believe that just as a prophet is appointed by God alone, only God has the prerogative to appoint the successor to his prophet. They believe God chose ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib to be Muhammad's successor, infallible, the first caliph (khalīfa, head of state) of Islam. Shīʿa Muslims believe that Muhammad designated Ali as his successor by God's command (Eid Al Ghadir).[147][148] ʿAlī was Muhammad's first-cousin and closest living male relative as well as his son-in-law, having married Muhammad's daughter, Fāṭimah.[149][150]

The Party of ʿAlī
Further information: The Four Companions
Even during the time of Muhammad, there were signs of split among the companions with Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Miqdad, and Ammar ibn Yasir amongst the most vehement and loyal supporters of ʿAlī.[151][152]

The event of Dhul Asheera
Main article: Hadith of Warning
During the revelation of Ash-Shu'ara, the twenty-sixth Surah of the Quran, in c. 617 CE,[153] Muhammad is said to have received instructions to warn his family members against adhering to their pre-Islamic religious practices. There are differing accounts of Muhammad's attempt to do this, with one version stating that he had invited his relatives to a meal (later termed the Feast of Dhul Asheera), during which he gave the pronouncement.[154] According to Ibn Ishaq, it consisted of the following speech:

Allah has commanded me to invite you to His religion by saying: And warn thy nearest kinsfolk. I, therefore, warn you, and call upon you to testify that there is no god but Allah, and that I am His messenger. O ye sons of Abdul Muttalib, no one ever came to you before with anything better than what I have brought to you. By accepting it, your welfare will be assured in this world and in the Hereafter. Who among you will support me in carrying out this momentous duty? Who will share the burden of this work with me? Who will respond to my call? Who will become my vicegerent, my deputy and my wazir?[155]
Among those gathered, only ʿAlī offered his consent. Some sources, such as the Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, do not record Muhammad's reaction to this, though Ibn Ishaq continues that he then declared ʿAlī to be his brother, heir and successor.[156] In another narration, when Muhammad accepted ʿAlī's offer, he "threw up his arms around the generous youth, and pressed him to his bosom" and said, "Behold my brother, my vizir, my vicegerent ... let all listen to his words, and obey him."[157] The direct appointment of ʿAlī as heir in this version is notable in that it alleges that his right to succession was established at the very beginning of Muhammad's prophetic activity. The association with the revelation of a Quranic verse also serves the purpose of providing the nomination with authenticity as well as a divine authorization.[158]

Event of Ghadir Khumm
Main article: Event of Ghadir Khumm
The ḥadīth report of Ghadir Khumm has many different variations and is transmitted by both Sunnī and Shīʿa sources. The narrations generally state that in March 632, Muhammad, while returning from his Farewell Pilgrimage alongside a large number of followers and companions, stopped at the oasis of Ghadir Khumm. There, he took ʿAlī's hand and addressed the gathering. The point of contention between different sects arises when Muhammad, whilst giving his speech, gave the proclamation "Anyone who has me as his mawla, has ʿAlī as his mawla." Some versions add the additional sentence "O God, befriend the friend of ʿAlī and be the enemy of his enemy."[159]
Mawla has a number of meanings in Arabic, with interpretations of Muhammad's use here being split along sectarian lines between the Sunnī and Shīʿa Muslims. Among the former group, the word is translated as "friend" or "one who is loyal/close" and that Muhammad was advocating that ʿAlī was deserving of friendship and respect. Conversely, Shīʿa Muslims tend to view the meaning as being "master" or "ruler",[citation needed] and that the statement was a clear designation of ʿAlī being Muhammad's appointed successor. Shīʿa sources also record further details of the event, such as stating that those present congratulated ʿAlī and acclaimed him as Amir al-Mu'minin ("commander of the believers").[159]

Caliphate of ʿAlī
 The investiture of ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib at Ghadir Khumm (MS Arab 161, fol. 162r, 1308–1309 CE, Ilkhanid manuscript illustration)
When Muhammad died in 632 CE, ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib and Muhammad's closest relatives made the funeral arrangements. While they were preparing his body, Abū Bakr, ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, and Abu Ubaidah ibn al Jarrah met with the leaders of Medina and elected Abū Bakr as caliph. ʿAlī did not accept the caliphate of Abū Bakr and refused to pledge allegiance to him. This is indicated in a ḥadīth report which both Sunnī and Shīʿa Muslims regard as sahih (authentic).

Ibn Qutaybah, a 9th-century Sunnī Islamic scholar narrates of ʿAlī:I am the servant of God and the brother of the Messenger of God. I am thus more worthy of this office than you. I shall not give allegiance to you [Abu Bakr & Umar] when it is more proper for you to give bayʼah to me. You have seized this office from the Ansar using your tribal relationship to the Prophet as an argument against them. Would you then seize this office from us, the ahl al-bayt by force? Did you not claim before the Ansar that you were more worthy than they of the caliphate because Muhammad came from among you (but Muhammad was never from Abu Bakr's family) – and thus they gave you leadership and surrendered command? I now contend against you with the same argument…It is we who are more worthy of the Messenger of God, living or dead. Give us our due right if you truly have faith in God, or else bear the charge of wilfully doing wrong... Umar, I will not yield to your commands: I shall not pledge loyalty to him.' Ultimately Abu Bakr said, "O 'Ali! If you do not desire to give your bay'ah, I am not going to force you for the same.
ʿAlī's wife and daughter of Muhammad, Fāṭimah, refused to pledge allegiance to Abū Bakr and remained angry with him until she died due to the issues of Fadak, the inheritance from her father, and the situation of ʿUmar at Fāṭimah's house; this is stated in various Sunnī ḥadīth collections, including Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim. Fāṭimah never pledged allegiance to Abū Bakr; neither did she acknowledge or accept his claim to the caliphate.[160] Almost all members of Banu Hashim, the Quraysh tribe to which Muhammad belonged, and many of his closest companions (the ṣaḥāba) had supported ʿAlī's cause after the death of Muhammad, whilst others supported Abū Bakr.[161][162][163][164][165][166][167][168][169]

 Great Mosque of Kufa, site of ʿAlī's assassination (661 CE)[149][150]
 Ḍarīẖ over ʿAlī's qabr (grave), Sanctuary of Imām ʿAlī, Najaf (present-day Iraq)
It was not until the murder of the third rāshidūn caliph, ʿUthmān (657 CE), that the Muslims of Medina in desperation invited ʿAlī to become the fourth caliph as the last source,[149] and he established his capital in Kufa (present-day Iraq).[15] ʿAlī's rule over the early Muslim community was often contested, and wars were waged against him. As a result, he had to struggle to maintain his power against the groups who betrayed him after giving allegiance to his succession, or those who wished to take his position. This dispute eventually led to the First Fitna, which was the first major civil war between Muslims within the early Islamic empire. The First Fitna began as a series of revolts fought against ʿAlī, caused by the assassination of his political predecessor, ʿUthmān. While the rebels had previously affirmed the legitimacy of ʿAlī's khilafāʾ (caliphate), they later turned against ʿAlī and fought him.[149] ʿAlī ruled from 656 CE to 661 CE,[149] when he was assassinated[150] while prostrating in prayer (sujud). ʿAlī's main rival, Muawiyah, then claimed the caliphate.[170]
The connection between the Indus Valley and Shīʿa Islam was established through the early Muslim conquests. According to Derryl N. Maclean, a link between the Sindh region and Shīʿas or proto-Shīʿas can be traced to Hakim ibn Jabalah al-Abdi, a companion of Muhammad, who traveled across the Sindh to Makran in the year 649 CE, and presented a report on the area to the caliph. He supported ʿAlī, and died in the Battle of the Camel alongside Sindhi Jats.[171] He was also a poet and few couplets of his poem in praise of ʿAlī have survived, as reported in Chachnama:[172]

"Oh Ali, owing to your alliance (with the prophet) you are truly of high birth, and your example is great, and you are wise and excellent, and your advent has made your age an age of generosity and kindness and brotherly love".[173] 
During the caliphate of ʿAlī, many Jats came under the influence of Shīʿa Islam.[174] Harith ibn Murrah Al-abdi and Sayfi ibn Fil' al-Shaybani, both officers of ʿAlī's army, attacked Sindhi bandits and chased them to Al-Qiqan (present-day Quetta) in the year 658 CE.[175] Sayfi was one of the seven Shīʿa Muslims who were beheaded alongside Hujr ibn Adi al-Kindi[176] in 660 CE, near Damascus.

Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī
Main article: Hasan ibn Ali
Upon the death of ʿAlī, his elder son Ḥasan became leader of the Muslims of Kufa, and after a series of skirmishes between the Kufa Muslims and the army of Muawiyah, Ḥasan agreed to cede the caliphate to Muawiyah and maintain peace among Muslims upon certain conditions:[177][178]

The enforced public cursing of ʿAlī, e.g. during prayers, should be abandoned
Muawiyah should not use tax money for his own private needs
There should be peace, and followers of Ḥasan should be given security and their rights
Muawiyah will never adopt the title of Amir al-Mu'minin ("commander of the believers")
Muawiyah will not nominate any successor
Ḥasan then retired to Medina, where in 670 CE he was poisoned by his wife Ja'da bint al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, after being secretly contacted by Muawiyah who wished to pass the caliphate to his own son Yazid and saw Ḥasan as an obstacle.[179]

Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī
Main article: Husayn ibn Ali
 Battle of Karbala, painting by the Isfahan-based Persian artist Abbas Al-Mousavi, Brooklyn Museum (between 1868 and 1933).
Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī, ʿAlī's younger son and brother to Ḥasan, initially resisted calls to lead the Muslims against Muawiyah and reclaim the caliphate. In 680 CE, Muawiyah died and passed the caliphate to his son Yazid, and breaking the treaty with Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī. Yazid asked Husayn to swear allegiance (bay'ah) to him. ʿAlī's faction, having expected the caliphate to return to ʿAlī's line upon Muawiyah's death, saw this as a betrayal of the peace treaty and so Ḥusayn rejected this request for allegiance. There was a groundswell of support in Kufa for Ḥusayn to return there and take his position as caliph and Imam, so Ḥusayn collected his family and followers in Medina and set off for Kufa. En route to Kufa, he was blocked by an army of Yazid's men, which included people from Kufa, near Karbala (modern Iraq); Ḥusayn and approximately 72 of his family members and followers were killed in the Battle of Karbala.

Left: the Shrine of Imam Ḥusayn; Right: the Mosque of Imam Ḥusayn premises during Arba'een.
Shīʿa Muslims regard Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī as a martyr (shahid), and count him as an Imam from the Ahl al-Bayt. They view Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī as the defender of Islam from annihilation at the hands of Yazid I. Ḥusayn is the last Imam following ʿAlī mutually recognized by all branches of Shīʿa Islam.[180] The Battle of Karbala and martyrdom of Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī is often cited as the definitive separation between the Shīʿa and Sunnī sects of Islam, and is commemorated each year by Shīʿa Muslims on the Day of Ashura.

Imamate of the Ahl al-Bayt
Main article: Imamate in Shia doctrine
 Zulfiqar with and without the shield. The Fatimid depiction of ʿAlī's sword is carved on the gates of Old Cairo, namely Bab al-Nasr (shown below). Two swords were captured from the temple of the pre-Islamic Arabian deity Manāt during the Raid of Sa'd ibn Zaid al-Ashhali. Muhammad gave them to ʿAlī, saying that one of them was "Zulfiqar", which became famously known as the sword of ʿAlī and a later symbol of Shīʿīsm.[181]
 Depiction of ʿAlī's sword and shield carved on the Bab al-Nasr gate wall in Cairo, Egypt
Later, most denominations of Shīʿa Islam, including Twelvers and Ismāʿīlīs, became Imamis. Imami Shīʿītes believe that Imams are the spiritual and political successors to Muhammad.[182] Imams are human individuals who not only rule over the Muslim community with justice, but also are able to keep and interpret the divine law and its esoteric meaning. The words and deeds of Muhammad and the Imams are a guide and model for the community to follow; as a result, they must be free from error and sin, and must be chosen by divine decree (nass) through Muhammad.[100][101] According to this view peculiar to Shīʿa Islam, there is always an Imam of the Age, who is the divinely appointed authority on all matters of faith and law in the Muslim community. ʿAlī was the first Imam of this line, the rightful successor to Muhammad, followed by male descendants of Muhammad through his daughter Fatimah.[182][183]
This difference between following either the Ahl al-Bayt (Muhammad's family and descendants) or pledging allegiance to Abū Bakr has shaped the Shīʿa—Sunnī divide on the interpretation of some Quranic verses, ḥadīth literature (accounts of the sayings and living habits attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad during his lifetime), and other areas of Islamic belief throughout the history of Islam. For instance, the ḥadīth collections venerated by Shīʿa Muslims are centered on narrations by members of the Ahl al-Bayt and their supporters, while some ḥadīth transmitted by narrators not belonging to or supporting the Ahl al-Bayt are not included. Those of Abu Hurairah, for example, Ibn Asakir in his Taʿrikh Kabir, and Muttaqi in his Kanzuʿl-Umma report that ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb lashed him, rebuked him, and forbade him to narrate ḥadīth from Muhammad. ʿUmar is reported to have said: "Because you narrate hadith in large numbers from the Holy Prophet, you are fit only for attributing lies to him. (That is, one expects a wicked man like you to utter only lies about the Holy Prophet.) So you must stop narrating hadith from the Prophet; otherwise, I will send you to the land of Dus." (An Arab clan in Yemen, to which Abu Hurairah belonged). According to Sunnī Muslims, ʿAlī was the fourth successor to Abū Bakr, while Shīʿa Muslims maintain that ʿAlī was the first divinely sanctioned "Imam", or successor of Muhammad. The seminal event in Shīʿa history is the martyrdom at the Battle of Karbala of ʿAlī's son, Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī, and 71 of his followers in 680 CE, who led a non-allegiance movement against the defiant caliph.

 Sanctuary of Imam Reza in Mashhad, Iran, is a complex which contains the mausoleum of Imam Reza, the 8th Imam of Twelver Shīʿas.
It is believed in Twelver and Ismāʿīlī branches of Shīʿa Islam that divine wisdom (ʿaql) was the source of the souls of the prophets and Imams, which bestowed upon them esoteric knowledge (ḥikmah), and that their sufferings were a means of divine grace to their devotees.[184][185] Although the Imam was not the recipient of a divine revelation (waḥy), he had a close relationship with God, through which God guides him, and the Imam, in turn, guides the people. Imamate, or belief in the divine guide, is a fundamental belief in the Twelver and Ismāʿīlī branches of Shīʿa Islam, and is based on the concept that God would not leave humanity without access to divine guidance.[102]

Imam Mahdi, last Imam of the Shīʿa
Main articles: Mahdi, Muhammad al-Mahdi, Occultation (Islam), and Reappearance of Hujjat Allah al-Mahdi
Further information: History of Shia Islam and Imamate in Shia doctrine
 Ghazan and his brother Öljaitü both were tolerant of sectarian differences within the boundaries of Islam, in contrast to the traditions of Genghis Khan.
In Shīʿa Islam, Imam Mahdi is regarded as the prophesied eschatological redeemer of Islam who will rule for seven, nine, or nineteen years (according to differing interpretations) before the Day of Judgment and will rid the world of evil. According to Islamic tradition, the Mahdi's tenure will coincide with the Second Coming of Jesus (ʿĪsā), who is to assist the Mahdi against the Masih ad-Dajjal (literally, the "false Messiah" or Antichrist). Jesus, who is considered the Masih ("Messiah") in Islam, will descend at the point of a white arcade east of Damascus, dressed in yellow robes with his head anointed. He will then join the Mahdi in his war against the Dajjal, where it is believed the Mahdi will slay the Dajjal and unite humankind.
Historians dispute over the origins of Shīʿa Islam, with many Western scholars positing that Shīʿīsm began as a political faction rather than a truly religious movement.[186][187] Other scholars disagree, considering this concept of religious-political separation to be an anachronistic application of a Western concept.[188]

Dynasties
Main article: List of Shia dynasties
In the century following the Battle of Karbala (680 CE), as various Shia-affiliated groups diffused in the emerging Islamic world, several nations arose based on a Shia leadership or population.

Idrisids (788–985 CE): a Zaydi dynasty in what is now Morocco
Qarmatians (899–1077 CE): an Ismaili Iranian dynasty. Their headquarters were in East Arabia and Bahrain. It was founded by Abu Sa'id al-Jannabi.
Buyids (934–1055 CE): a Twelver Iranian dynasty. at its peak consisted of large portions of modern Iraq and Iran.
Uqaylids (990–1096 CE): a Shia Arab dynasty with several lines that ruled in various parts of Al-Jazira, northern Syria and Iraq.
Ilkhanate (1256–1335): a Persianate Mongol khanate established in Persia in the 13th century, considered a part of the Mongol Empire. The Ilkhanate was based, originally, on Genghis Khan's campaigns in the Khwarezmid Empire in 1219–1224, and founded by Genghis's grandson, Hulagu, in territories which today comprise most of Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkey, and Pakistan. The Ilkhanate initially embraced many religions, but was particularly sympathetic to Buddhism and Christianity. Later Ilkhanate rulers, beginning with Ghazan in 1295, embraced Islam his brother Öljaitü promoted Shia Islam.[189]
Bahmanids (1347–1527): a Shia Muslim state of the Deccan in southern India and one of the great medieval Indian kingdoms.[190] Bahmanid Sultanate was the first independent Islamic Kingdom in South India.[191]
 The Fatimid Caliphate at its peak
Fatimid Caliphate
 Al Hakim Mosque, Islamic Cairo.
Fatimids (909–1171 CE): Controlled much of North Africa, the Levant, parts of Arabia and Mecca and Medina. The group takes its name from Fatima, Muhammad's daughter, from whom they claim descent.
In 909 CE the Shi'i military leader Abu Abdallah al-Shiʻi, overthrew the Sunni ruler in Northern Africa; which began the Fatimid regime.[192]
Jawhar (general) (Arabic: جوهر; fl. 966–d. 992) was a Fatimid general. Under the command of Caliph Al-Mu'izz, he led the conquest of North Africa and then of Egypt,[193] founded the city of Cairo[194] and the great al-Azhar Mosque. A Greek slave by origin, he was freed by Al-Mu'izz.[195]
Safavid Empire
Main articles: Safavid dynasty and Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam
 One of the first actions performed by Shāh Ismā'īl I of the Safavid dynasty was the proclamation of the Twelver denomination of Shīʿa Islam as the official religion of his newly-founded Persian Empire, causing sectarian tensions in the Middle East when he destroyed the tombs of the Abbasid caliphs, the Sunnī Imam Abū Ḥanīfa al-Nuʿmān, and the Ṣūfī Muslim ascetic ʿAbdul Qādir Gīlānī in 1508.[196] In 1533 the Ottoman Turks, upon their conquest of Iraq, rebuilt various important Sunnī shrines.[196][197]
A major turning point in the history of Shīʿa Islam was the dominion of the Safavid dynasty (1501–1736) in Persia. This caused a number of changes in the Muslim world:

The ending of the relative mutual tolerance between Sunnīs and Shīʿas that existed from the time of the Mongol conquests onwards and the resurgence of antagonism between the two groups.
Initial dependence of Shīʿīte clerics on the state followed by the emergence of an independent body of ulama capable of taking a political stand different from official policies.[198]
The growth in importance of Persian centers of Islamic education and religious learning, which resulted in the change of Twelver Shīʿīsm from being a predominantly Arab phenomenon to become predominantly Persian.[199]
The growth of the Akhbari school of thought, which taught that only the Quran, ḥadīth literature, and sunnah (accounts of the sayings and living habits attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad during his lifetime) are to be bases for verdicts, rejecting the use of reasoning.
With the fall of the Safavids, the state in Persia—including the state system of courts with government-appointed judges (qāḍī)—became much weaker. This gave the sharīʿa courts of mujtahid an opportunity to fill the legal vacuum and enabled the ulama to assert their judicial authority. The Usuli school of thought also increased in strength at this time.[200]





The declaration of Twelver Shīʿīsm as the state religion of Safavid Persia.






Battle of Chaldiran in 1514, was a major sectarian crisis between Muslims in the Middle East.






Monument commemorating the Battle of Chaldiran, where more than 7000 Muslims of the Shīʿa and Sunnī sects killed each other.




Persecution of Shīʿa Muslims
Main articles: Anti-Shiism and Shia–Sunni relations
Further information: Sectarian violence among Muslims and Shia genocide
 Shrine of Imam ʿAlī in Najaf, Iraq
The history of Shīʿa—Sunnī relations has often involved religious discrimination, persecution, and violence, dating back to the earliest development of the two competing sects.
At various times throughout the history of Islam, Shīʿa groups and minorities have faced persecution perpetrated by Sunnī Muslims.[201][202][203][204]
Militarily established and holding control over the Umayyad government, many Sunnī rulers perceived the Shīʿas as a threat—both to their political and religious authority.[205] The Sunnī rulers under the Umayyad dynasty sought to marginalize the Shīʿa minority, and later the Abbasids turned on their Shīʿa allies and imprisoned, persecuted, and killed them. The persecution of Shīʿa Muslims throughout history by their Sunnī co-religionists has often been characterized by brutal and genocidal acts. Comprising only about 10–15% of the global Muslim population,[12] Shīʿa Muslims remain a marginalized community to this day in many Sunnī-dominant Arab countries, without the rights to practice their religion and freely organize.[206]
In 1514, the Ottoman sultan Selim I (1512–1520) ordered the massacre of 40,000 Alevis and Bektashi (Anatolian Shīʿa Muslims).[207] According to Jalal Al-e-Ahmad, "Sultan Selim I carried things so far that he announced that the killing of one Shīʿa had as much otherworldly reward as killing 70 Christians."[208] In 1802, the Al Saud-Wahhabi armies of the Ikhwan from the First Saudi State (1727–1818) attacked and sacked the city of Karbala, the Shīʿa shrine in Najaf (eastern region of Iraq) that commemorates the martyrdom and death of Ḥusayn ibn ʿAlī.[209]
Under Saddam Hussein's Ba'athist regime in Iraq (1968–2003), Shīʿa Muslims were heavily persecuted, arrested, tortured, and killed.[210] In March 2011, the Malaysian government declared Shīʿa Islam a "deviant" sect and banned Shīʿa Muslims from promoting their faith to other Muslims, but left them free to practice it themselves privately.[211][212]
The most recent and grave attempt by Sunnī Muslims to entirely eradicate the Shīʿa community through violent means was the large-scale genocide of Shīʿa Muslims organized and perpetrated by ISIL/ISIS/IS/Daesh in Syria and Iraq between 2014 and 2018,[143][213][144][214] which occurred alongside the genocides of many other religious minorities in the same region of the Middle East perpetrated by the aforementioned Sunnī Islamist militant group and Salafi-jihadist terrorist organization.[143][144][145][146]

See also


Shia Islam portal
Islam portal
Religion portal

Alawi Islam
Anti-Shi'ism
Criticism of Twelver Shia Islam
History of Shia Islam
Imamate in Shia doctrine
Imamate and guardianship of Ali ibn Abi Talib
Imamate in Ismaili doctrine
Imamate in Nizari doctrine
Imamate in Twelver doctrine
Intellectual proofs in Shia jurisprudence
List of Shia books
List of Shia Islamic dynasties
List of Shia Muslim scholars of Islam
List of Shia Muslims
Shia crescent
Shia genocide
Shia Islam in the Indian subcontinent
Shia nations
Shia Rights Watch
Shia view of Ali
Shia view of the Quran

References
Notes


^ A 2019 Council on Foreign Relations article states: "Nobody really knows the size of the Shia population in Nigeria. Credible estimates that its numbers range between 2 and 3 percent of Nigeria's population, which would amount to roughly four million."[85] A 2019 BBC News article said that "Estimates of [Nigerian Shia] numbers vary wildly, ranging from less than 5% to 17% of Nigeria's Muslim population of about 100 million."[86]


Citations


^ Olawuyi, Toyib (2014). On the Khilafah of Ali over Abu Bakr. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-4928-5884-3. Archived from the original on 22 April 2016.

^ "The Shura Principle in Islam – by Sadek Sulaiman". www.alhewar.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2016.

^ "Sunnis and Shia: Islam's ancient schism". BBC News. 4 January 2016. Retrieved 14 August 2021.

^ Esposito, John. "What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam". Oxford University Press, 2002 | ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0. p. 40

^ "From the article on Shii Islam in Oxford Islamic Studies Online". Oxfordislamicstudies.com. Archived from the original on 28 May 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ Newman, Andrew J. Shiʿi. Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 28 December 2021.

^ Goldziher, I.; van Arendonk, C.; Tritton, A.S. (2012). "Ahl al- Bayt".  In P. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C.E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs (eds.). Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd ed.). Brill. doi:10.1163/1573-3912_islam_SIM_0378.

^ "Lesson 13: Imam's Traits". Al-Islam.org. 13 January 2015. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015.

^ Tabataba'i (1979), p. 76

^ God's rule: the politics of world religions, p. 146, Jacob Neusner, 2003

^ Esposito, John. What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam, Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0. p. 40

^ a b c "Mapping the Global Muslim Population". 7 October 2009. Archived from the original on 14 December 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2014. The Pew Forum's estimate of the Shia population (10–13%) is in keeping with previous estimates, which generally have been in the range of 10–15%.

^ Newman, Andrew J. (2013). "Introduction". Twelver Shiism: Unity and Diversity in the Life of Islam, 632 to 1722. Edinburgh University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-7486-7833-4. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2015.

^ Guidère, Mathieu (2012). Historical Dictionary of Islamic Fundamentalism. Scarecrow Press. p. 319. ISBN 978-0-8108-7965-2.

^ a b c d The New Encyclopædia Britannica, Jacob E. Safra, Chairman of the Board, 15th Edition, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 1998, ISBN 0-85229-663-0, Vol 10, p. 738

^ Duncan S. Ferguson (2010). Exploring the Spirituality of the World Religions: The Quest for Personal, Spiritual and Social Transformation. Bloomsbury Academic. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-4411-4645-8.

^ Wehr, Hans. "Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic". Archive.org. p. 498. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ Shiʻa is an alternative spelling of Shia, and Shiʻite of Shiite. In subsequent sections, the spellings Shia and Shiite are adopted for consistency, except where the alternative spelling is in the title of a reference.

^ "Difference Between The Meaning Of Shia And Shiite? However the term Shiite is being used less and is considered less proper than simply using the term "Shia"". English forums. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ Tabataba'i 1977, p. 34 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTabataba'i1977 (help)

^ Sobhani & Shah-Kazemi 2001, p. 97

^ Sobhani & Shah-Kazemi 2001, p. 98

^ Vaezi, Ahmad (2004). Shia political thought. London: Islamic Centre of England. p. 56. ISBN 978-1-904934-01-1. OCLC 59136662.

^ Cornell 2007, p. 218

^ "Druze and Islam". americandruze.com. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 12 August 2010.

^ "Ijtihad in Islam". AlQazwini.org. Archived from the original on 2 January 2005. Retrieved 12 August 2010.

^ "Shiʻite Islam," by Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, translated by Sayyid Husayn Nasr, State University of New York Press, 1975, p. 24

^ Dakake (2008), pp. 1–2

^ In his "Mutanabbi devant le siècle ismaëlien de l'Islam", in Mém. de l'Inst Français de Damas, 1935, p.

^ "Encyclopedia of the Middle East". Mideastweb.org. 14 November 2008. Archived from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ tebyan.net, موسسه فرهنگی واطلاع رسانی تبیان | (9 December 2010). "اضافه شدن نام حضرت علی (ع) به شهادتین". fa. Retrieved 28 August 2021.

^ a b Dabashi (2006). Theology of Discontent: The Ideological Foundatation of the Islamic Revolution in Iran. p. 463. ISBN 9781412839723.

^ Francis Robinson, Atlas of the Muslim World, p. 47.

^ "Shīʿite". Britannica. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019.

^ Quran 33:33

^ Momen 1985, p. 155

^ Corbin (1993), pp. 48 and 49

^ Corbin (1993), p. 48

^ "How do Sunnis and Shias differ theologically?". BBC. 19 August 2009. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014.

^ Nasr, Sayyed Hossein. "Expectation of the Millennium : Shiìsm in History", State University of New York Press, 1989, p. 19, ISBN 978-0-88706-843-0

^ "Comparison of Shias and Sunnis". Religionfacts.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ "The Complete Idiot's Guide to World Religions," Brandon Toropov, Father Luke Buckles, Alpha; 3rd edition, 2004, ISBN 978-1-59257-222-9, p. 135

^ "Shiʻite Islam" by Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i (1979), pp. 41–44

^ a b c d Al-Kulayni, Abu Jaʼfar Muhammad ibn Yaʼqub (2015). Kitab al-Kafi. South Huntington, NY: The Islamic Seminary Inc. ISBN 978-0-9914308-6-4.

^ Allamah Muhammad Rida Al Muzaffar (1989). The faith of Shia Islam. Ansariyan Qum. p. 1.

^ "The Beliefs of Shia Islam – Chapter 1". Archived from the original on 25 October 2016.

^ Sanders, Paula (1994). Ritual, politics, and the city in Fatimid Cairo. p. 121. ISBN 9780791417812.

^ Trawicky, Bernard; Wilhelme Gregory, Ruth (2002). Anniversaries and holidays. p. 233. ISBN 9780838910047.

^ "Lady Fatima inspired women of Iran to emerge as an extraordinary force". 18 March 2017. Archived from the original on 25 August 2018. Retrieved 26 August 2018.

^ "Karbala and Najaf: Shia holy cities". 20 April 2003.

^ Escobar, Pepe (24 May 2002). "Knocking on heaven's door". Central Asia/Russia. Asia Times Online. Archived from the original on 3 June 2002. Retrieved 12 November 2006. To give a measure of its importance, according to a famous hadith (saying) – enunciated with pleasure by the guardians of the shrine – we learn that 'our sixth imam, Imam Sadeg, says that we have five definitive holy places that we respect very much. The first is Mecca, which belongs to God. The second is Medina, which belongs to the Holy Prophet Muhammad, the messenger of God. The third belongs to our first imam of Shia, Ali, which is in Najaf. The fourth belongs to our third imam, Hussein, in Kerbala. The last one belongs to the daughter of our seventh imam and sister of our eighth imam, who is called Fatemah, and will be buried in Qom. Pilgrims and those who visit her holy shrine, I promise to these men and women that God will open all the doors of Heaven to them.'{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)

^ Louėr, Laurence (2008). Transnational Shia politics: religious and political networks in the Gulf. p. 22. ISBN 9780231700405.

^ Dabrowska, Karen; Hann, Geoff (2008). Iraq Then and Now: A Guide to the Country and Its People. p. 239. ISBN 9781841622439. Archived from the original on 2 January 2017.

^ "Jurisprudence and Law – Islam: Reorienting the Veil". University of North Carolina. 2009.

^ "Religions". CIA. The World Factbook. 2010. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 25 August 2010. Shia Islam represents 10–20% of Muslims worldwide

^ "Shīʿite". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 18 January 2022. In the early 21st century some 10–13 percent of the world's 1.6 billion Muslims were Shiʿi.

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Muslim Population". Pew Research Center. 7 October 2009. Archived from the original on 14 December 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2010. Of the total Muslim population, 10–13% are Shia Muslims and 87–90% are Sunni Muslims. Most Shias (between 68% and 80%) live in just four countries: Iran, Pakistan, India and Iraq.

^ a b c d e f g Miller, Tracy, ed. (October 2009). Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Muslim Population (PDF). Pew Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 January 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2009.

^ Momen 1985, p. 277

^ a b "Foreign Affairs – When the Shiites Rise – Vali Nasr". Mafhoum.com. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2014.

^ "Quick guide: Sunnis and Shias". BBC News. 11 December 2006. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008.

^ Atlas of the Middle East (Second ed.). Washington, DC: National Geographic. 2008. pp. 80–81. ISBN 978-1-4262-0221-6.

^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2010". U.S. Government Department of State. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2010.

^ "International Religious Freedom Report for 2012". US State Department. 2012.

^ "The New Middle East, Turkey, and the Search for Regional Stability" (PDF). Strategic Studies Institute. April 2008. p. 87. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2015.

^ Shankland, David (2003). The Alevis in Turkey: The Emergence of a Secular Islamic Tradition. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7007-1606-7.

^ "Country Profile: Pakistan" (PDF). Library of Congress Country Studies on Pakistan. Library of Congress. February 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2005. Retrieved 1 September 2010. Religion: The overwhelming majority of the population (96.3 percent) is Muslim, of whom approximately 95 percent are Sunni and 5 percent Shia.

^ "Shia women too can initiate divorce" (PDF). Library of Congress Country Studies on Afghanistan. August 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2010. Religion: Virtually the entire population is Muslim. Between 80 and 85 percent of Muslims are Sunni and 15 to 19 percent, Shia.

^ "Afghanistan". Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The World Factbook on Afghanistan. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2010. Religions: Sunni Muslim 80%, Shia Muslim 19%, other 1%

^ al-Qudaihi, Anees (24 March 2009). "Saudi Arabia's Shia press for rights". BBC Arabic Service. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 24 March 2009.

^ Merrick, Jane; Sengupta, Kim (20 September 2009). "Yemen: The land with more guns than people". The Independent. London. Retrieved 21 March 2010.

^ Sharma, Hriday (30 June 2011). "The Arab Spring: The Initiating Event for a New Arab World Order". E-international Relations. Archived from the original on 29 August 2020. In Yemen, Zaidists, a Shia offshoot, constitute 30% of the total population

^ Leonard Leo. International Religious Freedom (2010): Annual Report to Congress. Diane Publishing. pp. 261–. ISBN 978-1-4379-4439-6. Archived from the original on 1 January 2014. Retrieved 24 October 2012.

^ Paul Ohia (16 November 2010). "Nigeria: 'No Settlement With Iran Yet'". This Day. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012.

^ Charton-Bigot, Helene; Rodriguez-Torres, Deyssi (2010). Nairobi Today: the Paradox of a Fragmented City. African Books Collective. p. 239. ISBN 9789987080939.

^ Heinrich Matthée (2008). Muslim Identities and Political Strategies: A Case Study of Muslims in the Greater Cape Town Area of South Africa, 1994–2000. kassel university press GmbH. pp. 136–. ISBN 978-3-89958-406-6. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013. Retrieved 14 August 2012.

^ Abdullahi, Mohamed Diriye (2001). Culture and customs of Somalia. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-313-31333-2.

^ Yasurō Hase; Hiroyuki Miyake; Fumiko Oshikawa (2002). South Asian migration in comparative perspective, movement, settlement and diaspora. Japan Center for Area Studies, National Museum of Ethnology. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015.

^ "Pakistan". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 2 December 2021.

^ Reynolds, James (12 August 2012). "Why Azerbaijan is closer to Israel than Iran". BBC.

^ Umutlu, Ayseba. "Islam's gradual resurgence in post-Soviet Azerbaijan".

^ a b Bedford, Sofie (2016). "Turkey and Azerbaijan: one religion – two states?"".  In Ismayilov, Murad; Graham, Norman A. (eds.). Turkish-Azerbaijani Relations: One Nation—Two States?. Routledge. p. 128. ISBN 9781138650817.

^ Massoud, Waheed (6 December 2011). "Why have Afghanistan's Shias been targeted now?". BBC.

^ "Lebanon". CIA World Factbook. 2020.

^ a b Campbell, John (10 July 2019). "More Trouble Between Nigeria's Shia Minority and the Police". Council on Foreign Relations.

^ Tangaza, Haruna Shehu (5 August 2019). "Islamic Movement in Nigeria: The Iranian-inspired Shia group". BBC.

^ "2018 Report on International Religious Freedom: Kuwait". Office of International Religious Freedom, United States Department of State.

^ Aswad, B. and Abowd, T., 2013. Arab Americans. Race and Ethnicity: The United States and the World, pp.272–301.

^ Erlich, Reese (4 August 2015). "Mitigating Sunni-Shia conflict in 'the world's most charming police state'". Agence France-Presse.

^ Cornell 2007, p. 237

^ "Esposito, John. "What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam" Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0. p. 45.

^ "Administrative Department of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan – Presidential Library – Religion" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2011.

^ Esposito, John. "What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam" Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0. p. 45

^ John Pike. "Bahrain – Religion". globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012.

^ "Challenges For Saudi Arabia Amidst Protests in the Gulf – Analysis". Eurasia Review. 25 March 2011. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012.

^ "Shiʿite Doctrine". iranicaonline.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2015.

^ a b Richter, Joanne (2006). Iran: the Culture. p. 7. ISBN 9780778791423.

^ Nahj al-balaghah, Mohaghegh (researcher) 'Atarodi Ghoochaani, the introduction of Sayyid Razi, P.1

^ Islamic Texts Institute (2012). Al-Kafi Book I: Intellect and Foolishness. Taqwa Media. ISBN 978-1-939420-00-8.

^ a b Nasr (1979), p. 10

^ a b Momen 1985, p. 174

^ a b Gleave, Robert (2004). "Imamate". Encyclopaedia of Islam and the Muslim world; vol.1. MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-02-865604-5.

^ Khalaji 2009, p. 64.

^ Bohdan 2020, p. 243.

^ 10086 (1 March 2020). "اخوانی گوشه‌نشین". ایرنا پلاس (in Persian). Retrieved 10 May 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ Bohdan 2020, pp. 250–251.

^ Hermann, Denis (1 May 2013). "Akhund Khurasani and the Iranian Constitutional Movement". Middle Eastern Studies. 49 (3): 437. doi:10.1080/00263206.2013.783828. ISSN 0026-3206. S2CID 143672216.

^ "Shaykh Ahmad al-Ahsa'i". Archived from the original on 18 February 2007. Retrieved 25 April 2007.

^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p. 76

^ "Congressional Human Rights Caucus Testimony – NAJRAN, The Untold Story". Archived from the original on 27 December 2006. Retrieved 8 January 2007.

^ "News Summary: China; Latvia". 22 September 2003. Archived from the original on 6 May 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2007.

^ Daftary, Farhad (1998). A Short History of the Ismailis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. pp. 1–4. ISBN 978-0-7486-0687-0.

^ Virani, Shafique N. (2010). "The Right Path: A Post-Mongol Persian Ismaili Treatise". Iranian Studies. 43 (2): 197–221. doi:10.1080/00210860903541988. ISSN 0021-0862. S2CID 170748666.

^ a b c d e f Timani, Hussam S. (2021). "Part 5: In Between and on the Fringes of Islam – The Druze".  In Cusack, Carole M.; Upal, M. Afzal (eds.). Handbook of Islamic Sects and Movements. Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 21. Leiden and Boston: Brill Publishers. pp. 724–742. doi:10.1163/9789004435544_038. ISBN 978-90-04-43554-4. ISSN 1874-6691.

^ Poonawala, Ismail K. (July–September 1999). "Review: The Fatimids and Their Traditions of Learning by Heinz Halm". Journal of the American Oriental Society. American Oriental Society. 119 (3): 542. doi:10.2307/605981. ISSN 0003-0279. JSTOR 605981. LCCN 12032032. OCLC 47785421.

^ "al-Hakim bi Amr Allah: Fatimid Caliph of Egypt". Archived from the original on 6 April 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2007.

^ Pintak, Lawrence (2019). America & Islam: Soundbites, Suicide Bombs and the Road to Donald Trump. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 86. ISBN 978-1-78831-559-3.

^ Jonas, Margaret (2011). The Templar Spirit: The Esoteric Inspiration, Rituals and Beliefs of the Knights Templar. Temple Lodge Publishing. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-906999-25-4. [Druze] often they are not regarded as being Muslim at all, nor do all the Druze consider themselves as Muslim

^ "Are the Druze People Arabs or Muslims? Deciphering Who They Are". Arab America. Arab America. 8 August 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2020.

^ J. Stewart, Dona (2008). The Middle East Today: Political, Geographical and Cultural Perspectives. Routledge. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-135-98079-5. Most Druze do not consider themselves Muslim. Historically they faced much persecution and keep their religious beliefs secrets.

^ Daftary, Farhad (1998). A Short History of the Ismailis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. pp. 106–108. ISBN 978-0-7486-0687-0.

^ "About Yemen". Yemeni in Canada. Embassy of the Republic of Yemen in Canada. Archived from the original on 27 January 2007. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ "Yemen [Yamaniyyah]: general data of the country". Population Statistics. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ "Sunni-Shiʻa Schism: Less There Than Meets the Eye". 1991. p. 24. Archived from the original on 23 April 2005.

^ Hodgson, Marshall (1961). Venture of Islam. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 262.[clarification needed]

^ Ibn Abī Zarʻ al-Fāsī, ʻAlī ibn ʻAbd Allāh (1340). Rawḍ al-Qirṭās: Anīs al-Muṭrib bi-Rawd al-Qirṭās fī Akhbār Mulūk al-Maghrib wa-Tārīkh Madīnat Fās. ar-Rabāṭ: Dār al-Manṣūr (published 1972). p. 38.

^ "حين يكتشف المغاربة أنهم كانوا شيعة وخوارج قبل أن يصبحوا مالكيين !". hespress.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008.

^ Ignác Goldziher (1981). Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law. Princeton University Press. p. 218. ISBN 978-0-691-10099-9.

^ James Hastings (2003). Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. Kessinger Publishing. p. 844. ISBN 978-0-7661-3704-2.

^ "The Initial Destination of the Fatimid caliphate: The Yemen or The Maghrib?". iis.ac.uk. The Institute of Ismaili Studies. Archived from the original on 6 July 2015.

^ "Shiʻah tenets concerning the question of the imamate – New Page 1". muslimphilosophy.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012.

^ Article by Sayyid 'Ali ibn 'Ali Al-Zaidi,At-tarikh as-saghir 'an ash-shia al-yamaniyeen (Arabic: التاريخ الصغير عن الشيعة اليمنيين, A short History of the Yemenite Shiʻites), 2005 Referencing: Iranian Influence on Moslem Literature

^ Article by Sayyid 'Ali ibn 'Ali Al-Zaidi, At-tarikh as-saghir 'an ash-shia al-yamaniyeen (Arabic: التاريخ الصغير عن الشيعة اليمنيين, A short History of the Yemenite Shiʻites), 2005 Referencing: Encyclopædia Iranica

^ Walker, Paul Ernest (1999). Hamid Al-Din Al-Kirmani: Ismaili Thought in the Age of Al-Hakim. Ismaili Heritage Series. Vol. 3. London; New York: I.B. Tauris in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-86064-321-7.

^ Madelung, W. (7 December 2007). "al-Uk̲h̲ayḍir". Encyclopaedia of Islam. Brill.

^ Article by Sayyid Ali ibn ' Ali Al-Zaidi, At-tarikh as-saghir 'an ash-shia al-yamaniyeen (Arabic: التاريخ الصغير عن الشيعة اليمنيين, A short History of the Yemenite Shiʻites), 2005

^ "Universiteit Utrecht Universiteitsbibliotheek". Library.uu.nl. Archived from the original on 2 May 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ a b c Nevola, Luca; Shiban, Baraa (2020). "The Role of "Coup Forces," Saleh, and the Houthis".  In Day, Stephen W.; Brehony, Noel (eds.). Global, Regional, and Local Dynamics in the Yemen Crisis. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 233–251. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-35578-4_15. ISBN 978-3-030-35578-4. S2CID 213121908.

^ a b c Glenn, Cameron (29 April 2015). "Who are Yemen's Houthis?". The Islamists. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson International Center. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022.

^ "Yemen's Houthis form own government in Sanaa". Al Jazeera. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 7 February 2015. Retrieved 7 February 2015.

^ "Yemen govt vows to stay in Aden despite IS bombings". Yahoo News. 7 October 2015. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015.

^ "Arab Coalition Faces New Islamic State Foe in Yemen Conflict". NDTV.com. 7 October 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ a b c Poljarevic, Emin (2021). "Theology of Violence-oriented Takfirism as a Political Theory: The Case of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)".  In Cusack, Carole M.; Upal, Muhammad Afzal (eds.). Handbook of Islamic Sects and Movements. Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 21. Leiden and Boston: Brill Publishers. pp. 485–512. doi:10.1163/9789004435544_026. ISBN 978-90-04-43554-4. ISSN 1874-6691.

^ a b c Rickenbacher, Daniel (August 2019).  Jikeli, Gunther (ed.). "The Centrality of Anti-Semitism in the Islamic State's Ideology and Its Connection to Anti-Shiism". Religions. Basel: MDPI. 10 (8: The Return of Religious Antisemitism?): 483. doi:10.3390/rel10080483. ISSN 2077-1444.

^ a b Badara, Mohamed; Nagata, Masaki (November 2017). "Modern Extremist Groups and the Division of the World: A Critique from an Islamic Perspective". Arab Law Quarterly. Leiden: Brill Publishers. 31 (4): 305–335. doi:10.1163/15730255-12314024. ISSN 1573-0255.

^ a b Bunzel, Cole (March 2015). "From Paper State to Caliphate: The Ideology of the Islamic State" (PDF). The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World. Washington, D.C.: Center for Middle East Policy (Brookings Institution). 19: 1–48. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2020.

^ Momen 1985, p. 15

^ Ehsan Yarshater (ed.). "Shiʻite Doctrine". Iranicaonline.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2019.

^ a b c d e Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions, Wendy Doniger, Consulting Editor, Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, Springfield, MA 1999, ISBN 0-87779-044-2, LoC: BL31.M47 1999, p. 525

^ a b c "Esposito, John. "What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam" Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0. p. 46

^ Ali, Abbas, ed. (12 November 2013). "Respecting the Righteous Companions". A Shi'ite Encyclopedia. Ahlul Bayt Digital Islamic Library Project. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020 – via al-islam.org.

^ Ja'fariyan, Rasul (2014). "Umars Caliphate". History of the Caliphs. p. 290. ISBN 978-1-312-54108-5. Abu Hatin al-Razi says, "It is the appellation of those who were attached to Ali during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, such as Salman, Abu Dharr Ghifari, Miqdad ibn al-Aswad and Ammar ibn Yasir and others. Concerning these four, the Messenger of Allah had declared, 'The paradise is eager for four men: Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, and Ammar.'"
Rasul Ja'fariyan (1996). "Shi'ism and Its Types During the Early Centuries". Al Seraj.

^ Zwettler, Michael (1990). "A Mantic Manifesto: The Sura of "The Poets" and the Qur'anic Foundations of Prophetic Authority". Poetry and Prophecy: The Beginnings of a Literary Tradition. Cornell University Press. p. 84. ISBN 0-8014-9568-7.

^ Rubin, Uri (1995). The Eye of the Beholder: The life of Muhammad as viewed by the early Muslims. Princeton, New Jersey: The Darwin Press Inc. pp. 135–38. ISBN 978-0-87850-110-6.

^ Razwy, Sayed Ali Asgher. A Restatement of the History of Islam & Muslims. pp. 54–55.

^ Rubin (1995, p. 137)

^ Irving, Washington (1868), Mahomet and His Successors, vol. I, New York: G. P. Putnam and Son, p. 71

^ Rubin (1995, pp. 136–37)

^ a b Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali (2014). "Ghadīr Khumm".  In Kate Fleet; Gundrun Krämer; Denis Matringe; John Nawas; Everett Rowson (eds.). Encyclopaedia of Islam THREE. doi:10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_27419.

^ "After the death of Allah 's Apostle Fatima the daughter of Allah's Apostle asked Abu Bakr As-Siddiq to give her, her share of inheritance from what Allah's Apostle had (p. 1) – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017.

^ "Lesson 8: The Shiʻah among the Companions {sahabah}". Al-Islam.org. February 2013. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017.

^ "Chapter 3: State of Affairs in Saqifah after the Death of the Prophet". Al-Islam.org. 21 April 2016. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017.

^ "Did Imam Ali Give Allegiance to Abu Bakr?". Islamic Insights. 8 December 2009. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017.

^ Riz̤vī, Sayyid Sa'eed Ak̲h̲tar. Slavery: From Islamic & Christian Perspectives. Richmond, British Columbia: Vancouver Islamic Educational Foundation, 1988. Print. ISBN 0-920675-07-7 pp. 35–36

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 14 June 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Shaikh, Asif. Sahaba: The Companion. n.p., n.d. Print. pp. 42–45

^ Peshawar Nights

^ A list composed of sources such as Ibn Hajar Asqalani and Baladhuri, each in his Ta'rikh, Muhammad Bin Khawind Shah in his Rauzatu's-Safa, Ibn Abdu'l-Birr in his Isti'ab

^ Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 208; Ayoub, 2003, 21

^ The New Encyclopædia Britannica, Jacob E. Safra, Chairman of the Board, 15th Edition, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 1998, ISBN 0-85229-663-0, Vol 10, p. tid738

^ M. Ishaq, "Hakim Bin Jabala – An Heroic Personality of Early Islam", Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, pp. 145–50, (April 1955).

^ Derryl N. Maclean," Religion and Society in Arab Sind", p. 126, BRILL, (1989) ISBN 90-04-08551-3.

^ Mirza Kalichbeg Fredunbeg, "The Chachnama", p. 43, The Commissioner's Press, Karachi (1900).

^ Ibn Athir, Vol. 3, pp. 45–46, 381, as cited in: S. A. N. Rezavi, "The Shia Muslims", in History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization, Vol. 2, Part. 2: "Religious Movements and Institutions in Medieval India", Chapter 13, Oxford University Press (2006).

^ Ibn Sa'd, 8:346. The raid is noted by Baâdhurî, "fatooh al-Baldan" p. 432, and Ibn Khayyât, Ta'rîkh, 1:173, 183–84, as cited in: Derryl N. Maclean," Religion and Society in Arab Sind", p. 126, BRILL, (1989) ISBN 90-04-08551-3.

^ Tabarî, 2:129, 143, 147, as cited in: Derryl N. Maclean," Religion and Society in Arab Sind", p. 126, Brill, (1989) ISBN 90-04-08551-3.

^ ""Solhe Emam Hassan"-Imam Hassan Sets Peace". Archived from the original on 11 March 2013.

^ تهذیب التهذیب. p. 271.

^ Madelung, Wilfred (2003). "Ḥasan b. ʿAli b. Abi Ṭāleb". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 7 November 2018.

^ Discovering Islam: making sense of Muslim history and society (2002) Akbar S. Ahmed

^ Mustafa, Ghulam (1968). Religious trends in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry. p. 11. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Similarly, swords were also placed on the Idols, as it is related that Harith b. Abi Shamir, the Ghassanid king, had presented his two swords, called Mikhdham and Rasub, to the image of the goddess, Manat....to note that the famous sword of Ali, the fourth caliph, called Dhu-al-Fiqar, was one of these two swords

^ a b "امامت از منظر متکلّمان شیعی و فلاسفه اسلامی". پرتال جامع علوم انسانی (in Persian). Retrieved 28 August 2021.

^ عسکری, سید مرتضی. ولایت علی در قرآن کریم و سنت پیامبر، مرکز فرهنگی انتشاراتی منیر، چاپ هفتم.

^ Corbin 1993, pp. 45–51

^ Nasr (1979), p. 15

^ See: Lapidus p. 47, Holt p. 72

^ Francis Robinson, Atlas of the Islamic World, p. 23.

^ Jafri, S.H. Mohammad. "The Origin and Early Development of Shiʻa Islam", Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 6, ISBN 978-0-19-579387-1

^ "نقد و بررسى گرایش ایلخانان به اسلام و تشیّع". پرتال جامع علوم انسانی (in Persian). Retrieved 28 August 2021.

^ "The Five Kingdoms of the Bahmani Sultanate". orbat.com. Archived from the original on 23 February 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2007.

^ Ansari, N.H. Bahmanid Dynasty. Encyclopædia Iranica. Archived from the original on 19 October 2006.

^ Pollard, Elizabeth (2015). Worlds Together Worlds Apart. New York: W.W. Norton Company Inc. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-393-91847-2.

^ Chodorow, Stanley; Knox, MacGregor; Shirokauer, Conrad; Strayer, Joseph R.; Gatzke, Hans W. (1994). The Mainstream of Civilization. Harcourt Press. p. 209. ISBN 978-0-15-501197-7. The architect of his military system was a general named Jawhar, an islamicized Greek slave who had led the conquest of North Africa and then of Egypt

^ Fossier, Robert; Sondheimer, Janet; Airlie, Stuart; Marsack, Robyn (1997). The Cambridge illustrated history of the Middle Ages. Cambridge University Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-521-26645-1. When the Sicilian Jawhar finally entered Fustat in 969 and the following year founded the new dynastic capital, Cairo, 'The Victorious', the Fatimids ...

^ Saunders, John Joseph (1990). A History of Medieval Islam. Routledge. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-415-05914-5. Under Muʼizz (955-975) the Fatimids reached the height of their glory, and the universal triumph of isma ʻilism appeared not far distant. The fourth Fatimid Caliph is an attractive character: humane and generous, simple and just, he was a good administrator, tolerant and conciliatory. Served by one of the greatest generals of the age, Jawhar al-Rumi, a former Greek slave, he took fullest advantage of the growing confusion in the Sunnite world.

^ a b Masters, Bruce (2009). "Baghdad".  In Ágoston, Gábor; Masters, Bruce (eds.). Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire. New York: Facts On File. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-8160-6259-1. LCCN 2008020716. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2022.

^ Stanford J. Shaw; Ezel Kural Shaw (1976). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey: Volume 1, Empire of the Gazis: The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire 1280–1808. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29163-7. Archived from the original on 11 January 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2018.

^ Francis Robinson, Atlas of the Muslim World, p. 49.

^ Momen 1985, p. 123

^ Momen 1985, pp. 191, 130

^ Stevan Lars Nielson; E. Thomas Dowd (2006). The Psychologies in Religion: Working with the Religious Client. Springer Publishing Company. p. 237. ISBN 978-0-8261-2857-7.

^ Maddox, Bronwen (30 December 2006). "Hanging will bring only more bloodshed". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 29 October 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2010.

^ "Al-Ahram Weekly | Region | Shiʻism or schism". Weekly.ahram.org.eg. 17 March 2004. Archived from the original on 4 April 2011. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ "The Shia, Ted Thornton, NMH, Northfield Mount Hermon". Archived from the original on 13 August 2009.

^ "The Origins of the Sunni/Shia split in Islam". Islamfortoday.com. Archived from the original on 26 January 2007. Retrieved 4 May 2011.

^ Nasr, Vali (2006). The Shia Revival: How Conflicts Within Islam Will Shape the Future. W.W. Norton & Company Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-06211-3 pp. 52–53

^ George C. Kohn (2007). Dictionary of Wars. Infobase Publishing. p. 385. ISBN 0-8160-6577-2

^ Al-e Ahmad, Jalal. Plagued by the West (Gharbzadegi), translated by Paul Sprachman. Delmor, NY: Center for Iranian Studies, Columbia University, 1982.

^ "Saudi Arabia – The Saud Family and Wahhabi Islam". Library of Congress Country Studies. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011.

^ Gritten, David (25 February 2006). "Long path to Iraq's sectarian split". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 July 2008. Retrieved 19 April 2015.

^ "Malaysian government to Shia Muslims: Keep your beliefs to yourself". globalpost.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014. Retrieved 17 March 2014.

^ "Malaysia" (PDF). International Religious Freedom Report. United States Department of State Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2014.

^ Baele, Stephane J. (October 2019).  Giles, Howard (ed.). "Conspiratorial Narratives in Violent Political Actors' Language" (PDF). Journal of Language and Social Psychology. SAGE Publications. 38 (5–6): 706–734. doi:10.1177/0261927X19868494. hdl:10871/37355. ISSN 1552-6526. S2CID 195448888. Retrieved 3 January 2022.

^ Ghasemi, Faezeh (2020). Anti-Shiism Discourse (PhD). University of Tehran. • Ghasemi, Faezeh (2017). "Anti-Shiite and Anti-Iranian Discourses in ISIS Texts". Discourse. 11 (3): 75–96. • Matthiesen, Toby (21 July 2015). "The Islamic State Exploits Entrenched Anti-Shia Incitement". Sada. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.


Sources

Cornell, Vincent J. (2007). Voices of Islam. Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publishers. ISBN 978-0-275-98732-9.
Encyclopædia Iranica Online. Columbia University Center for Iranian Studies. Retrieved 11 September 2019.
Martin, Richard C. (2004). Encyclopaedia of Islam and the Muslim World. Vol. 1: Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World: A–L. MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-02-865604-5.
Corbin, Henry (1993) [1964]. History of Islamic Philosophy. Translated by Liadain Sherrard and Philip Sherrard. London; Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. ISBN 978-0-7103-0416-2.
Dakake, Maria Massi (2008). The Charismatic Community: Shiʻite Identity in Early Islam. Suny Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-7033-6.
Holt, P. M.; Lewis, Bernard (1977a). Cambridge History of Islam, Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29136-1.
Lapidus, Ira (2002). A History of Islamic Societies (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-77933-3.
Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein (1988). The Just Ruler (al-sultān Al-ʻādil) in Shīʻite Islam: The Comprehensive Authority of the Jurist in Imamite Jurisprudence. Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-511915-2.
Sobhani, Ja'afar; Shah-Kazemi, Reza (2001). Doctrines of Shiʻi Islam: A Compendium of Imami Beliefs and Practices ([Online-Ausg.] ed.). London: I. B. Tauris [u.a.] ISBN 978-1-86064-780-2.
Tabatabaei, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1979). Shiʻite Islam. Translated by Seyyed Hossein Nasr. State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-87395-272-9.
Ṭabataba'i, Allamah Sayyid Muḥammad Husayn (1977). Shiʻite Islam. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-87395-390-0.
Vaezi, Ahmad (2004). Shia political thought. London: Islamic Centre of England. ISBN 978-1-904934-01-1. OCLC 59136662.

Further reading

Chelkowski, Peter J. (2010). Eternal Performance: Taziyah and Other Shiite Rituals. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-1-906497-51-4.
Corbin, Henry (1993). History of Islamic Philosophy, translated by Liadain Sherrard and Philip Sherrard. Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. ISBN 978-0-7103-0416-2.



Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  "Shiites".




Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Shi'ites".




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shia Islam.

Dabashi, Hamid (2011). Shiʻism: A Religion of Protest. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-06428-7.
Halm, Heinz (2004). Shiʻism. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-1888-0.
Halm, Heinz (2007). The Shiʻites: A Short History. Markus Wiener Pub. ISBN 978-1-55876-437-8.
Lalani, Arzina R. (2000). Early Shiʻi Thought: The Teachings of Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-86064-434-4.
Marcinkowski, Christoph (2010). Shiʻite Identities: Community and Culture in Changing Social Contexts. Lit Verlag. ISBN 978-3-643-80049-7.
Momen, Moojan (1985). An Introduction to Shiʻi Islam: The History and Doctrines of Twelver Shiʻism. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03499-8.
Shirazi, Sultanu'l-Wa'izin (2013). Peshawar Nights, A Transcript of a Dialogue between Shia and Sunni scholars. Ansariyan Publications. ISBN 978-964-438-320-5.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein; Hamid Dabashi (1989). Expectation of the Millennium: Shiʻism in History. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-88706-843-0.
Rogerson, Barnaby (2007). The Heirs of Muhammad: Islam's First Century and the Origins of the Sunni Shia split. Overlook Press. ISBN 978-1-58567-896-9.
Wollaston, Arthur N. (2005). The Sunnis and Shias. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4254-7916-9.
Moosa, Matti (1988). Extremist Shiites: The Ghulat Sects. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-2411-0.
Shi'a Minorities in the Contemporary World: Migration, Transnationalism and Multilocality. United Kingdom, Edinburgh University Press, 2020.
Khalaji, Mehdi (27 November 2009). "The Dilemmas of Pan-Islamic Unity". Current Trends in Islamist Ideology. 9: 64–79.
Bohdan, Siarhei (Summer 2020). ""They Were Going Together with the Ikhwan": The Influence of Muslim Brotherhood Thinkers on Shi'i Islamists during the Cold War". The Middle East Journal. 74 (2): 243–262. doi:10.3751/74.2.14. ISSN 1940-3461. S2CID 225510058.

External links
"Shi'a History and Identity". shiism.wcfia.harvard.edu. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Project on Shi'ism and Global Affairs at the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs (Harvard University). 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2022.
Daftary, Farhad; Nanji, Azim (2018) [2006]. "What is Shi'a Islam?". www.iis.ac.uk. London: Institute of Ismaili Studies at the Aga Khan Centre. Retrieved 4 March 2022.
Muharrami, Ghulam-Husayn (2003). "History of Shi'ism: From the Advent of Islam up to the End of Minor Occultation". Al-Islam.org. Translated by Limba, Mansoor L. Ahlul Bayt Digital Islamic Library Project. Retrieved 4 March 2022.
vteShia Islam around the WorldAfghanistanAlgeriaAngolaAustraliaAzerbaijanBahrainBangladeshBeninBotswanaBrazilBurkina FasoCanadaChinaEgyptEl SalvadorIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqIsraelIvory CoastJordanKenyaKuwaitLebanonLibyaMalaysiaMoroccoNetherlandsNigeriaPakistanPalestineQatarSaudi ArabiaSenegalSierra LeoneSingaporeSomaliaSouth AfricaSudanSyriaTajikistanTunisiaTurkeyUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited StatesUzbekistanYemen
vteIslamic theologyFieldsTheologiansBooksFieldsAqidah
Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam
Philosophy
‘Aql
Education
Logic
Peace
Science
Astronomy
Cosmology
Physics
Sufism
Cosmology
Metaphysics
Philosophy
TheologiansAsh'ari (Al-Ash'ari)
Al-Bayhaqi
Al-Baqillani
Al-Juwayni
Al-Qushayri
Al-Shahrastani
Al-Ghazali
Al-Taftazani
Al-Maziri
Ibn Furak
Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani
Zakariyya al-Ansari
Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi
Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini
Ibn Aqil
Ibn Tumart
Abdul Qadir Gilani
Abu al-Walid al-Baji
Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi
Ibn al-Jawzi
Qadi Ayyad
Ahmad al-Rifa'i
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
Sayf al-Din al-Amidi
Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam
Taqi al-Din al-Subki
Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi
Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati
Al-Baydawi
Ibn Khaldun
Ibn Arafa
Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi
Ibn Hajar al-Haytami
Al-Sha'rani
Jalal al-Din al-Dawani
Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani
Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi
Ibn Ashir
Al-Bahūtī
Muhammad Mayyara
Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi
'Illish
Ibrahim al-Bajuri
Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad
Ahmad al-Dardir
Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki
Ahmad Zayni Dahlan
Early Sunni
Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit (Hanafiyah)
Malik ibn Anas (Maliki)
Al-Shafi‘i (Shafi‘i)
Maturidi (Al-Maturidi)
Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi
Al-Sarakhsi
Al-Bazdawi
Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi
Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi
Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari
Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi
'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari
Al-Sharif al-Jurjani
Akmal al-Din al-Babarti
Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi
Nur al-Din al-Sabuni
Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi
Siraj al-Din al-Ushi
Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi
Khidr Bey
Ibn Kemal
Ali Qushji
Ali al-Qari
Al-Maydani
Ahmad Sirhindi
Anwar Shah Kashmiri
Shah Waliullah Dehlawi
Shah Abdul Aziz
Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri
Muhammad Zakariya Kandhlawi
Rahmatullah Kairanawi
Murtada al-Zabidi
Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi
Muhammad Abu Zahra
Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar
Rumi
Mu'attila
Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham
Mu'jbira
Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī
Jahmīyya
Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī
Mu'jassimā
Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al-Balkhī (Muqātilīyya)
Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al-Juzjanī al-Kūfī
Jawālikīyya
Rum Abdals
Ibn Karram (Karramiyya)
Murji'ah
Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad-Dimashqī an-Nabati al-Qībtī (Murjī-Qadariyah)
Mu'tazila (Wasil ibn 'Ata')
Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya)
Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm
Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya)
Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya)
Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī
Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya)
Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya)
Ja'far ibn Harb
Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr
Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya)
Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar
Abu al-Husayn al-Basri
Al-Zamakhshari
Amr ibn Ubayd
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Sahib ibn Abbad
Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya)
Najjārīyya
Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī
Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard
Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya)
Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya)
Mustadrakīyya
Salafi Theologians
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibnul Qayyim
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Wahhabism
Al-Shawkani
Rashid Rida
Bin Baz
Ibn al-Uthaymeen
Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i
Al-Albani
Saleh Al-Fawzan
Rabee al-Madkhali
Madkhalism
Syed Nazeer Husain
Ahl-i Hadith
Siddiq Hasan Khan
Zubair Ali Zai
Safar Al-Hawali
Sahwa movement
Salman al-Ouda
Osama bin Laden
Salafi Jihadism
Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi
Hazimism
Yasir Qadhi
Post-Salafism
Shi’a-Imamiyyah(Wilayat al-faqih)
The Twelve Imams
Ali
Hasan ibn Ali
Husayn ibn Ali
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammad al-Baqir
Ja'far al-Sadiq
Musa al-Kadhim
Ali al-Ridha
Muhammad al-Jawad
Ali al-Hadi
Hasan al-Askari
Muhammad al-Mahdi
Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid
Sharif al-Murtaza
Shaykh Tusi
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Allamah Al-Hilli
Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi
Zurarah ibn A'yan
Hisham ibn Hakam
Agha Zia ol Din Araghi
Ja'far Sobhani
Ruhollah Khomeini
Shi’a-Ismailiyyah (Ibn Maymūn)
Ibn Ismāʿīl
Maymūn al-Qaddāḥ's Ismā'īlī doctrine
Al-Qadi al-Nu'man
Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani
Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani
Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi
Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi
Arwa al-Sulayhi
Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine
Dhu'ayb ibn Musa
Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam
Nizārī Ismāʿīlī doctrine
Idris Imad al-Din
Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid
Key booksSunni books
Asas al-Taqdis
Al-Baz al-Ashhab
Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq
Al-Milal wa al-Nihal
Al-Irshad
Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah
Al-Sawad al-A'zam
Kitab al-Tawhid
Tabsirat al-Adilla
Masnavi
Fihi Ma Fihi
Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi
The Moderation in Belief
Shia books
Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya
Al-Amali
Al-Khisal
Awail Al Maqalat
Tashih al-I'tiqad
Tajrid al-I'tiqad
Independent
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity
Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis
Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya
Rasa'il al-Hikma of Druze
Umm al-Kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism

Early Muslim scholars
List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam
Islamic schools and branchesAhl us-Sunnahwa’l-Jama’ahAhl al-Hadith (Traditionalism)
Kullabiyya
Ibn Kullab
Hanbalis
Ibn Hanbal
Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la
Khwaja Abdullah Ansari
Zahiris
Dawud al-Zahiri
Salafism
Ahl-i Hadith
Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan
Wahhabism
Ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Ibn Baz
Ibn al Uthaymeen
Nasiruddin al-Albani
Other Salafi trends
Jihadism
Madkhalism
Sahwa
Salafi Modernism
Muhammad bin Dawud
Maqrizi
Ahl ar-Ra'y (Ilm al-Kalam)
Ashʿari
Malikis
Shafi'is
Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash
Maturidi
Hanafis
Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi
Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi
Necmettin Erbakan – Millî Görüş
Shia IslamZaydi Shi'a
Zayd ibn Ali
Jarudi
Batriyya
Alid dynasties of northern Iran
Hasan al-Utrush
Yahya ibn Umar
Imams of Yemen
Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects
Dukayniyya
Khalafiyya
ImamiMahdiistShi'iteSects inIslamImamiTwelver
Theology of Twelvers
Ja'fari
Akhbari
Usuli
Shaykhism
Qizilbash
Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam
Ghulat
al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites
Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism
Baktāshism
Demir Bābā – Alians
Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs
ImamiIsma'ilism
Fathite
Abdullah al-Aftah
Batiniyyah
Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians
Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes
Fatimids
Musta'li
Tayyibi
Alavi
Dawoodi
Sulaymani
Hafizi
Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism
Nizari
Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins
Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas
Pir Sadardin – Satpanth
KaysanitesShia
Mukhtār
Abū ʿAmra Kaysān
Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya
Hārbīyya
ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi
Janāhiyya
Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya
Hārithīyya
Riyāhīyya
Sam‘ānīyya
Bayān ibn Sam‘ān
Rawendis
Rezāmīyya
Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Muḥammirah
Khurramites
Babak
Mazyar
al-Muqanna
Ishaq al-Turk
Khashabiyya Shia
Other Mahdiists
An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah
Hurufiyya
Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya
Shayki
Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya
Tawussite Shia
ʿAjlan ibn Nawus
Waqifite Shia
Muhakkima(Arbitration)Kharijites
Ajardi
Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād
Maymunīyyah
Sa'labīyyah
Azariqa
Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī
Bayhasīyyah
Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir
Najdat
Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī
Sufri
Abu Qurra
Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al-Nukkari
Ibadism
'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi
Jābir ibn Zayd
Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al-Ifrani
Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi
Wahbiyyah
Azzabas
Murji'ah(Hasan ibnMuḥāmmadibn al-Hanafiyyah)Karrāmīyya
Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī
ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid)
Dhīmmīyya
Hakāiqīyya
Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam)
Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif)
Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh)
Maʿīyya
Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir)
Nūnīyya
Razīnīyya
Sauwāqīyya
Sūramīyya
Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī)
Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh)
Wāhidīyya
Zarībīyya
Other sects
Gaylānīyya
Gaylān ibn Marwān
Yūnusīyya
Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī
Gassānīyya
Gassān al-Kūfī
Tūmanīyya
Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī
Sawbānīyya
Abū Sawbān al-Murjī
Sālehīyya
Sāleh ibn Umar
Shamrīyya
Abū Shamr
Ubaydīyya
Ubayd al-Mūktaib
Ziyādīyya
Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī
Other Murjīs
Al-Harith ibn Surayj
Sa'id ibn Jubayr
Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān
Muhārīb ibn Dithār
Sābit Kutna
Awn ibn Abdullāh
Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr
Umar ibn Zar
Salm ibn Sālem
Hālaf ibn Ayyūb
Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf
Nusayr ibn Yahyā
Ahmad ibn Hārb
Amr ibn Murrah
Mu'shabbihaTamsīl
Jawārībīyya
Dāwūd al-Jawāribî
Hāshwīyya
Hulmānīyya
Abū Hulmān al-Fārisī ad-Dimashqī
Kalandars
Bārāq Bābā
Tasjīm
Khāttabīyya
Bāzīghīyya
Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā
Muʿāmmarīyya
Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar
ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya
Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī
Mufāddālīyya
Mufāddāl ibn Umār as-Sāyrāfī
Ghurābīyya
Mānsūrīyya
Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī
Mughīrīyya
Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī
Mukhāmmīsa
Namiriya
‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya
Saba'īyya
Qadariyah (Ma'badal-Juhani)Alevism
Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya
Baba Ishak – Babai revolt
Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order
Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Rifa`i / Galibi Order
Muʿtazila(Rationalism)
Mā’marīyya
Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī
Bishriyya
Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī
Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī
Bahshamiyya
Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī
Huzaylīyya
Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī
Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī
Ikhshīdiyya
Nazzāmīyya
Ali al-Aswarī
Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī
Hābītīyya
Ahmad ibn Hābīt
Sumamīyya
Sumāma ibn Ashras
Kā‘bīyya
Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī
Quranism
Ahle Qur'an
Kala Kato
Tolu-e-Islam
Muhammad Iqbal
Ghulam Ahmed Pervez
United Submitters International
Rashad Khalifa
Edip Yüksel
IndependentMuslimbeliefsMessianism
Ahmadiyya
Mirza Ghulam
Qadiani
Lahori
Kabbalist Dönmes
Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean
Mahdavīyya
Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris
Nation of Islam
Wallace Fard Muhammad's doctrine
Nur movement
Said Nursî / Fethullah Gülen – Hizmet
Modernism
Modernist Salafism
Muhammad Abduh
Muhammad Asad
Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani
Rashid Rida
Other Islamic modernists
Taṣawwuf
Ṭarīqah
Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi
Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı
Other orders
Tawassul
Other beliefs
Sadaqah
Sunnah
Taqwa
Tawakkul
Tewafuq
Thawab

Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence:
Hanafi
Hanbali
Maliki
Shafi'i
Zahiri

vteIslam topicsOutline of IslamBeliefs
God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad
In Islam
Prophets of Islam
Angels
Revelation
Qadar
Judgement Day
Five Pillars
Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj
HistoryLeaders
Timeline of Islamic history
Succession to Muhammad
Early conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman
Religious texts
Quran
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah
Story of Prophets
Denominations
Sunni
Ash'ari, Maturidi and Hanbali
Sufi
Salafi
Shia
Twelver Shia
Isma'ilism
Alawites
Alevism
Bektashi Alevism
Zaidiyyah
Ibadi
Nation of Islam
Ahmadiyya
Lahori
Quranism
Non-denominational
LifeCulture
Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Flags
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science
Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
LawJurisprudenceEconomics
Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba
Hygiene
Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu
FamilyMarriageSex
Haya
Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Nikah
Nikah mut'ah
Zina
Other aspects
Baligh
Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military
POWs
Slavery
Sources of law
Theological
kalam
Schools of islamic jurisprudence
 Islamic studiesArts
Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery
Medieval science
Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics
Philosophy
Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological
Other areas
Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature
poetry
Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques
 OtherOther religions
Christianity
Mormonism
Protestantism
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism
Apostasy
Apostasy in Islam by country
Ex-Muslims
List of former Muslims
List of ex-Muslim organisations
Related topics
Criticism of Islam
Muhammad
Quran
Cultural Muslim
Islamism
Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Islamophobia
Incidents
Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism

 Islam portal
 Category

vteReligionReligious groups and denominationsWesternAbrahamicJudaism
Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Modern
Zionist
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Samaritanism
Haymanot
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
list
Christianity
Catholicism
Latin
Eastern
Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy
Nestorianism
Ancient
Assyrian
Proto-Protestantism
Hussites/Moravians
Waldensians
Protestantism
Adventism
Anabaptism
Amish
Brethren
Hutterites
Mennonites
Schwenkfelders
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism
Congregationalism
Presbyterianism
Reformed
Charismatic Christianity
Pentecostal
Charismatic
Neo-charismatic
Evangelicalism
Irvingism
Lutheranism
Methodism
Holiness
Nondenominational
Plymouth Brethren
Quakerism
Restorationism
Esoteric
Independent Catholicism
Judaizers
Nontrinitarianism
Bible Students/Jehovah's Witnesses
British Israelism
Christadelphians
Mormonism
Oneness Pentecostalism
Spiritual
Swedenborgianism
Tolstoyan
Unitarianism
list
Islam
Sunni
Ash'ari
Maturidi
Traditionalist theology
Salafism
Wahhabism
Modernist Salafism
Shia
Twelver
Zaidiyyah
Isma'ilism
Alawis
Sufism
Khawarij
Ibadism
Alevism
Ahmadi
Mahdavia
Quranism
Milah Abraham
Non-denominational
list
Other
Bábism
Baháʼí
Druze
Ali-Illahism
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Iranian
Zoroastrianism
Yazidism
Yarsanism
Assianism/Uatsdin
Roshani
EasternEast AsianChinese
Chinese folk religion
Confucianism
Luoism
Nuo
Salvationist
Xiantiandao
Yiguandao
Taoism
Folk Taoism
Yao Taoism
Japanese
Shinto
list
Shugendō
Tenrikyo
Ryukyuan
Korean
Korean shamanism
Cheondoism
Jeungsanism
IndianHinduism
Vaishnavism
Krishnaism
Sri Vaishnavism
Brahma Sampradaya
Nimbarka Sampradaya
Pushtimarg
Mahanubhava
Ramanandi
Warkari
Swaminarayan
Shaivism
Shaiva Siddhanta
Ganapatya
Kashmiri
Kapalika
Kaumaram
Lingayatism
Nath
Balinese
Shaktism
Smartism
Sauraism
Śrauta
Sant Mat
Neo-Hinduism
list
Buddhism
Theravada
Mahayana
Chan/Zen/Thiền
Amidism
Nichiren
Vajrayana
Tibetan
Neo-Buddhism
list
Other
Ayyavazhi
Kalash
Jainism
Digambara
Śvētāmbara
Sarnaism
Kirat Mundhum
Kalash
Srilankan Vedda
Ravidassia
Sikhism
Khalsa
Sects
EthnicAltaic
Turko-Mongolic
Burkhanism
Tengrism
Vattisen Yaly
Tungusic
Evenki
Manchu
Austroasiatic
Vietnamese
Đạo Mẫu
Caodaism
Hoahaoism
Sarnaism
Austronesian
Batak Parmalim
Dayak
Kaharingan
Momolianism
Indonesian
Aliran Kepercayaan
Kejawèn
Kapitayan
Karo Pemena
Malaysian
Philippine Dayawism
Tagalog
Polynesian
Hawaiian
Māori
Sumbese Marapu
Sundanese Wiwitan
NativeAmerican
Abenaki
Anishinaabe
Blackfoot
Californian
Miwok
Ohlone
Pomo
Cherokee
Chilote
Choctaw
Creek
Guarani
Haida
Ho-Chunk
Hopi
Iroquois
Longhouse
Seneca
Wyandot
Jivaroan
Kwakwakaʼwakw
Lakota
Lenape
Mapuche
Mesoamerican
Aztec
Maya
Olmec
Purépecha
Midewiwin
Muisca
Native American Church
Navajo
Nuu-chah-nulth
Pawnee
Tsimshian
Ute
Zuni
Tai and Miao
Ahom
Hmongism
Mo
Satsana Phi
Tibeto-Burmese
Bon
Burmese
Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Heraka
Kiratism
Qiang
Sanamahism
Traditional  AfricanNorth African
Berber
Guanche church
Sub-SaharanAfrican
Akamba
Akan
Baluba
Bantu
Kongo
Zulu
Bushongo
Dinka
Dogon
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Ik
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
Odinani
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Urhobo
Waaqeffanna
Yoruba
Ifá
Diasporic:
Candomblé
Bantu
Jejé
Ketu
Comfa
Convince
Espiritismo
Kumina
Obeah
Palo
Quimbanda
Santería
Tambor de Mina
Trinidad Orisha
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti
Other ethnic
Aboriginal Australian
Inuit
Papuan
Siberian
New religionsSyncretic
Brahmoism
Falun Gong
Japanese
Meivazhi
Modekngei
New Acropolis
New Age
New Thought
Rajneesh
Rastafari
Sant Mat
Radha Soami
Spiritualism
Subud
Tensegrity
Thelema
Theosophy
Neo-Theosophy
Agni Yoga
Transcendental Meditation
Unitarian Universalism
White Brotherhood
ModernPaganism
African
Godianism
Armenian
Baltic
Dievturība
Romuva
Caucasian
Abkhaz
Circassian
Celtic
Druidry
Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Neoshamanism
Ossetian
Polytheistic reconstructionism
Romanian
Slavic
Uralic
Estonian
Finnish
Hungarian
Mari
Mordvin
Sámi
Udmurt
Wicca
Zalmoxianism
list
De novo
Anthroposophy
Discordianism
Eckankar
Fourth Way
Goddess
Jediism
Satanism
Scientology
UFO religion
Raëlism
Historical religions
Prehistoric
Paleolithic
Ainu
Arabian
Armenian
Baltic
Old Prussian
Latvian
Lithuanian
Basque
Celtic
Druidism
Irish
Cook Islands
Dravidian
Egyptian
Atenism
Etruscan
Finnish
Fuegian
Selk'nam
Georgian
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Frankish
Norse
Greek
Mysteries
Orphism
Gnosticism
Hermeticism
Greco-Buddhism
Guanche
Harappan
Hittite
Hungarian
Hurrian
Inca
Jamaican Maroon
Manichaeism
Mazdakism
Melanesian
Mesopotamian
Sumerian
Babylonian
Micronesian
Nauruan
Olmec
Paleo-Balkan
Albanian
Illyrian
Thracian
Dacian
Proto-Indo-Iranian
Vedic
Iranian
Rapa Nui
Roman
Cult of Magna Mater
Imperial cult
Gallo-Roman
Mithraism
Mysteries of Isis
Semitic
Canaanite
Punic
Yahwism
Scythian
Slavic
Somali
Tongan
Urartu
Vainakh
Zapotec
TopicsAspects
Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Call to prayer
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Denomination
Entheogens
Ethnic
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Goddess
Indigenous
Meditation
Monasticism
Monk
Nun
Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Prophecy
Religious experience
Ritual
Liturgy
Purification
Sacrifice
Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship
Theism
Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism
Religiousstudies
Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Neurotheology
Philosophy
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women
Religion and society
Agriculture
Business
Clergy / Laity
monasticism
ordination
Priest
Conversion
assimilation
missionary
proselytism
Disability
Education
Fanaticism
Freedom
pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism
Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Populations
Religiocentrism
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence
persecution
terrorism
war
Wealth
Secularism and irreligion
Agnosticism
Antireligion
Atheism
Criticism
Deconstruction
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated
Overviewsand lists
Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
Names of God
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars

 Category
 Portal

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
2
Other
İslâm Ansiklopedisi





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shia_Islam&oldid=1113249187"
Categories: Shia IslamHidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errorsCS1 maint: unfit URLCS1 maint: numeric names: authors listCS1 Persian-language sources (fa)Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2022CS1 maint: archived copy as titleArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from August 2020Articles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2022Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles containing Persian-language textCS1: long volume valueCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with TDVİA identifiersArticles with multiple identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikinews




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésAsturianuАварAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschދިވެހިބަސްEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalegoГӀалгӀайگیلکی한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlingueИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرҚазақшаKiswahiliKurdîКыргызчаLadinLatinaLatviešuЛезгиLietuviųLingua Franca NovaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMinangkabauမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsQırımtatarcaRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVènetoTiếng Việt文言Winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 30 September 2022, at 14:56 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










