



Thomas Edison - Wikipedia










































Thomas Edison

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
American inventor and businessman (1847–1931)
"Edison" redirects here. For other uses, see Edison (disambiguation).


Thomas EdisonEdison c. 1922BornThomas Alva Edison(1847-02-11)February 11, 1847Milan, Ohio, U.S.DiedOctober 18, 1931(1931-10-18) (aged 84)West Orange, New Jersey, U.S.Burial placeThomas Edison National Historical ParkEducationSelf-educated; some coursework at Cooper UnionOccupationInventorbusinessmanYears active1877–1930Known for
List
Edison effectEdison light bulbEdison screwEdison's Phonograph DollElectric penEdisonian approachEdison–Lalande cellAcoustic telegraphyCarbon microphoneEtheric forceFluoroscopyElectric power distributionGrasshopper telegraphyKinetoscopeNickel–iron batteryPhonographPhonomotorQuadruplex telegraphTasimeterWar of the currents
SpousesMary Stilwell
​ ​(m. 1871; died 1884)​Mina Miller ​(m. 1886)​Children6, including Madeleine, Charles, and TheodoreRelativesLewis Miller (father-in-law)AwardsMatteucci Medal (1887)John Scott Medal (1889)Edward Longstreth Medal (1899)John Fritz Medal (1908)Franklin Medal (1915)Navy Distinguished Service Medal (1920)Congressional Gold Medal (1928)Signature
Thomas Alva Edison (February 11, 1847 – October 18, 1931) was an American inventor and businessman.[1][2][3] He developed many devices in fields such as electric power generation, mass communication, sound recording, and motion pictures.[4] These inventions, which include the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and early versions of the electric light bulb, have had a widespread impact on the modern industrialized world.[5] He was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of organized science and teamwork to the process of invention, working with many researchers and employees. He established the first industrial research laboratory.[6]
Edison was raised in the American Midwest. Early in his career he worked as a telegraph operator, which inspired some of his earliest inventions.[4] In 1876, he established his first laboratory facility in Menlo Park, New Jersey, where many of his early inventions were developed. He later established a botanical laboratory in Fort Myers, Florida, in collaboration with businessmen Henry Ford and Harvey S. Firestone, and a laboratory in West Orange, New Jersey, that featured the world's first film studio, the Black Maria. With 1,093 US patents in his name, as well as patents in other countries, Edison is regarded as the most prolific inventor in American history.[7] Edison married twice and fathered six children. He died in 1931 of complications of diabetes.

Contents

1 Early life
2 Early career
3 Menlo Park laboratory (1876–1886)

3.1 Research and development facility
3.2 Phonograph
3.3 Carbon telephone transmitter
3.4 Electric light
3.5 Electric power distribution
3.6 War of currents


4 West Orange and Fort Myers (1886–1931)
5 Other inventions and projects

5.1 Fluoroscopy
5.2 Tasimeter
5.3 Telegraph improvements
5.4 Motion pictures
5.5 Mining
5.6 Rechargeable battery
5.7 Chemicals
5.8 Spirit Phone


6 Final years and death

6.1 Final years
6.2 Death


7 Marriages and children
8 Views

8.1 On religion, and metaphysics
8.2 On politics


9 Awards
10 Tributes

10.1 Places and people named for Edison
10.2 Museums and memorials
10.3 Companies bearing Edison's name
10.4 Awards named in honor of Edison
10.5 Other items named after Edison
10.6 In popular culture


11 People who worked for Edison
12 See also
13 References
14 Bibliography
15 External links

15.1 Museums
15.2 Information and media




Early life
 Edison as a boy, 1861
Thomas Edison was born in 1847 in Milan, Ohio, but grew up in Port Huron, Michigan, after the family moved there in 1854.[8] He was the seventh and last child of Samuel Ogden Edison Jr. (1804–1896, born in Marshalltown, Nova Scotia) and Nancy Matthews Elliott (1810–1871, born in Chenango County, New York).[9][10] His patrilineal family line was Dutch by way of New Jersey;[11] the surname had originally been "Edeson".[12] His grandfather John Edeson fled New Jersey for Nova Scotia in 1784, his father moved to Vienna, Ontario and fled after his involvement in the Rebellion of 1837.[13]
Edison was taught reading, writing, and arithmetic by his mother, who used to be a school teacher. He attended school for only a few months. However, one biographer described him as a very curious child who learned most things by reading on his own.[14] As a child, he became fascinated with technology and spent hours working on experiments at home.[15]
Edison developed hearing problems at the age of 12. The cause of his deafness has been attributed to a bout of scarlet fever during childhood and recurring untreated middle-ear infections. He subsequently concocted elaborate fictitious stories about the cause of his deafness.[16] As he was completely deaf in one ear and barely hearing in the other, it is alleged[17] that Edison would listen to a music player or piano by clamping his teeth into the wood to absorb the sound waves into his skull. As he got older, Edison believed his hearing loss allowed him to avoid distraction and concentrate more easily on his work. Modern-day historians and medical professionals have suggested he may have had ADHD.[15]
It is known that early in his career he enrolled in a chemistry course at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art to support his work on a new telegraphy system with Charles Batchelor. This appears to have been his only enrollment in courses at an institution of higher learning.[18][19][20]

Early career
Thomas Edison began his career as a news butcher, selling newspapers, candy and vegetables on the trains running from Port Huron to Detroit. He turned a $50-a-week profit by age 13, most of which went to buying equipment for electrical and chemical experiments.[21] At age 15, in 1862, he saved 3-year-old Jimmie MacKenzie from being struck by a runaway train.[22] Jimmie's father, station agent J. U. MacKenzie of Mount Clemens, Michigan, was so grateful that he trained Edison as a telegraph operator. Edison's first telegraphy job away from Port Huron was at Stratford Junction, Ontario, on the Grand Trunk Railway.[23] He also studied qualitative analysis and conducted chemical experiments until he left the job rather than be fired after being held responsible for a near collision of two trains.[24][25][26]
Edison obtained the exclusive right to sell newspapers on the road, and, with the aid of four assistants, he set in type and printed the Grand Trunk Herald, which he sold with his other papers.[26] This began Edison's long streak of entrepreneurial ventures, as he discovered his talents as a businessman. Ultimately, his entrepreneurship was central to the formation of some 14 companies, including General Electric, still one of the largest publicly traded companies in the world.[27][28]
In 1866, at the age of 19, Edison moved to Louisville, Kentucky, where, as an employee of Western Union, he worked the Associated Press bureau news wire. Edison requested the night shift, which allowed him plenty of time to spend at his two favorite pastimes—reading and experimenting. Eventually, the latter pre-occupation cost him his job. One night in 1867, he was working with a lead–acid battery when he spilt sulfuric acid onto the floor. It ran between the floorboards and onto his boss's desk below. The next morning Edison was fired.[29]
His first patent was for the electric vote recorder, U.S. Patent 90,646, which was granted on June 1, 1869.[30] Finding little demand for the machine, Edison moved to New York City shortly thereafter. One of his mentors during those early years was a fellow telegrapher and inventor named Franklin Leonard Pope, who allowed the impoverished youth to live and work in the basement of his Elizabeth, New Jersey, home, while Edison worked for Samuel Laws at the Gold Indicator Company. Pope and Edison founded their own company in October 1869, working as electrical engineers and inventors. Edison began developing a multiplex telegraphic system, which could send two messages simultaneously, in 1874.[31]

Menlo Park laboratory (1876–1886)
Research and development facility
 Edison's Menlo Park Laboratory, reconstructed at Greenfield Village at Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan
Edison's major innovation was the establishment of an industrial research lab in 1876. It was built in Menlo Park, a part of Raritan Township (now named Edison Township in his honor) in Middlesex County, New Jersey, with the funds from the sale of Edison's quadruplex telegraph. After his demonstration of the telegraph, Edison was not sure that his original plan to sell it for $4,000 to $5,000 was right, so he asked Western Union to make a bid. He was surprised to hear them offer $10,000 ($239,500 in today's dollars[32]), which he gratefully accepted.[33] The quadruplex telegraph was Edison's first big financial success, and Menlo Park became the first institution set up with the specific purpose of producing constant technological innovation and improvement. Edison was legally credited with most of the inventions produced there, though many employees carried out research and development under his direction. His staff was generally told to carry out his directions in conducting research, and he drove them hard to produce results.
William Joseph Hammer, a consulting electrical engineer, started working for Edison and began his duties as a laboratory assistant in December 1879. He assisted in experiments on the telephone, phonograph, electric railway, iron ore separator, electric lighting, and other developing inventions. However, Hammer worked primarily on the incandescent electric lamp and was put in charge of tests and records on that device (see Hammer Historical Collection of Incandescent Electric Lamps). In 1880, he was appointed chief engineer of the Edison Lamp Works. In his first year, the plant under general manager Francis Robbins Upton turned out 50,000 lamps. According to Edison, Hammer was "a pioneer of incandescent electric lighting".[34] Frank J. Sprague, a competent mathematician and former naval officer, was recruited by Edward H. Johnson and joined the Edison organization in 1883. One of Sprague's contributions to the Edison Laboratory at Menlo Park was to expand Edison's mathematical methods. Despite the common belief that Edison did not use mathematics, analysis of his notebooks reveal that he was an astute user of mathematical analysis conducted by his assistants such as Francis Robbins Upton, for example, determining the critical parameters of his electric lighting system including lamp resistance by an analysis of Ohm's Law, Joule's Law and economics.[35]

 Edison's Menlo Park Lab, 1880
Nearly all of Edison's patents were utility patents, which were protected for 17 years and included inventions or processes that are electrical, mechanical, or chemical in nature. About a dozen were design patents, which protect an ornamental design for up to 14 years. As in most patents, the inventions he described were improvements over prior art. The phonograph patent, in contrast, was unprecedented in describing the first device to record and reproduce sounds.[36]
In just over a decade, Edison's Menlo Park laboratory had expanded to occupy two city blocks. Edison said he wanted the lab to have "a stock of almost every conceivable material".[37] A newspaper article printed in 1887 reveals the seriousness of his claim, stating the lab contained "eight thousand kinds of chemicals, every kind of screw made, every size of needle, every kind of cord or wire, hair of humans, horses, hogs, cows, rabbits, goats, minx, camels ... silk in every texture, cocoons, various kinds of hoofs, shark's teeth, deer horns, tortoise shell ... cork, resin, varnish and oil, ostrich feathers, a peacock's tail, jet, amber, rubber, all ores ..." and the list goes on.[38]
Over his desk Edison displayed a placard with Sir Joshua Reynolds' famous quotation: "There is no expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the real labor of thinking."[39] This slogan was reputedly posted at several other locations throughout the facility.
In Menlo Park, Edison had created the first industrial laboratory concerned with creating knowledge and then controlling its application.[40] Edison's name is registered on 1,093 patents.[41]

Phonograph
 Photograph of Edison with his phonograph (2nd model), taken in Mathew Brady's Washington, D.C. studio in April 1878




Mary Had a Little Lamb

Thomas Edison reciting "Mary Had a Little Lamb" in 1929.
Problems playing this file? See media help.

Edison began his career as an inventor in Newark, New Jersey, with the automatic repeater and his other improved telegraphic devices, but the invention that first gained him wider notice was the phonograph in 1877.[42] This accomplishment was so unexpected by the public at large as to appear almost magical. Edison became known as "The Wizard of Menlo Park".[5]
His first phonograph recorded on tinfoil around a grooved cylinder. Despite its limited sound quality and that the recordings could be played only a few times, the phonograph made Edison a celebrity. Joseph Henry, president of the National Academy of Sciences and one of the most renowned electrical scientists in the US, described Edison as "the most ingenious inventor in this country... or in any other".[43] In April 1878, Edison traveled to Washington to demonstrate the phonograph before the National Academy of Sciences, Congressmen, Senators and US President Hayes.[44] The Washington Post described Edison as a "genius" and his presentation as "a scene... that will live in history".[45] Although Edison obtained a patent for the phonograph in 1878,[46] he did little to develop it until Alexander Graham Bell, Chichester Bell, and Charles Tainter produced a phonograph-like device in the 1880s that used wax-coated cardboard cylinders.

Carbon telephone transmitter
In 1876, Edison began work to improve the microphone for telephones (at that time called a "transmitter") by developing a carbon microphone, which consists of two metal plates separated by granules of carbon that would change resistance with the pressure of sound waves. A steady direct current is passed between the plates through the granules and the varying resistance results in a modulation of the current, creating a varying electric current that reproduces the varying pressure of the sound wave.
Up to that point, microphones, such as the ones developed by Johann Philipp Reis and Alexander Graham Bell, worked by generating a weak current. The carbon microphone works by modulating a direct current and, subsequently, using a transformer to transfer the signal so generated to the telephone line. Edison was one of many inventors working on the problem of creating a usable microphone for telephony by having it modulate an electrical current passed through it.[47] His work was concurrent with Emile Berliner's loose-contact carbon transmitter (who lost a later patent case against Edison over the carbon transmitter's invention[48]) and David Edward Hughes study and published paper on the physics of loose-contact carbon transmitters (work that Hughes did not bother to patent).[47][49]
Edison used the carbon microphone concept in 1877 to create an improved telephone for Western Union.[48] In 1886, Edison found a way to improve a Bell Telephone microphone, one that used loose-contact ground carbon, with his discovery that it worked far better if the carbon was roasted. This type was put in use in 1890[48] and was used in all telephones along with the Bell receiver until the 1980s.

Electric light
Main article: Incandescent light bulb
 Thomas Edison's first successful model of light bulb, used in public demonstration at Menlo Park, December 1879
In 1878, Edison began working on a system of electrical illumination, something he hoped could compete with gas and oil-based lighting.[50] He began by tackling the problem of creating a long-lasting incandescent lamp, something that would be needed for indoor use. However, Thomas Edison did not invent the light bulb.[51] In 1840, British scientist Warren de la Rue developed an efficient light bulb using a coiled platinum filament but the high cost of platinum kept the bulb from becoming a commercial success.[52] Many other inventors had also devised incandescent lamps, including Alessandro Volta's demonstration of a glowing wire in 1800 and inventions by Henry Woodward and Mathew Evans. Others who developed early and commercially impractical incandescent electric lamps included Humphry Davy, James Bowman Lindsay, Moses G. Farmer,[53] William E. Sawyer, Joseph Swan, and Heinrich Göbel.
These early bulbs all had flaws such as an extremely short life and requiring a high electric current to operate which made them difficult to apply on a large scale commercially.[54]: 217–218  In his first attempts to solve these problems, Edison tried using a filament made of cardboard, carbonized with compressed lampblack. This burnt out too quickly to provide lasting light. He then experimented with different grasses and canes such as hemp, and palmetto, before settling on bamboo as the best filament.[55] Edison continued trying to improve this design and on November 4, 1879, filed for U.S. patent 223,898 (granted on January 27, 1880) for an electric lamp using "a carbon filament or strip coiled and connected to platina contact wires".[56]
The patent described several ways of creating the carbon filament including "cotton and linen thread, wood splints, papers coiled in various ways".[56] It was not until several months after the patent was granted that Edison and his team discovered that a carbonized bamboo filament could last over 1,200 hours.[57]

 U.S. Patent #223898: Electric-Lamp, issued January 27, 1880
In 1878, Edison formed the Edison Electric Light Company in New York City with several financiers, including J. P. Morgan, Spencer Trask,[58] and the members of the Vanderbilt family. Edison made the first public demonstration of his incandescent light bulb on December 31, 1879, in Menlo Park. It was during this time that he said: "We will make electricity so cheap that only the rich will burn candles."[59]

 The Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company's new steamship, the Columbia, was the first commercial application for Edison's incandescent light bulb in 1880.
Henry Villard, president of the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company, attended Edison's 1879 demonstration. Villard was impressed and requested Edison install his electric lighting system aboard Villard's company's new steamer, the Columbia. Although hesitant at first, Edison agreed to Villard's request. Most of the work was completed in May 1880, and the Columbia went to New York City, where Edison and his personnel installed Columbia's new lighting system. The Columbia was Edison's first commercial application for his incandescent light bulb. The Edison equipment was removed from Columbia in 1895.[60][61][62][63]
In 1880, Lewis Latimer, a draftsman and an expert witness in patent litigation, began working for the United States Electric Lighting Company run by Edison's rival Hiram S. Maxim.[64] While working for Maxim, Latimer invented a process for making carbon filaments for light bulbs and helped install broad-scale lighting systems for New York City, Philadelphia, Montreal, and London. Latimer holds the patent for the electric lamp issued in 1881, and a second patent for the "process of manufacturing carbons" (the filament used in incandescent light bulbs), issued in 1882.
On October 8, 1883, the US patent office ruled that Edison's patent was based on the work of William E. Sawyer and was, therefore, invalid. Litigation continued for nearly six years. In 1885, Latimer switched camps and started working with Edison.[65] On October 6, 1889, a judge ruled that Edison's electric light improvement claim for "a filament of carbon of high resistance" was valid.[66] To avoid a possible court battle with yet another competitor, Joseph Swan, whose British patent had been awarded a year before Edison's, he and Swan formed a joint company called Ediswan to manufacture and market the invention in Britain.
The incandescent light bulb patented by Edison also began to gain widespread popularity in Europe as well. Mahen Theatre in Brno (in what is now the Czech Republic), opened in 1882, and was the first public building in the world to use Edison's electric lamps. Francis Jehl, Edison's assistant in the invention of the lamp, supervised the installation.[67] In September 2010, a sculpture of three giant light bulbs was erected in Brno, in front of the theater.[68] The first Edison light bulbs in the Nordic countries were installed at the weaving hall of the Finlayson's textile factory in Tampere, Finland in March 1882.[69]

Electric power distribution
After devising a commercially viable electric light bulb on October 21, 1879, Edison developed an electric "utility" to compete with the existing gas light utilities.[70] On December 17, 1880, he founded the Edison Illuminating Company, and during the 1880s, he patented a system for electricity distribution. The company established the first investor-owned electric utility in 1882 on Pearl Street Station, New York City. On September 4, 1882, Edison switched on his Pearl Street generating station's electrical power distribution system, which provided 110 volts direct current (DC) to 59 customers in lower Manhattan.[71]
In January 1882, Edison switched on the first steam-generating power station at Holborn Viaduct in London. The DC supply system provided electricity supplies to street lamps and several private dwellings within a short distance of the station. On January 19, 1883, the first standardized incandescent electric lighting system employing overhead wires began service in Roselle, New Jersey.

War of currents
Main article: War of the currents
 Extravagant displays of electric lights quickly became a feature of public events, as in this picture from the 1897 Tennessee Centennial Exposition.
As Edison expanded his direct current (DC) power delivery system, he received stiff competition from companies installing alternating current (AC) systems. From the early 1880s, AC arc lighting systems for streets and large spaces had been an expanding business in the US. With the development of transformers in Europe and by Westinghouse Electric in the US in 1885–1886, it became possible to transmit AC long distances over thinner and cheaper wires, and "step down" (reduce) the voltage at the destination for distribution to users. This allowed AC to be used in street lighting and in lighting for small business and domestic customers, the market Edison's patented low voltage DC incandescent lamp system was designed to supply.[72] Edison's DC empire suffered from one of its chief drawbacks: it was suitable only for the high density of customers found in large cities. Edison's DC plants could not deliver electricity to customers more than one mile from the plant, and left a patchwork of unsupplied customers between plants. Small cities and rural areas could not afford an Edison style system at all, leaving a large part of the market without electrical service. AC companies expanded into this gap.
Edison expressed views that AC was unworkable and the high voltages used were dangerous. As George Westinghouse installed his first AC systems in 1886, Thomas Edison struck out personally against his chief rival stating, "Just as certain as death, Westinghouse will kill a customer within six months after he puts in a system of any size. He has got a new thing and it will require a great deal of experimenting to get it working practically."[73] Many reasons have been suggested for Edison's anti-AC stance. One notion is that the inventor could not grasp the more abstract theories behind AC and was trying to avoid developing a system he did not understand. Edison also appeared to have been worried about the high voltage from misinstalled AC systems killing customers and hurting the sales of electric power systems in general.[74] Primary was the fact that Edison Electric based their design on low voltage DC and switching a standard after they had installed over 100 systems was, in Edison's mind, out of the question. By the end of 1887, Edison Electric was losing market share to Westinghouse, who had built 68 AC-based power stations to Edison's 121 DC-based stations. To make matters worse for Edison, the Thomson-Houston Electric Company of Lynn, Massachusetts (another AC-based competitor) built 22 power stations.[75]
Parallel to expanding competition between Edison and the AC companies was rising public furor over a series of deaths in the spring of 1888 caused by pole mounted high voltage alternating current lines.  This turned into a media frenzy against high voltage alternating current and the seemingly greedy and callous lighting companies that used it.[76][77] Edison took advantage of the public perception of AC as dangerous, and joined with self-styled New York anti-AC crusader Harold P. Brown in a propaganda campaign, aiding Brown in the public electrocution of animals with AC, and supported legislation to control and severely limit AC installations and voltages (to the point of making it an ineffective power delivery system) in what was now being referred to as a "battle of currents". The development of the electric chair was used in an attempt to portray AC as having a greater lethal potential than DC and smear Westinghouse at the same time via Edison colluding with Brown and Westinghouse's chief AC rival, the Thomson-Houston Electric Company, to make sure the first electric chair was powered by a Westinghouse AC generator.
Thomas Edison's staunch anti-AC tactics were not sitting well with his own stockholders. By the early 1890s, Edison's company was generating much smaller profits than its AC rivals, and the War of Currents would come to an end in 1892 with Edison forced out of controlling his own company. That year, the financier J.P. Morgan engineered a merger of Edison General Electric with Thomson-Houston that put the board of Thomson-Houston in charge of the new company called General Electric. General Electric now controlled three-quarters of the US electrical business and would compete with Westinghouse for the AC market.[78][79]

West Orange and Fort Myers (1886–1931)
 Thomas A. Edison Industries Exhibit, Primary Battery section, 1915
Edison moved from Menlo Park after the death of his first wife, Mary, in 1884, and purchased a home known as "Glenmont" in 1886 as a wedding gift for his second wife, Mina, in Llewellyn Park in West Orange, New Jersey. In 1885, Thomas Edison bought 13 acres of property in Fort Myers, Florida, for roughly $2,750 (equivalent to $82,938 in 2021) and built what was later called Seminole Lodge as a winter retreat.[80] The main house and guest house are representative of Italianate architecture and Queen Anne style architecture. The building materials were pre-cut in New England by the Kennebec Framing Company and the Stephen Nye Lumber Company of Fairfield Maine. The materials were then shipped down by boat and were constructed at a cost of $12,000 each, which included the cost of interior furnishings.[81] Edison and Mina spent many winters at their home in Fort Myers, and Edison tried to find a domestic source of natural rubber.[82]
Due to the security concerns around World War I, Edison suggested forming a science and industry committee to provide advice and research to the US military, and he headed the Naval Consulting Board in 1915.[83]
Edison became concerned with America's reliance on foreign supply of rubber and was determined to find a native supply of rubber.  Edison's work on rubber took place largely at his research laboratory in Fort Myers, which has been designated as a National Historic Chemical Landmark.[84]
The laboratory was built after Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and Harvey Firestone pulled together $75,000 to form the Edison Botanical Research Corporation. Initially, only Ford and Firestone were to contribute funds to the project, while Edison did all the research. Edison, however, wished to contribute $25,000 as well. Edison did the majority of the research and planting, sending results and sample rubber residues to his West Orange Lab. Edison employed a two-part Acid-base extraction, to derive latex from the plant material after it was dried and crushed to a powder.[85] After testing 17,000 plant samples, he eventually found an adequate source in the Goldenrod plant. Edison decided on Solidago leavenworthii, also known as Leavenworth's Goldenrod. The plant, which normally grows roughly 3–4 feet tall with a 5% latex yield, was adapted by Edison through cross-breeding to produce plants twice the size and with a latex yield of 12%.[86]
During the 1911 New York Electrical show, Edison told representatives of the copper industry it was a shame he didn't have a "chunk of it". The representatives decided to give a cubic foot of solid copper weighing 486 pounds with their gratitude inscribed on it in appreciation for his part in the "continuous stimulation in the copper industry".[87][88][89]

Other inventions and projects
Fluoroscopy
Edison is credited with designing and producing the first commercially available fluoroscope, a machine that uses X-rays to take radiographs. Until Edison discovered that calcium tungstate fluoroscopy screens produced brighter images than the barium platinocyanide screens originally used by Wilhelm Röntgen, the technology was capable of producing only very faint images.
The fundamental design of Edison's fluoroscope is still in use today, although Edison abandoned the project after nearly losing his own eyesight and seriously injuring his assistant, Clarence Dally. Dally made himself an enthusiastic human guinea pig for the fluoroscopy project and was exposed to a poisonous dose of radiation; he later died (at the age of 39) of injuries related to the exposure, mediastinal cancer.[90]
In 1903, a shaken Edison said: "Don't talk to me about X-rays, I am afraid of them."[91] Nonetheless, his work was important in the development of a technology still used today.[92]

Tasimeter
Edison invented a highly sensitive device, that he named the tasimeter, which measured infrared radiation.  His impetus for its creation was the desire to measure the heat from the solar corona during the total Solar eclipse of July 29, 1878. The device was not patented since Edison could find no practical mass-market application for it.[93]

Telegraph improvements
The key to Edison's initial reputation and success was his work in the field of telegraphy. With knowledge gained from years of working as a telegraph operator, he learned the basics of electricity. This, together with his studies in chemistry at the Cooper Union, allowed him to make his early fortune with the stock ticker, the first electricity-based broadcast system.[18][19] His innovations also included the development of the quadruplex, the first system which could simultaneously transmit four messages through a single wire.[94]

Motion pictures
 The June 1894 Leonard–Cushing bout. Each of the six one-minute rounds recorded by the Kinetoscope was made available to exhibitors for $22.50.[95] Customers who watched the final round saw Leonard score a knockdown.
Edison was granted a patent for a motion picture camera, labeled the "Kinetograph". He did the electromechanical design while his employee William Kennedy Dickson, a photographer, worked on the photographic and optical development. Much of the credit for the invention belongs to Dickson.[54] In 1891, Thomas Edison built a Kinetoscope or peep-hole viewer. This device was installed in penny arcades, where people could watch short, simple films. The kinetograph and kinetoscope were both first publicly exhibited May 20, 1891.[96]
In April 1896, Thomas Armat's Vitascope, manufactured by the Edison factory and marketed in Edison's name, was used to project motion pictures in public screenings in New York City. Later, he exhibited motion pictures with voice soundtrack on cylinder recordings, mechanically synchronized with the film.
Officially the kinetoscope entered Europe when wealthy American businessman Irving T. Bush (1869–1948) bought from the Continental Commerce Company of Frank Z. Maguire and Joseph D. Baucus a dozen machines. Bush placed from October 17, 1894, the first kinetoscopes in London. At the same time, the French company Kinétoscope Edison Michel et Alexis Werner bought these machines for the market in France. In the last three months of 1894, the Continental Commerce Company sold hundreds of kinetoscopes in Europe (i.e. the Netherlands and Italy). In Germany and in Austria-Hungary, the kinetoscope was introduced by the Deutsche-österreichische-Edison-Kinetoscop Gesellschaft, founded by the Ludwig Stollwerck[97] of the Schokoladen-Süsswarenfabrik Stollwerck & Co of Cologne.
The first kinetoscopes arrived in Belgium at the Fairs in early 1895. The Edison's Kinétoscope Français, a Belgian company, was founded in Brussels on January 15, 1895, with the rights to sell the kinetoscopes in Monaco, France and the French colonies. The main investors in this company were Belgian industrialists. On May 14, 1895, the Edison's Kinétoscope Belge was founded in Brussels. Businessman Ladislas-Victor Lewitzki, living in London but active in Belgium and France, took the initiative in starting this business. He had contacts with Leon Gaumont and the American Mutoscope and Biograph Co. In 1898, he also became a shareholder of the Biograph and Mutoscope Company for France.[98]
Edison's film studio made nearly 1,200 films. The majority of the productions were short films showing everything from acrobats to parades to fire calls including titles such as Fred Ott's Sneeze (1894), The Kiss (1896), The Great Train Robbery (1903), Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1910), and the first Frankenstein film in 1910. In 1903, when the owners of Luna Park, Coney Island announced they would execute Topsy the elephant by strangulation, poisoning, and electrocution (with the electrocution part ultimately killing the elephant), Edison Manufacturing sent a crew to film it, releasing it that same year with the title Electrocuting an Elephant.

 A Day with Thomas Edison (1922)
As the film business expanded, competing exhibitors routinely copied and exhibited each other's films.[99] To better protect the copyrights on his films, Edison deposited prints of them on long strips of photographic paper with the U.S. copyright office. Many of these paper prints survived longer and in better condition than the actual films of that era.[100]
In 1908, Edison started the Motion Picture Patents Company, which was a conglomerate of nine major film studios (commonly known as the Edison Trust). Thomas Edison was the first honorary fellow of the Acoustical Society of America, which was founded in 1929.
Edison said his favorite movie was The Birth of a Nation. He thought that talkies had "spoiled everything" for him. "There isn't any good acting on the screen. They concentrate on the voice now and have forgotten how to act. I can sense it more than you because I am deaf."[101] His favorite stars were Mary Pickford and Clara Bow.[102]

Mining
Starting in the late 1870s, Edison became interested and involved with mining. High-grade iron ore was scarce on the east coast of the United States and Edison tried to mine low-grade ore. Edison developed a process using rollers and crushers that could pulverize rocks up to 10 tons. The dust was then sent between three giant magnets that would pull the iron ore from the dust. Despite the failure of his mining company, the Edison Ore Milling Company, Edison used some of the materials and equipment to produce cement.[103]
In 1901, Edison visited an industrial exhibition in the Sudbury area in Ontario, Canada and thought nickel and cobalt deposits there could be used in his production of electrical equipment. He returned as a mining prospector and is credited with the original discovery of the Falconbridge ore body. His attempts to mine the ore body were not successful, and he abandoned his mining claim in 1903.[104] A street in Falconbridge, as well as the Edison Building, which served as the head office of Falconbridge Mines, are named for him.

Rechargeable battery
Further information: Nickel–iron battery § History
 Share of the Edison Storage Battery Company, issued October 19, 1903
In the late 1890s, Edison worked on developing a lighter, more efficient rechargeable battery (at that time called an "accumulator"). He looked on them as something customers could use to power their phonographs but saw other uses for an improved battery, including electric automobiles.[105] The then available lead acid rechargeable batteries were not very efficient and that market was already tied up by other companies so Edison pursued using alkaline instead of acid. He had his lab work on many types of materials (going through some 10,000 combinations), eventually settling on a nickel-iron combination. Besides his experimenting Edison also probably had access to the 1899 patents for a nickel–iron battery by the Swedish inventor Waldemar Jungner.[106]
Edison obtained a US and European patent for his nickel–iron battery in 1901 and founded the Edison Storage Battery Company, and by 1904 it had 450 people working there. The first rechargeable batteries they produced were for electric cars, but there were many defects, with customers complaining about the product. When the capital of the company was exhausted, Edison paid for the company with his private money. Edison did not demonstrate a mature product until 1910: a very efficient and durable nickel-iron-battery with lye as the electrolyte. The nickel–iron battery was never very successful; by the time it was ready, electric cars were disappearing, and lead acid batteries had become the standard for turning over gas-powered car starter motors.[106]

Chemicals
At the start of World War I, the American chemical industry was primitive.  Most chemicals were imported from Europe.  The outbreak of war in August 1914 resulted in an immediate shortage of imported chemicals.  One of particular importance to Edison was phenol, which was used to make phonograph records—presumably as phenolic resins of the Bakelite type.
At the time, phenol came from coal as a by-product of coke oven gases or manufactured gas for gas lighting.  Phenol could be nitrated to picric acid and converted to ammonium picrate, a shock resistant high explosive suitable for use in artillery shells.  A telling of the phenol story is found in The Aspirin Wars.[107] Most phenol had been imported from Britain, but with war, Parliament blocked exports and diverted most to production of ammonium picrate.  Britain also blockaded supplies from Germany.
Edison responded by undertaking production of phenol at his Silver Lake facility using processes developed by his chemists.[108] He built two plants with a capacity of six tons of phenol per day.  Production began the first week of September, one month after hostilities began in Europe.  He built two plants to produce raw material benzene at Johnstown, Pennsylvania, and Bessemer, Alabama, replacing supplies previously from Germany.  Edison also manufactured aniline dyes, which previously had been supplied by the German dye trust.  Other wartime products include xylene, p-phenylenediamine, shellac, and pyrax.  Wartime shortages made these ventures profitable.  In 1915, his production capacity was fully committed by midyear.
Phenol was a critical material because two derivatives were in high growth phases. Bakelite, the original thermoset plastic, had been invented in 1909. Aspirin, too was a phenol derivative.  Invented in 1899, it had become a block buster drug. Bayer had acquired a plant to manufacture in the US in Rensselaer, New York, but struggled to find phenol to keep their plant running during the war.  Edison was able to oblige.
Bayer relied on Chemische Fabrik von Heyden, in Piscataway, New Jersey, to convert phenol to salicylic acid, which they converted to aspirin.  (See Great Phenol plot.) It is said that German companies bought up supplies of phenol to block production of ammonium picrate.  Edison preferred not to sell phenol for military uses.  He sold his surplus to Bayer, who had it converted to salicylic acid by Heyden, some of which was exported.

Spirit Phone
In 1920, Edison spoke to American Magazine, saying that he had been working on a device for some time to see if it was possible to communicate with the dead.[109][110] Edison said the device would work on scientific principles not by an occult means.[109] The announcement caused a press heyday,[110][109] though the actual nature of this invention remained a mystery, as there were no details for some time. Until In 2015, Philippe Baudouin, a French journalist, found a copy of Edison's Diary in a thrift store with a chapter not found in the previously published editions. The new chapter details Edison's theories of the afterlife and the scientific basis by which communication  with them might be achieved.[109]

Final years and death
Final years
 Henry Ford, Thomas Edison, and Harvey Firestone, respectively. Ft. Myers, Florida, February 11, 1929
Henry Ford, the automobile magnate, later lived a few hundred feet away from Edison at his winter retreat in Fort Myers. Ford once worked as an engineer for the Edison Illuminating Company of Detroit and met Edison at a convention of affiliated Edison illuminating companies in Brooklyn, NY in 1896. Edison was impressed with Ford's internal combustion engine automobile and encouraged its developments. They were friends until Edison's death. Edison and Ford undertook annual motor camping trips from 1914 to 1924. Harvey Firestone and naturalist John Burroughs also participated.
In 1928, Edison joined the Fort Myers Civitan Club. He believed strongly in the organization, writing that "The Civitan Club is doing things—big things—for the community, state, and nation, and I certainly consider it an honor to be numbered in its ranks."[111] He was an active member in the club until his death, sometimes bringing Henry Ford to the club's meetings.
Edison was active in business right up to the end. Just months before his death, the Lackawanna Railroad inaugurated suburban electric train service from Hoboken to Montclair, Dover, and Gladstone, New Jersey. Electrical transmission for this service was by means of an overhead catenary system using direct current, which Edison had championed. Despite his frail condition, Edison was at the throttle of the first electric MU (Multiple-Unit) train to depart Lackawanna Terminal in Hoboken in September 1930, driving the train the first mile through Hoboken yard on its way to South Orange.[112]
This fleet of cars would serve commuters in northern New Jersey for the next 54 years until their retirement in 1984. A plaque commemorating Edison's inaugural ride can be seen today in the waiting room of Lackawanna Terminal in Hoboken, which is presently operated by New Jersey Transit.[112]
Edison was said to have been influenced by a popular fad diet in his last few years; "the only liquid he consumed was a pint of milk every three hours".[54] He is reported to have believed this diet would restore his health. However, this tale is doubtful. In 1930, the year before Edison died, Mina said in an interview about him, "Correct eating is one of his greatest hobbies."[113] She also said that during one of his periodic "great scientific adventures", Edison would be up at 7:00, have breakfast at 8:00, and be rarely home for lunch or dinner, implying that he continued to have all three.[101]
Edison became the owner of his Milan, Ohio, birthplace in 1906. On his last visit, in 1923, he was reportedly shocked to find his old home still lit by lamps and candles.[114]

Death
Edison died of complications of diabetes on October 18, 1931, in his home, "Glenmont" in Llewellyn Park in West Orange, New Jersey, which he had purchased in 1886 as a wedding gift for Mina. Rev. Stephen J. Herben officiated at the funeral;[115] Edison is buried behind the home.[116][117]
Edison's last breath is reportedly contained in a test tube at The Henry Ford museum near Detroit. Ford reportedly convinced Charles Edison to seal a test tube of air in the inventor's room shortly after his death, as a memento.[118] A plaster death mask and casts of Edison's hands were also made.[119] Mina died in 1947.

Marriages and children
On December 25, 1871, at the age of 24, Edison married 16-year-old Mary Stilwell (1855–1884), whom he had met two months earlier; she was an employee at one of his shops. They had three children:

Marion Estelle Edison (1873–1965), nicknamed "Dot"[120]
Thomas Alva Edison Jr. (1876–1935), nicknamed "Dash"[121]
William Leslie Edison (1878–1937) Inventor, graduate of the Sheffield Scientific School at Yale, 1900.[122]
Mary Edison died at age 29 on August 9, 1884, of unknown causes: possibly from a brain tumor[123] or a morphine overdose. Doctors frequently prescribed morphine to women in those years to treat a variety of causes, and researchers believe that her symptoms could have been from morphine poisoning.[124]
Edison generally preferred spending time in the laboratory to being with his family.[41]

 Mina Miller Edison in 1906
On February 24, 1886, at the age of 39, Edison married the 20-year-old Mina Miller (1865–1947) in Akron, Ohio.[125] She was the daughter of the inventor Lewis Miller, co-founder of the Chautauqua Institution, and a benefactor of Methodist charities. They also had three children together:

Madeleine Edison (1888–1979), who married John Eyre Sloane.[126][127]
Charles Edison (1890–1969), Governor of New Jersey (1941–1944), who took over his father's company and experimental laboratories upon his father's death.[128]
Theodore Miller Edison (1898–1992), (MIT Physics 1923), credited with more than 80 patents.
Mina outlived Thomas Edison, dying on August 24, 1947.[129][130]
Wanting to be an inventor, but not having much of an aptitude for it, Thomas Edison's son, Thomas Alva Edison Jr., became a problem for his father and his father's business. Starting in the 1890s, Thomas Jr. became involved in snake oil products and shady and fraudulent enterprises producing products being sold to the public as "The Latest Edison Discovery". The situation became so bad that Thomas Sr. had to take his son to court to stop the practices, finally agreeing to pay Thomas Jr. an allowance of $35 (equivalent to $1,056 in 2021)[32] per week, in exchange for not using the Edison name; the son began using aliases, such as Burton Willard. Thomas Jr., experiencing alcoholism, depression and ill health, worked at several menial jobs, but by 1931 (towards the end of his life) he would obtain a role in the Edison company, thanks to the intervention of his half-brother Charles.[131][132]

Views
On religion, and metaphysics
 This 1910 New York Times Magazine feature states that "Nature, the supreme power, (Edison) recognizes and respects, but does not worship. Nature is not merciful and loving, but wholly merciless, indifferent." Edison is quoted as saying "I am not an individual—I am an aggregate of cells, as, for instance, New York City is an aggregate of individuals. Will New York City go to heaven?"
Historian Paul Israel has characterized Edison as a "freethinker".[54] Edison was heavily influenced by Thomas Paine's The Age of Reason.[54] Edison defended Paine's "scientific deism", saying, "He has been called an atheist, but atheist he was not. Paine believed in a supreme intelligence, as representing the idea which other men often express by the name of deity."[54] In 1878, Edison joined the Theosophical Society in New Jersey,[133] but according to its founder, H. P. Blavatsky, he was not a very active member.[134] In an October 2, 1910, interview in the New York Times Magazine, Edison stated:


Nature is what we know. We do not know the gods of religions. And nature is not kind, or merciful, or loving. If God made me—the fabled God of the three qualities of which I spoke: mercy, kindness, love—He also made the fish I catch and eat. And where do His mercy, kindness, and love for that fish come in? No; nature made us—nature did it all—not the gods of the religions.[135]


Edison was accused of being an atheist for those remarks, and although he did not allow himself to be drawn into the controversy publicly, he clarified himself in a private letter:

You have misunderstood the whole article, because you jumped to the conclusion that it denies the existence of God. There is no such denial, what you call God I call Nature, the Supreme intelligence that rules matter. All the article states is that it is doubtful in my opinion if our intelligence or soul or whatever one may call it lives hereafter as an entity or disperses back again from whence it came, scattered amongst the cells of which we are made.[54]
He also stated, "I do not believe in the God of the theologians; but that there is a Supreme Intelligence I do not doubt."[136] In 1920, Edison set off a media sensation when he told B. C. Forbes of American Magazine that he was working on a "spirit phone" to allow communication with the dead, a story which other newspapers and magazines repeated.[137] Edison later disclaimed the idea, telling the New York Times in 1926 that "I really had nothing to tell him, but I hated to disappoint him so I thought up this story about communicating with spirits, but it was all a joke."[138]

On politics
Edison was a supporter of women's suffrage.[139] He said in 1915, "Every woman in this country is going to have the vote."[139] Edison notably signed onto a statement supporting women's suffrage which was published to counter anti-suffragist literature spread by Senator James Edgar Martine.[140]
Nonviolence was key to Edison's political and moral views, and when asked to serve as a naval consultant for World War I, he specified he would work only on defensive weapons and later noted, "I am proud of the fact that I never invented weapons to kill." Edison's philosophy of nonviolence extended to animals as well, about which he stated: "Nonviolence leads to the highest ethics, which is the goal of all evolution. Until we stop harming all other living beings, we are still savages."[141][142] He was a vegetarian[143] but not a vegan in actual practice, at least near the end of his life.[54] Following a tour of Europe in 1911, Edison spoke negatively about "the belligerent nationalism that he had sensed in every country he visited".[144]
Edison was an advocate for monetary reform in the United States. He was ardently opposed to the gold standard and debt-based money. Famously, he was quoted in the New York Times as stating: "Gold is a relic of Julius Caesar, and interest is an invention of Satan."[145] In the same article, he expounded upon the absurdity of a monetary system in which the taxpayer of the United States, in need of a loan, can be compelled to pay in return perhaps double the principal, or even greater sums, due to interest. Edison argued that, if the government can produce debt-based money, it could equally as well produce money that was a credit to the taxpayer.[145]
In May 1922, he published a proposal, entitled "A Proposed Amendment to the Federal Reserve Banking System".[146] In it, he detailed an explanation of a commodity-backed currency, in which the Federal Reserve would issue interest-free currency to farmers, based on the value of commodities they produced. During a publicity tour that he took with friend and fellow inventor, Henry Ford, he spoke publicly about his desire for monetary reform. For insight, he corresponded with prominent academic and banking professionals. In the end, however, Edison's proposals failed to find support and were abandoned.[147][148]

Awards
 Portrait of Edison by Abraham Archibald Anderson (1890), National Portrait GalleryThe following is an incomplete list of awards given to Edison during his lifetime and posthumously:
In 1878, Edison was awarded an honorary PhD from Union College[149]
The President of the Third French Republic, Jules Grévy, on the recommendation of his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, and with the presentations of the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, Louis Cochery, designated Edison with the distinction of an Officer of the Legion of Honour (Légion d'honneur) by decree on November 10, 1881;[150] Edison was also named a Chevalier in the Legion in 1879, and a Commander in 1889.[151]
In 1887, Edison won the Matteucci Medal. In 1890, he was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.
The Philadelphia City Council named Edison the recipient of the John Scott Medal in 1889.[151]
In 1899, Edison was awarded the Edward Longstreth Medal of The Franklin Institute.[152]
He was named an Honorable Consulting Engineer at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition World's fair in 1904.[151]
In 1908, Edison received the American Association of Engineering Societies John Fritz Medal.[151]
In 1915, Edison was awarded Franklin Medal of The Franklin Institute for discoveries contributing to the foundation of industries and the well-being of the human race.[153]
In 1920, the United States Navy department awarded him the Navy Distinguished Service Medal.[151]
In 1923, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers created the Edison Medal and he was its first recipient.[151]
In 1927, he was granted membership in the National Academy of Sciences.[151]
On May 29, 1928, Edison received the Congressional Gold Medal.[151]
In 1983, the United States Congress, pursuant to Senate Joint Resolution 140 (Public Law 97–198), designated February 11, Edison's birthday, as National Inventor's Day.[154]
Life magazine (USA), in a special double issue in 1997, placed Edison first in the list of the "100 Most Important People in the Last 1000 Years", noting that the light bulb he promoted "lit up the world". In the 2005 television series The Greatest American, he was voted by viewers as the fifteenth greatest.
In 2008, Edison was inducted in the New Jersey Hall of Fame.
In 2010, Edison was honored with a Technical Grammy Award.
In 2011, Edison was inducted into the Entrepreneur Walk of Fame and named a Great Floridian by the governor and cabinet of Florida.[155]
Tributes
Places and people named for Edison
 Thomas Edison commemorative stamp, issued on the 100th anniversary of his birth in 1947
Several places have been named after Edison, most notably the town of Edison, New Jersey. Thomas Edison State University, nationally known for adult learners, is in Trenton, New Jersey. Two community colleges are named for him: Edison State College (now Florida SouthWestern State College) in Fort Myers, Florida, and
Edison Community College in Piqua, Ohio.[156] There are numerous high schools named after Edison (see Edison High School) and other schools including Thomas A. Edison Middle School. Footballer Pelé's father originally named him Edison, as a tribute to the inventor of the light bulb, but the name was incorrectly listed on his birth certificate as "Edson".[157]
The small town of Alva just east of Fort Myers took Edison's middle name.
In 1883, the City Hotel in Sunbury, Pennsylvania was the first building to be lit with Edison's three-wire system. The hotel was renamed The Hotel Edison upon Edison's return to the city on 1922.[158]
In 1954, Lake Thomas A Edison in California was named after Edison to mark the 75th anniversary of the incandescent light bulb.[159]
Edison was on hand to turn on the lights at the Hotel Edison in New York City when it opened in 1931.[160]
Three bridges around the United States have been named in Edison's honor: the Edison Bridge in New Jersey,[161] the Edison Bridge in Florida,[162] and the Edison Bridge in Ohio.[163]
In space, his name is commemorated in asteroid 742 Edisona.
Mount Edison in the Chugach Mountains of Alaska was named after him in 1955.[164]

Museums and memorials
 Statue of young Thomas Edison by the railroad tracks in Port Huron, Michigan. The Blue Water Bridge can be seen in the background.
In West Orange, New Jersey, the 13.5 acres (5.5 hectares) Glenmont estate is maintained and operated by the National Park Service as the Edison National Historic Site, as is his nearby laboratory and workshops including the reconstructed "Black Maria"—the world's first movie studio.[165]
The Thomas Alva Edison Memorial Tower and Museum is in the town of Edison, New Jersey.[166]
In Beaumont, Texas, there is an Edison Museum, though Edison never visited there.[167]
The Port Huron Museum, in Port Huron, Michigan, restored the original depot that Thomas Edison worked out of as a young news butcher. The depot has been named the Thomas Edison Depot Museum.[168] The town has many Edison historical landmarks, including the graves of Edison's parents, and a monument along the St. Clair River.
In Detroit, the Edison Memorial Fountain in Grand Circus Park was created to honor his achievements. The limestone fountain was dedicated October 21, 1929, the fiftieth anniversary of the creation of the light bulb.[169] On the same night, The Edison Institute was dedicated in nearby Dearborn.
He was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in 1969.[170]
A bronze statue of Edison was placed in the National Statuary Hall Collection at the United States Capitol in 2016, with the formal dedication ceremony held on September 20 of that year. The Edison statue replaced one of 19th-century state governor William Allen that had been one of Ohio's two allowed contributions to the collection.[171]

Companies bearing Edison's name
 Edison in 1915
Edison General Electric, merged with Thomson-Houston Electric Company to form General Electric
Commonwealth Edison, now part of Exelon
Consolidated Edison
Edison International
Detroit Edison, a unit of DTE Energy
Edison S.p.A., a unit of Italenergia
Trade association the Edison Electric Institute, a lobbying and research group for investor-owned utilities in the United States
Edison Ore-Milling Company
Edison Portland Cement Company
Ohio Edison (merged with Centerior in 1997 to form First Energy)
Southern California Edison
Awards named in honor of Edison
The Edison Medal was created on February 11, 1904, by a group of Edison's friends and associates. Four years later the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE), later IEEE, entered into an agreement with the group to present the medal as its highest award. The first medal was presented in 1909 to Elihu Thomson. It is the oldest award in the area of electrical and electronics engineering, and is presented annually "for a career of meritorious achievement in electrical science, electrical engineering or the electrical arts".
In the Netherlands, the major music awards are named the Edison Award after him. The award is an annual Dutch music prize, awarded for outstanding achievements in the music industry, and is one of the oldest music awards in the world, having been presented since 1960.
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers has awarded the Thomas A. Edison Patent Award since 1997 to individual patents that demonstrate a significant impact on the practice of mechanical engineering.[172]

Other items named after Edison
The United States Navy named the USS Edison (DD-439), a Gleaves class destroyer, in his honor in 1940. The ship was decommissioned a few months after the end of World War II.[173] In 1962, the Navy commissioned USS Thomas A. Edison (SSBN-610), a fleet ballistic missile nuclear-powered submarine.[174]

In popular culture
Main article: Thomas Edison in popular culture
Thomas Edison has appeared in popular culture as a character in novels, films, comics and video games. His prolific inventing helped make him an icon and he has made appearances in popular culture during his lifetime down to the present day. Edison is also portrayed in popular culture as an adversary of Nikola Tesla.[175]
On February 11, 2011, on what would have been Thomas Edison's 164th birthday, Google's homepage featured an animated Google Doodle commemorating his many inventions. When the cursor was hovered over the doodle, a series of mechanisms seemed to move, causing a light bulb to glow.[176]

People who worked for Edison
The following is a list of people who worked for Thomas Edison in his laboratories at Menlo Park or West Orange or at the subsidiary electrical businesses that he supervised.

Edward Goodrich Acheson – chemist, worked at Menlo Park 1880–1884
William Symes Andrews – started at the Menlo Park machine shop 1879
Charles Batchelor – "chief experimental assistant"
John I. Beggs – manager of Edison Illuminating Company in New York, 1886
William Kennedy Dickson – joined Menlo Park in 1883, worked on the motion picture camera
Justus B. Entz – joined Edison Machine Works in 1887
Reginald Fessenden – worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1886
Henry Ford – engineer Edison Illuminating Company Detroit, Michigan, 1891–1899
William Joseph Hammer – started as laboratory assistant Menlo Park in 1879
Miller Reese Hutchison – inventor of hearing aid
Edward Hibberd Johnson – started in 1909, chief engineer at West Orange laboratory 1912–1918
Samuel Insull – started in 1881, rose to become VP of General Electric (1892) then President of Chicago Edison
Kunihiko Iwadare – joined Edison Machine Works in 1887
Francis Jehl – laboratory assistant Menlo Park 1879–1882
Arthur E. Kennelly – engineer, experimentalist at West Orange laboratory 1887–1894
John Kruesi – started 1872, was head machinist, at Newark, Menlo Park, Edison Machine Works
Lewis Howard Latimer – hired 1884 as a draftsman, continued working for General Electric
John W. Lieb – worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1881
Thomas Commerford Martin – electrical engineer, worked at Menlo Park 1877–1879
George F. Morrison – started at Edison Lamp Works 1882
Edwin Stanton Porter – joined the Edison Manufacturing Company 1899
Frank J. Sprague – joined Menlo Park 1883, became known as the "Father of Electric Traction".
Nikola Tesla – electrical engineer and inventor, worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1884
Francis Robbins Upton – mathematician/physicist, joined Menlo Park 1878
Theo Wangemann – personal assistant to Edison
See also
Edison Pioneers – a group formed in 1918 by employees and other associates of Thomas Edison
Thomas Alva Edison Birthplace

References


^ Adrian Wooldridge (September 15, 2016). "The alphabet of success". The Economist. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016.

^ Sproule, Anna (2000). Thomas Alva Edison: The World's Greatest Inventor (1st U.S. ed.). Woodbridge, CT: Blackbirch Press. ISBN 978-1-56711-331-0.

^ "Hangout – Thomas Edison". state.nj.us. State of New Jersey.

^ a b "Con Edison: A Brief History of Con Edison – electricity". Coned.com. January 1, 1998. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved October 11, 2012.

^ a b "The Wizard of Menlo Park". The Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on March 5, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Walsh, Bryan (July 15, 2009). "The Electrifying Edison". Time. Archived from the original on July 18, 2009. Retrieved December 31, 2013.

^ Boyer, Paul S., ed. (2001). The Oxford Companion to United States History. Oxford University Press. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-19-989109-2. OCLC 57680178.

^ "Edison's Early Years". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020.

^ "National Historic Landmarks Program (NHL)". Tps.cr.nps.gov. January 12, 1965. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2013.

^ Thomas Edison's Inventive Life; by Joyce Bedi Archived April 1, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved March 31, 2018

^ The Yankee Road: Tracing the Journey of the New England Tribe that Created Modern America, Vol. 2: Domination. Wheatmark, Inc. March 7, 2018. p. 146. ISBN 978-1-62787-519-6. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2018.

^ Baldwin, Neal (1995). Edison: Inventing the Century. Hyperion. pp. 3–5. ISBN 978-0-7868-6041-8.

^ "Samuel and Nancy Elliott Edison – Thomas Edison National Historical Park (U.S. National Park Service)". Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021.

^ "Edison Biography". National Park Service. Archived from the original on June 24, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.

^ a b The Near-Death Experience That Set Thomas Edison on the Road to Fame Archived July 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Barbara Maranzani, March 5, 2020

^ The medical mystery that helped make Thomas Edison an inventor Archived July 20, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, PBS October 22, 2018

^ "Thomas Edison's Greatest Inventio". atlantic.com. October 13, 2019. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019.

^ a b Conot, Robert (1979). Thomas A. Edison: A Streak of Luck. New York: Da Capo Press.

^ a b Topper, Robert Q. "Thomas Edison, Chemistry and Cooper Union". Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021.

^ Thomas Edison Is An Innovative Icon, And Here's Why Archived July 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Odyssey, March 26, 2018

^ Derek Thompson (2019). "Thomas Edison's Greatest Invention". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019.

^ Maranzani, Barbara (October 15, 2020). "Thomas Edison's Near-Death Experience Set Him on the Road to Fame". Biography. Retrieved September 23, 2022.

^ Baldwin, p. 37

^ Bryan, Mike (2017). "Edison the Man and His Life (Part One): The First 30 Years". www.capsnews.org. Retrieved September 23, 2022.

^ "Stratford's Railway Industry" (PDF). Visit Stratford. Stratford Tourism. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 7, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017.

^ a b  Homans, James E., ed. (1918). "Edison, Thomas Alva" . The Cyclopædia of American Biography. New York: The Press Association Compilers, Inc.

^ "GE emerges world's largest company: Forbes". Trading Markets.com. April 10, 2009. Archived from the original on August 5, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2010.

^ "GE emerges world's largest company: Forbes". The Indian Express. April 9, 2009. Archived from the original on March 28, 2010. Retrieved February 7, 2010.

^ Baldwin, pp. 40–41

^ The Edison Papers Archived February 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers University. Retrieved March 20, 2007.

^ "Life of Thomas Alva Edison" Archived October 17, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Inventing Entertainment: The Early Motion Pictures and Sound Recordings of the Edison Companies, Library of Congress.

^ a b 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved April 16, 2022.

^ Trollinger, Vernon (February 11, 2013). "Happy Birthday, Thomas Edison!". Bounce Energy. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.

^ "The Thomas A. Edison Papers". Edison.rutgers.edu. Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved January 29, 2009.

^ Evans, Harold, They Made America. Little, Brown and Company, New York, 2004. ISBN 978-0-316-27766-2. p. 152.

^ Wilson, Wendell E. "Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931)". The Mineralogical Record. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Shulman, Seth (1999). Owning the Future. Houghton Mifflin Company. pp. 158–160. ISBN 9780395841754.

^ "AERONAUTICS: Real Labor". Time. December 8, 1930. Archived from the original on January 25, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2008.

^ Israel, Paul. "Edison's Laboratory". The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ a b "Business: The Quintessential Innovator". Time. October 22, 1979. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 23, 2016.

^ "The Life of Thomas A. Edison". The Library of Congress. Archived from the original on January 20, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Edison, Thomas A. 1989. Menlo Park: The early years, April 1876 – December 1877. Edited by P. B. Israel, K. A. Nier and L. Carlat. Vol. 3, The papers of Thomas A Edison. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Doc. 1117

^ Baldwin, Neil. 2001. Edison: Inventing the century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 97–98

^ Washington Post. 1878. Genius before science. The Washington Post, April 19.

^ Edison, Thomas A. 1877. Telephones or speaking-telegraphs. US patent 203,018 filed December 13, 1877, and issued April 30, 1878.

^ a b Adrian Hope, 100 Years of Microphone, New Scientist May 11, 1978, Vol. 78, No. 1102, p. 378 ISSN 0262-4079

^ a b c IEEE Global History Network: Carbon Transmitter. New Brunswick, NJ: IEEE History Center "Carbon Transmitter". Archived from the original on March 18, 2010. Retrieved January 14, 2009.

^ David Edward Hughes: Concertinist and Inventor "David Edward Hughes: Concertinist and Inventor" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2012.

^ Howard B. Rockman, Intellectual Property Law for Engineers and Scientists, John Wiley & Sons – 2004, p. 131

^ The real history of electricity is more gripping than The Current War Archived July 18, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, The new Scientist, July 26, 2019

^ Who Invented the Light Bulb? Archived June 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine LiveScience, August 17, 2017

^ "Moses G. Farmer, Eliot's Inventor". Archived from the original on June 19, 2006. Retrieved March 11, 2006.

^ a b c d e f g h Israel, Paul (2000). Edison: A Life of Invention. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-36270-8.

^ Thomas A. Edison Papers Archived September 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers School of Arts and Sciences

^ a b U.S. Patent 0,223,898

^ Flannery, L. G. (Pat) (1960). John Hunton's Diary, Volume 3. pp. 68, 69.

^ "Handbook of Research on Venture Capital". Colin Mason. Edward Elgar Publishing. January 1, 2012. pg 17

^ "Keynote Address – Second International ALN1 Conference (PDF)". Archived from the original on June 13, 2010.

^ Jehl, Francis Menlo Park reminiscences : written in Edison's restored Menlo Park laboratory Archived January 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village, Whitefish, Mass, Kessinger Publishing, July 1, 2002, p. 564

^ Dalton, Anthony
A long, dangerous coastline: shipwreck tales from Alaska to California Archived January 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
Heritage House Publishing Company, February 1, 2011 – 128 pp.

^ Swann, p. 242.

^ "Lighting A Revolution: 19th Century Promotion". Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on October 10, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.

^ "Lewis Howard Latimer". National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2007.

^ Meet Lewis Latimer, the African American who enlightened Thomas Edison Archived July 18, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Grist February 11, 2015

^ Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.

^ "About the Memory of a Theatre". National Theatre Brno. Archived from the original on January 19, 2008. Retrieved December 30, 2007.

^ Michal Kašpárek (September 8, 2010). "Sculpture of three giant light bulbs: in memory of Thomas Alva Edison". Brnonow.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2013.

^ Kautonen, Mika (November 18, 2015). "A history of continuous change and innovation". Smart Tampere Ecosystem. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021.

^ Ahmad Faruqui, Kelly Eakin, Pricing in Competitive Electricity Markets, Springer Science & Business Media – 2000, p. 67

^ "A brief history of Con Edison:"Electricity"". Coned.com. January 1, 1998. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2013.

^ Jill Jonnes, Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, And The Race To Electrify The World, Random House – 2004, pp. 54–60

^ Maury Klein, The Power Makers: Steam, Electricity, and the Men Who Invented Modern America, Bloomsbury Publishing US – 2008, p. 257

^ Empires Of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, And The Race To Electrify The Country By Jill Jonnes p. 146

^ Robert l. Bradley, Jr (2011). Edison to Enron. ISBN 978-1-118-19251-1. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.

^ Jill Jonnes, Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, And The Race To Electrify The World, Random House – 2004, p. 143

^ Mark Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death, Bloomsbury Publishing US – 2009, pp. 139–140

^ Mark Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death, Bloomsbury Publishing US – 2009, p. 268

^ Robert L. Bradley Jr., Edison to Enron: Energy Markets and Political Strategies, John Wiley & Sons – 2011, pp. 28–29

^ Cosden, M. (2015). Edison and Ford in Florida. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 9781467114646

^ "Edison and Ford Winter Estates. Media kit. Retrieved on 10/9/2019" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019.

^ Reisert, Sarah (2016). "Home Away from Home". Distillations. Vol. 2, no. 2. pp. 46–47. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018.

^ "Thomas Edison's Vision". United States Navy. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2013. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels seized the opportunity created by Edison's public comments to enlist Edison's support. He agreed to serve as the head of a new body of civilian experts – the Naval Consulting Board – to advise the Navy on science and technology.

^ "Edison Botanic Research Laboratory – Edison & Ford Winter Estates – (239) 334-7419". Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2016.

^ "Green Chemistry: The Nexus Blog: Thomas Edison'... | ACS Network". communities.acs.org. May 21, 2014. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.

^ Growing American Rubber by Mark Finlay

^ LeCain, Timothy J. (June 22, 2009). Mass Destruction: The Men and Giant Mines That Wired America and Scarred the Planet. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 9780813548562. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.

^ Worthington, George (1911). Electrical Review. McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.

^ Tyer, Brad (March 26, 2013). Opportunity, Montana: Big Copper, Bad Water, and the Burial of an American Landscape. Beacon Press. ISBN 9780807003305. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.

^ "Thomas Edison". Radiopaedia. June 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2020. He spent hours blowing glass tubes, which were laced with calcium tungstate, for an early model fluoroscope.

^ Duke University Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library: Edison fears the hidden perils of the x-rays. New York Worldb/, August 3, 1903, Durham, NC.

^ "Thomas Edison". Radiopaedia. June 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2020. Radiology Legacy, invention of fluoroscopy

^ Baron, David (June 6, 2017). American Eclipse: A Nation's Epic Race to Catch the Shadow of the Moon and Win the Glory of the World. Liveright. p. 223. ISBN 978-1631490163. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.

^ Josephson, Matthew. "Thomas Edison: American Inventor". Brittanica. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2021.

^ Leonard–Cushing fight Archived September 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Part of the Library of Congress/Inventing Entertainment educational website. Retrieved December 14, 2006.

^ "History of Edison Motion Pictures". Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved October 14, 2007.

^ "Martin Loiperdinger. Film & Schokolade. Stollwercks Geschäfte mit lebenden Bildern. KINtop Schriften Stroemfeld Verlag, Frankfurt am Main, Basel 1999 ISBN 3878777604 (Book and Videocassette)". Victorian-cinema.net. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved January 29, 2009.

^ Guido Convents, Van Kinetoscoop tot Cafe-Cine de Eerste Jaren van de Film in Belgie, 1894–1908, pp. 33–69. Universitaire Pers Leuven. Leuven: 2000. Guido Convents, "'Edison's Kinetscope in Belgium, or, Scientists, Admirers, Businessmen, Industrialists and Crooks", pp. 249–258. in C. Dupré la Tour, A. Gaudreault, R. Pearson (Ed.) Cinema at the Turn of the Century. Québec, 1999 

^ Siegmund Lubin (1851–1923) Archived August 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Who's Who of Victorian Cinema. Retrieved August 20, 2007.

^ "History of Edison Motion Pictures: Early Edison Motion Picture Production (1892–1895)" Archived August 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Memory.loc.gov, Library of Congress. Retrieved August 20, 2007.

^ a b Reader's Digest, March 1930, pp. 1042–1044, "Living With a Genius", condensed from The American Magazine February 1930

^ "Edison Wears Silk Nightshirt, Hates Talkies, Writes Wife", Capital Times, October 30, 1930

^ "Edison's Companies – The Edison Papers". Archived from the original on October 8, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2016.

^ "Thomas Edison". Greater Sudbury Heritage Museums. Archived from the original on September 10, 2010. Retrieved December 30, 2007.

^ David John Cole, Eve Browning, Eve Browning Cole, Fred E. H. Schroeder, Encyclopedia of Modern Everyday Inventions, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003, pages 45–46

^ a b Seth Fletcher, Bottled Lightning: Superbatteries, Electric Cars, and the New Lithium Economy, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, May 10, 2011, pages 14–16

^ Mann, Charles C. And Plummer, Mark L (1991). The Aspirin Wars: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition. Alfred A. Knopf, NY, ISBN 0-394-57894-5, pp. 38–40

^ Conot, Robert (1979), A Streak of Luck: The Life & Legend of Thomas Alva Edison, Seaview Books, NY, pp. 413–414

^ a b c d Zarrelli, Natalie (October 18, 2016). "Dial-a-Ghost on Thomas Edison's Least Successful Invention: the Spirit Phone". Atlas Obscura. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.

^ a b Tablang, Kristin (October 25, 2019). "Thomas Edison, B.C. Forbes And The Mystery Of The Spirit Phone". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.

^ Armbrester, Margaret E. (1992). The Civitan Story. Birmingham, AL: Ebsco Media. p. 34.

^ a b Holland, Kevin J. (2001). Classic American Railroad Terminals. Osceola, WI: MBI. ISBN 9780760308325. OCLC 45908903.

^ Edison at Home Archived May 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 24, 1930.

^ "His Life". The Thomas Edison Birthplace Museum. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020.

^ "Rev. S. Herben Dead at 75". Plainfield Courier-News. Plainfield, New Jersey. February 23, 1937. p. 11. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved March 19, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. 

^ "Thomas Edison Dies in Coma at 84; Family With Him as the End Comes; Inventor Succumbs at 3:24 am. After Fight for Life Since He Was Stricken on August 1. World-Wide Tribute Is Paid to Him as a Benefactor of Mankind". The New York Times. October 18, 1931. West Orange, New Jersey, Sunday, October 18, 1931. Thomas Alva Edison died at 3:24 o'clock this morning at his home, Glenmont, in the Llewellyn Park section of this city. The great inventor, the fruits of whose genius so magically transformed the everyday world, was 84 years and 8 months old.

^ Benoit, Tod (2003). Where are they buried? How did they die?. Black Dog & Leventhal. p. 560. ISBN 978-1-57912-678-0.

^ "Is Thomas Edison's last breath preserved in a test tube in the Henry Ford Museum?" Archived September 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, The Straight Dope, September 11, 1987. Retrieved August 20, 2007.

^ Neil Baldwin, Edison: Inventing the Century, University of Chicago Press – 2001, 408

^ Baldwin 1995, p.60

^ Baldwin 1995, p.67

^ "Older Son To Sue To Void Edison Will; William, Second Child of the Counsel". The New York Times. October 31, 1931. The will of Thomas A. Edison, filed in Newark last Thursday, which leaves the bulk of the inventor's $12 million estate to the sons of his second wife, was attacked as unfair yesterday by William L. Edison, second son of the first wife, who announced at the same time that he would sue to break it.

^ "The Life of Thomas Edison" Archived January 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, American Memory, Library of Congress. Retrieved March 3, 2009.

^ "Thomas Edison's First Wife May Have Died of a Morphine Overdose" Archived November 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers Today. Retrieved November 18, 2011

^ "Thomas Edison's Children". IEEE Global History Network. IEEE. December 16, 2010. Archived from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2011.

^ "Madeleine Edison a Bride. Inventor's Daughter Married to J. E. Sloan by Mgr. Brann". The New York Times. June 18, 1914.

^ "Mrs. John Eyre Sloane Has a Son at the Harbor Sanitarium Here". The New York Times. January 10, 1931.

^ "Charles Edison, 78, Ex-Governor of Jersey and U.S. Aide, Is Dead". The New York Times. August 1969.

^ "Edison's Widow Very III". The New York Times. August 21, 1947.

^ "Rites for Mrs. Edison". The New York Times. August 26, 1947.

^ René Rondeau (1997). "LOST IN HISTORY: Thomas A. Edison, Junior". Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.

^ "Thomas Alva Edison Jr". National Park Service. Archived from the original on April 20, 1997. Retrieved December 30, 2017.

^ "Theosophical Society Members 1875–1942 – Historical membership list of the Theosophical Society (Adyar) 1875–1942". tsmembers.org. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018.

^ Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna (1980). Collected Writings, Vol. XII. Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House. p. 130.

^ ""No Immortality of the Soul" says Thomas A. Edison. In Fact, He Doesn't Believe There Is a Soul—Human Beings Only an Aggregate of Cells and the Brain Only a Wonderful Machine, Says Wizard of Electricity". The New York Times. October 2, 1910. Thomas A. Edison in the following interview for the first time speaks to the public on the vital subjects of the human soul and immortality. It will be bound to be a most fascinating, an amazing statement, from one of the most notable and interesting men of the age ... Nature is what we know. We do not know the gods of religions. And nature is not kind, or merciful, or loving. If God made me—the fabled God of the three qualities of which I spoke: mercy, kindness, love—He also made the fish I catch and eat. And where do His mercy, kindness, and love for that fish come in? No; nature made us—nature did it all—not the gods of the religions.

^ The Freethinker Archived June 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (1970), G.W. Foote & Company, Volume 90, p. 147

^ "Edison's Forgotten 'Invention': A Phone That Calls the Dead". GE Reports. October 28, 2010. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013.

^ "Invention Geek – Edison Spirit Phone?". Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2013.

^ a b "Edison Comes Out Unqalifiedly for Suffrage". Passaic Daily News. October 7, 1915. p. 12. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.

^ "Edison, Harvey, Hughes and Other Leading Men Refute Senator Martine". Passaic Daily News. October 7, 1915. p. 12. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Cited in Innovate Like Edison: The Success System of America's Greatest Inventor Archived June 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine by Sarah Miller Caldicott, Michael J. Gelb, p. 37.

^ "Vegetarianism Quotes from Noteworthy People". Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016.

^ "10 Genius Vegetarians". Mines Green Circle. April 20, 2011. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016.

^ "Review: Thomas Edison's life of ceaseless action". America Magazine. April 24, 2020. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021.

^ a b "Ford sees wealth in muscle shoals" (PDF). The New York Times. December 6, 1921. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Edison, 1922

^ Hammes, D.L.; Wills, D.T. (2006). "Thomas Edison's Monetary Option". Journal of the History of Economic Thought. 28 (3): 295. doi:10.1080/10427710600857773. S2CID 154880573.

^ Hammes, David L. (2012). Harvesting Gold: Thomas Edison's Experiment to Re-Invent American Money. Mahler Publishing.

^ Scientific American. Munn & Company. July 13, 1878. p. 21. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021.

^ The same decree awarded German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz with the designation of Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, as well as Alexander Graham Bell. The decree preamble cited "for services provided to the Congress and to the International Electrical Exhibition"

^ a b c d e f g h Kennelly, Arthur E. (1932). Biographical Memoir of Thomas Alva Edison (PDF). National Academy of Sciences. pp. 300–301. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2012.

^ "Franklin Laureate Database – Edward Longstreth Medal 1899 Laureates". Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2011.

^ "Thomas Alva Edison – Acknowledgement". The Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ "Proclamation 5013 – National Inventors' Day, 1983". Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ "Great Floridian Program". Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved April 2, 2012.

^ "Edison Community College (Ohio)". Edison.cc.oh.us. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved January 29, 2009.

^ Pelé; Orlando Duarte; Alex Bellos (2006). Pelé: The Autobiography. London: Simon & Schuster UK Ltd. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-7432-7582-8. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved October 2, 2010.

^ "The Edison Hotel". City of Sunbury. Archived from the original on September 23, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ "Depression/War Years" (PDF). Initial Information Package for the Big Creek Hydroelectric System. Southern California Edison (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2021.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Hotel Edison. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ "The History & Technology of the Edison Bridge & Driscoll Bridge over the Raritan River, New Jersey" (PDF). New Jersey Department of Transportation. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 6, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2013.

^ Solomon, Irvin D. (2001). Thomas Edison: The Fort Myers Connection. Arcadia Publishing. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-7385-1369-0.

^ "5533.18 Thomas A. Edison memorial bridge". Ohio Revised Statutes. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ "Mount Edison". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved March 25, 2020.

^ "Thomas Edison National Historical Park (U.S. National Park Service)". Nps.gov. December 15, 2013. Archived from the original on October 10, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2013.

^ Menlo Park Museum, Tower-Restoration Archived September 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved September 28, 2010.

^ Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.

^ Thomas Edison Depot Archived January 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved September 28, 2010.

^ Edison Memorial Fountain Archived September 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine at Buildings of Detroit. Retrieved September 28, 2010.

^ "Thomas A. Edison". automotivehalloffame.org. The Automotive Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 27, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020.

^ Wehrman, Jessica (September 21, 2016). "Thomas Edison statue dedicated in U.S. Capitol's Statuary Hall". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved February 3, 2017.

^ "Thomas A. Edison Patent Award". American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021.

^ "Edison". Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.

^ "Thomas A. Edison". Naval History and Heritage Command. April 14, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015.

^ Knapp, Alex (May 18, 2012). "Nikola Tesla Wasn't God and Thomas Edison Wasn't the Devil". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017.

^ "Thomas Edison's Birthday". Google. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2016.


Bibliography
External video Booknotes interview with Neil Baldwin on Edison: Inventing the Century, March 19, 1995, C-SPAN Booknotes interview with Jill Jonnes on Empires of Light, October 26, 2003, C-SPAN

Albion, Michele Wehrwein. (2008). The Florida Life of Thomas Edison. Gainesville: University Press of Florida. ISBN 978-0-8130-3259-7.
Adams, Glen J. (2004). The Search for Thomas Edison's Boyhood Home. ISBN 978-1-4116-1361-4.
Angel, Ernst (1926). Edison. Sein Leben und Erfinden. Berlin: Ernst Angel Verlag.
Baldwin, Neil (1995). Edison: Inventing the Century. Hyperion. ISBN 978-0-226-03571-0.
Clark, Ronald William (1977). Edison: The man who made the future. London: Macdonald & Jane's: Macdonald and Jane's. ISBN 978-0-354-04093-8.
Conot, Robert (1979). A Streak of Luck. New York: Seaview Books. ISBN 978-0-87223-521-2.
Davis, L. J. (1998). Fleet Fire: Thomas Edison and the Pioneers of the Electric Revolution. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-47927-1.
Essig, Mark (2004). Edison and the Electric Chair. Stroud: Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-3680-4.
Essig, Mark (2003). Edison & the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death. New York: Walker & Company. ISBN 978-0-8027-1406-0.
Israel, Paul (1998). Edison: A Life of Invention. New York: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-52942-2.
Jonnes, Jill (2003). Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, and the Race to Electrify the World. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50739-7.
Josephson, Matthew (1959). Edison. McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-033046-7.
Koenigsberg, Allen (1987). Edison Cylinder Records, 1889–1912. APM Press. ISBN 978-0-937612-07-1.
Pretzer, William S., ed. (1989). Working at Inventing: Thomas A. Edison and the Menlo Park Experience. Dearborn, Michigan: Henry Ford Museum & Greenfield Village. ISBN 978-0-933728-33-2.
Stross, Randall E. (2007). The Wizard of Menlo Park: How Thomas Alva Edison Invented the Modern World. Crown. ISBN 978-1-4000-4762-8.

External links
This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


Thomas Edison  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource

Museums
Menlo Park Museum and Edison Memorial Tower
Thomas Edison National Historical Park (National Park Service)
Edison exhibit and Menlo Park Laboratory at Henry Ford Museum
Edison Museum
Edison Depot Museum
Edison Birthplace Museum
Thomas Edison House
Information and media
Thomas Edison on In Our Time at the BBC
"An Hour with Edison", Scientific American, July 13, 1878, p. 17
Interview with Thomas Edison in 1931
The Diary of Thomas Edison
Works by Thomas Edison at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas Edison at Internet Archive
Edison's patent application for the light bulb at the National Archives.
Thomas Edison at IMDb
"The Invention Factory: Thomas Edison's Laboratories" National Park Service (NPS)
Thomas Edison Personal Manuscripts and Letters
 Edison, His Life and Inventions at Project Gutenberg by Frank Lewis Dyer and Thomas Commerford Martin.
The short film Story of Thomas Alva Edison is available for free download at the Internet Archive.
Edison Papers Rutgers.
Edisonian Museum Antique Electrics
Edison Innovation Foundation – Non-profit foundation supporting the legacy of Thomas Edison.
Thomas Alva Edison at Find a Grave
The Illustrious Vagabonds Henry Ford Heritage Association
"The World's Greatest Inventor" October 1931, Popular Mechanics. Detailed, illustrated article.
14 minutes "instructional" film with fictional elements The boyhood of Thomas Edison from 1964, produced by Coronet, published by archive.org
"Edison's Miracle of Light" PBS – American Experience. Premiered January 2015.
Newspaper clippings about Thomas Edison in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW


Awards and achievements


Preceded byLeon Trotsky

 Cover of Time magazine 

Succeeded byRichard Swann Lull


vteThomas EdisonDiscoveriesand inventions
List of Edison patents
Carbon microphone
Edison's Phonograph Doll
Edison screw
Etheric force
Kinetoscope
Phonograph
Phonomotor
Quadruplex telegraph
Tasimeter
Advancements
Consolidated Edison
Edison–Lalande cell
Fluoroscopy
Incandescent light bulb
Movie camera
Nickel–iron battery
Thermionic emission
Ticker tape
Ventures
Thomas A. Edison, Inc.
Edison and Swan Electric Light Company
Edison Gower-Bell Telephone Company of Europe
Edison Illuminating Company
Edison Machine Works
Edison Manufacturing Company
Edison Ore-Milling Company
Edison Portland Cement Company
Edison Records
Edison Storage Battery Company
Edison Studios
General Electric
Motion Picture Patents Company
Mine Safety Appliances
Oriental Telephone Company
Monuments
Birthplace
Black Maria
Depot Museum
Memorial Tower and Museum
National Historical Park
State Park
Storage Battery Company Building
General Electric Research Laboratory
Winter Estates
Family
Charles Edison (son)
Theodore Miller Edison (son)
Films
Young Tom Edison (1940)
Edison, the Man (1940)
"The Wizard of Evergreen Terrace" (1998)
The Current War (2017)
Tesla (2020)
Literature
The Future Eve (1886)
Edison's Conquest of Mars (1898)
Tales from the Bully Pulpit (2004)
Productions
The Execution of Mary Stuart (1895)
The Kiss (1896)
Frankenstein (1910)
A Night of Terror (1911)
Kidnapped (1917)
Terms
Edisonade
Edisonian approach
Related
Thomas Edison in popular culture
War of the currents
Pearl Street Station
Edison Museum
Thomas Edison House
Edison Hotel
Telephonoscope
Statue of Thomas Edison
Thomas Alva Edison silver dollar

vteGeneral ElectricSubsidiariesand divisionsCurrent
GE Additive
GE Aviation
GE Aviation Systems
GE Capital
GE Digital
GE Healthcare
GE Power
GE Renewable Energy
LM Wind Power
GE Research
Former anddefunct
Australian Guarantee Corporation1
Canadian General Electric1
Compagnia Generale di Elettricità2
Current, powered by GE2
Electric Bond and Share Company2
GE Aerospace2
GE Americom2
GE Appliances2
GE Automation & Controls2
GE Betz2
GE Capital Aviation Services2
GE Capital IT Solutions2
GE Capital Rail Services2
GE Commercial Finance1
GE Energy1
GE Equipment Services2
GE Home & Business Solutions2
GE Industrial2
GE Infrastructure1
GE Jenbacher2
GE Lighting2
GE Measurement & Control1
GE Oil & Gas1
GEnPact2
GE Security2
GE Transportation2
GE Waukesha2
GE Wind Energy1
GECIS2
GEIS2
Genesis Lease2
Genworth Financial2
Montgomery Ward2
Synchrony Financial2
Tungsram1
United Nuclear Corporation1
Utah Construction Company2
Whatman1
Joint ventures/ shareholdingsCurrent
Baker Hughes (30%)
CFM International (50%)
Engine Alliance (50%)
GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy (60%)
GE Honda Aero Engines (50%)
ProlecGE (49.99%)
TBS GB
Former
Alco-GE (1940–53)
NBC (1926–30, 1986–2004)
NBCUniversal (2004–13)
Penske Truck Leasing (15.5%)
Wabtec
Productsand brands
Aircraft engines
General Comprehensive Operating System
GEnie
Locomotives
Mazda
Reciprocating engines
Trivection oven
Tungsram
PeopleFounders
Charles A. Coffin
Thomas Edison
Edwin J. Houston
J. P. Morgan
Elihu Thomson
Executives
Jeff Immelt
Jack Welch
Bob Wright
Outside Directors
James Cash Jr.
John L. Flannery
Ann M. Fudge
Susan Hockfield
Andrea Jung
Rochelle Lazarus
Sam Nunn
Roger Penske
Vera Silva
Douglas A. Warner III
Places andfacilities
GE Building (30 Rockefeller Plaza)
GE Building (570 Lexington Avenue)
Nela Park
Realty Plot
Research Laboratory
River Works
Specialty Control Plant
Switchgear Plant
Welch Technology Centre
Sponsorship
Carousel of Progress (1964–65, 1967–73, 1975–85)
Horizons at Epcot (1983–93)
Other
GE True
The General Electric Concert
General Electric EdgeLab
General Electric Theater
General Imaging
KGEI
Phoebus cartel
Thomson-Houston Electric Company
Timeline
United States v. General Electric Co.
Diamond v. Chakrabarty

1Now integrated into other GE divisions or business groupings
2Sold or spun off
 Category
 Commons

vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright

vteInstitute of Electrical and Electronics EngineersSubsidiaries
GlobalSpec
IEEE Standards Association
Predecessors
American Institute of Electrical Engineers
Institute of Radio Engineers
Technicalcouncils
Biometrics Council
Council on Electronic Design Automation
Council on Superconductivity
Nanotechnology Council
Sensors Council
Systems Council
Technical Activities Board
Technicalsocieties
Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Antennas and Propagation
Broadcast Technology
Circuits and Systems
Communications
Components Packaging, and Manufacturing Technology
Computational Intelligence
Computer
Consumer Electronics
Control Systems
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation
Education
Electromagnetic Compatibility
Electron Devices
Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Industrial Electronics
Industry Applications
Information Theory
Instrumentation and Measurement
Intelligent Transportation Systems
Magnetics
Nuclear and Plasma Sciences
Oceanic Engineering
Photonics
Power and Energy
Power Electronics
Product Safety Engineering
Professional Communication
Reliability
Robotics and Automation
Signal Processing
Social Implications of Technology
Solid-State Circuits
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
Technology Management
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control
Vehicular Technology
Related
Certified Software Development Professional
Computer-Aided Design Technical Committee
Engineering and Technology History Wiki
Engineering for Change
Eta Kappa Nu
IEEE Access
IEEE Cloud Computing
IEEE conferences
IEEEXtreme
IEEEmadC
IEEE Rebooting Computing
IEEE Xplore
Internet Technical Committee
IEEE Life Sciences
List of IEEE awards
List of IEEE milestones
List of IEEE publications
IEEE Registration Authority
IEEE Smart Grid
IEEE style
Technical Committee on VLSI

vteJohn Fritz Medal1902–1924
1902 : John Fritz
1903 : No award
1904 : No award
1905 : Lord Kelvin
1906 : George Westinghouse
1907 : Alexander Graham Bell
1908 : Thomas Alva Edison
1909 : Charles Talbot Porter
1910 : Alfred Noble
1911 : Sir William Henry White
1912 : Robert Woolston Hunt
1913 : No award
1914 : John Edson Sweet
1915 : James Douglas
1916 : Elihu Thomson
1917 : Henry Marion Howe
1918 : J. Waldo Smith
1919 : Gen. George W. Goethals
1920 : Orville Wright
1921 : Sir Robert Hadfield
1922 : Charles P. E. Schneider
1923 : Guglielmo Marconi
1924 : Ambrose Swasey
1925–1949
1925 : John Frank Stevens
1926 : Edward Dean Adams
1927 : Elmer Ambrose Sperry
1928 : John Joseph Carty
1929 : Herbert Clark Hoover
1930 : Ralph Modjeski
1931 : David Watson Taylor
1932 : Mihajlo Idvorski Pupin
1933 : Daniel Cowan Jackling
1934 : John Ripley Freeman (posthumous)
1935 : Frank Julian Sprague (posthumous)
1936 : William Frederick Durand
1937 : Arthur Newell Talbot
1938 : Paul Dyer Merica
1939 : Frank Baldwin Jewett
1940 : Clarence Floyd Hirshfeld (posthumous)
1941 : Ralph Budd
1942 : Everette Lee DeGolyer
1943 : Willis Rodney Whitney
1944 : Charles F. Kettering
1945 : John Lucian Savage
1946 : Zay Jeffries
1947 : Lewis Warrington Chubb
1948 : Theodore von Karman
1949 : Charles Metcalf Allen
1950–1974
1950 : Walter H. Aldridge
1951 : Vannevar Bush
1952 : Ervin George Bailey
1953 : Benjamin F. Fairless
1954 : William Embry Wrather
1955 : Harry Alonzo Winne
1956 : Philip Sporn
1957 : Ben Moreell
1958 : John R. Suman
1959 : Mervin J. Kelly
1960 : Gwilyn A. Price
1961 : Stephen D. Bechtel
1962 : Crawford H. Greenewalt
1963 : Hugh L. Dryden
1964 : Lucius D. Clay
1965 : Frederick Kappel
1966 : Warren K. Lewis
1967 : Walker L. Cisler
1968 : Igor Ivan Sikorsky
1969 : Michael Lawrence Haider
1970 : Glenn B. Warren
1971 : Patrick E. Haggerty
1972 : William Webster
1973 : Lyman Wilber
1974 : H. I. Romnes
1975–1999
1975 : Manson Benedict
1976 : Thomas O. Paine
1977 : George R. Brown
1978 : Robert G. Heitz
1979 : Nathan M. Newmark
1980 : T. Louis Austin, Jr.
1981 : Ian MacGregor
1982 : David Packard
1983 : Claude Elwood Shannon
1984 : Kenneth A. Roe
1985 : Daniel C. Drucker
1986 : Simon Ramo
1987 : Ralph Landau
1988 : Ralph B. Peck
1989 : Robert N. Noyce
1990 : Gordon A. Cain
1991 : Hunter Rouse
1992 : Serge Gratch
1993 : Gordon Moore
1994 : Hoyt C. Hottel
1995 : Lynn S. Beedle
1996 : George N. Hatsopoulos
1997 : Arthur E. Humphrey
1998 : Ivan A. Getting
1999 : George H. Heilmeier
2000–
2000 : John W. Fisher
2001 : Paul C. W. Chu
2002 : Daniel Goldin
2003 : Robert S. Langer
2004 : John A. Swanson
2005 : George Tamaro
2006 : No award
2007 : Gavriel Salvendy
2008 : Kristina M. Johnson
2009 : Yvonne Claeys Brill
2010 : Gerald J. Posakony
2011 : Andrew Viterbi
2012 : Leslie E. Robertson
2013 : Gregory Stephanopoulos
2014 : Julia Weertman
2015 : Jon D. Magnusson
2017 : Frank Kreith
2018 : Anne S. Kiremidjian
2019 : No award
2020 : No award
2021 : Elon Musk

vteMatteucci Medallists1851-1900
Hermann Helmholtz (1868)
Henri Victor Regnault (1875)
William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (1876)
Gustav Kirchhoff (1877)
Gustav Wiedemann (1878)
Wilhelm Weber (1879)
Antonio Pacinotti (1880)
Emilio Villari (1881)
Augusto Righi (1882)
Thomas Edison (1887)
Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1888)
John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh (1894)
Henry Augustus Rowland (1895)
Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen / Philipp Lenard (1896)
1901-1950
Guglielmo Marconi (1901)
Albert A. Michelson (1903)
Marie Curie / Pierre Curie (1904)
Henri Poincaré (1905)
James Dewar (1906)
William Ramsay (1907)
Antonio Garbasso (1908)
Orso Mario Corbino (1909)
Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1910)
Jean Perrin (1911)
Pieter Zeeman (1912)
Ernest Rutherford (1913)
Max von Laue (1914)
Johannes Stark (1915)
William Henry Bragg / Lawrence Bragg (1915)
Antonino Lo Surdo (1917)
Robert W. Wood (1918)
Henry Gwyn-Jeffreys Moseley (1919)
Albert Einstein (1921)
Niels Bohr (1923)
Arnold Sommerfeld (1924)
Robert Andrews Millikan (1925)
Enrico Fermi (1926)
Erwin Schrödinger (1927)
Venkata Raman Chandrasekhara (1928)
Werner Heisenberg (1929)
Arthur Compton (1930)
Franco Rasetti (1931)
Frédéric Joliot / Irène Joliot-Curie (1932)
1951-2000
Wolfgang Pauli (1956)
Bruno Touschek (1975)
Abdus Salam (1978)
Luciano Maiani (1979)
Giancarlo Wick (1980)
Rudolf Peierls (1982)
Hendrik Casimir (1985)
Pierre-Gilles De Gennes (1987)
Lev Okun (1988)
Freeman Dyson (1989)
Jack Steinberger (1990)
Bruno Rossi (1991)
Anatole Abragam (1992)
John Archibald Wheeler (1993)
Claude Cohen-Tannoudji (1994)
Tsung-Dao Lee (1995)
Wolfgang K.H. Panofsky (1996)
Oreste Piccioni (1998)
2001-present
Theodor W. Hänsch (2001)
Nicola Cabibbo (2002)
Manuel Cardona (2003)
David Ruelle (2004)
John Iliopoulos (2005)
Giorgio Bellettini (2006)
Adalberto Giazotto (2016)
Marco Tavani (2017)
Gianluigi Fogli (2018)
Federico Capasso (2019)

Portals: Biography Business and economics Engineering Energy Journalism New Jersey Ohio Science Technology History of science Electronics United States Film Trains History Physics Transport Speculative fiction Society Business
Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Netherlands
2
Poland
Sweden
Vatican
Art galleries and museums
Te Papa (New Zealand)
Art research institutes
Photographers' Identities
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
National Archives (US)
RERO (Switzerland)
1
Social Networks and Archival Context
2
SUDOC (France)
1
Trove (Australia)
1





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Edison&oldid=1111865256"
Categories: Thomas Edison1847 births1931 deaths19th-century American businesspeople19th-century American inventors20th-century American businesspeople20th-century American inventorsAmerican chief executivesAmerican deistsAmerican electrical engineersAmerican film production company foundersAmerican film studio executivesAmerican manufacturing businesspeopleAmerican patent holdersAmerican people of Canadian descentAmerican people of Dutch descentAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican scientistsAmerican telecommunications engineersBattery inventorsBurials in New JerseyBusinesspeople from FloridaBusinesspeople from New York CityBusinesspeople from Newark, New JerseyBusinesspeople from OhioCinema pioneersCongressional Gold Medal recipientsDeaf people from the United StatesDeaths from diabetesEdison familyGeneral Electric peopleGeneral ElectricHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesHonorary Members of the USSR Academy of SciencesMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyMembers of the Royal Swedish Academy of SciencesMembers of the United States National Academy of SciencesOfficiers of the Légion d'honneurPeople associated with electricityPeople from Edison, New JerseyPeople from Fort Myers, FloridaPeople from ManhattanPeople from Milan, OhioPeople from West Orange, New JerseyPeople of United Empire Loyalist descentPhonograph manufacturersRecipients of the Navy Distinguished Service MedalTelegraph engineers and inventorsRecipients of the Matteucci MedalHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Cyclopaedia of American BiographyCS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse American English from September 2022All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from September 2022Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia external links cleanup from January 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from January 2015Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BIBSYS identifiersArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with CANTICN identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with NLG identifiersArticles with NLK identifiersArticles with NTA identifiersArticles with PLWABN identifiersArticles with SELIBR identifiersArticles with VcBA identifiersArticles with TePapa identifiersArticles with PIC identifiersArticles with ULAN identifiersArticles with DTBIO identifiersArticles with CINII identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with MusicBrainz identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with RERO identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersAC with 32 elementsArticles with multiple identifiersArticles containing video clips



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésArmãneashtiArpetanঅসমীয়াAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)Bikol CentralBislamaБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChavacano de ZamboangaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschडोटेलीEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalego贛語Gĩkũyũગુજરાતીगोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa HulontaloIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganКъарачай-малкъарქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRipoarischRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаGagana Samoaसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõro文言Winaray吴语ייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 23 September 2022, at 10:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










