



Transport - Wikipedia










































Transport

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Human-directed movement of things or people between locations
For other uses, see Transport (disambiguation).
"Transportation" redirects here. For other uses, see Transportation (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Transport" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onTransport
Modes
Air
Animal-powered
Land
Rail
Road
Motorized cable transport
Rail
Human-powered
Cable
Land
Rail
Road
Water
Motorized land transport
Rail
Road
Personal rapid transit
Pipeline
Space
Motorized water transport
Vactrain

Topics
Accessibility
Bicycle transportation planning and engineering
Cyclability
Cycling infrastructure
Engineering
Free public transport
Green transport hierarchy
History
Outline
Public transport
Sustainable transport
Timeline
Transport divide
Transportation planning

 Transport portalvte
Transport (in British English), or transportation (in American English), is the movement of humans, animals, and goods from one location to another. In other words, the action of transport is defined as a particular movement of an organism or thing from a point A (a place in space) to a point B.  
Modes of transport include air, land (rail and road), water, cable, pipeline, and space. The field can be divided into infrastructure, vehicles, and operations. Transport enables trade between people, which is essential for the development of civilizations.
Transport infrastructure consists of the fixed installations, including roads, railways, airways, waterways, canals, and pipelines and terminals such as airports, railway stations, bus stations, warehouses, trucking terminals, refueling depots (including fueling docks and fuel stations), and seaports. Terminals may be used both for interchange of passengers and cargo and for maintenance.
Means of transport are any of the different kinds of transport facilities used to carry people or cargo. They may include vehicles, riding animals, and pack animals. Vehicles may include wagons, automobiles, bicycles, buses, trains, trucks, helicopters, watercraft, spacecraft, and aircraft.

Contents

1 Modes

1.1 Human-powered
1.2 Animal-powered
1.3 Air
1.4 Land

1.4.1 Rail
1.4.2 Road


1.5 Water
1.6 Other modes


2 Elements

2.1 Infrastructure
2.2 Means of transport

2.2.1 Animals
2.2.2 Vehicles


2.3 Operation
2.4 Policy


3 Functions

3.1 Passenger
3.2 Medical
3.3 Freight


4 Industry
5 Impact

5.1 Economic
5.2 Planning
5.3 Environment
5.4 Sustainable development


6 History

6.1 Natural
6.2 Infrastructure
6.3 Water transport
6.4 Mechanical


7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links


Modes[edit]
Main article: Mode of transport
 
A mode of transport is a solution that makes use of a certain type of vehicle, infrastructure, and operation. The transport of a person or of cargo may involve one mode or several of the modes, with the latter case being called inter-modal or multi-modal transport. Each mode has its own advantages and disadvantages, and will be chosen on the basis of cost, capability, and route.
Governments deal with the way the vehicles are operated, and the procedures set for this purpose, including financing, legalities, and policies. In the transport industry, operations and ownership of infrastructure can be either public or private, depending on the country and mode.
Passenger transport may be public, where operators provide scheduled services, or private. Freight transport has become focused on containerization, although bulk transport is used for large volumes of durable items. Transport plays an important part in economic growth and globalization, but most types cause air pollution and use large amounts of land. While it is heavily subsidized by governments, good planning of transport is essential to make traffic flow and restrain urban sprawl.

Human-powered[edit]
Main article: Human-powered transport
 Human-powered transport remains common in developing countries.
Human-powered transport, a form of sustainable transport, is the transport of people and/or goods using human muscle-power, in the form of walking, running, and swimming. Modern technology has allowed machines to enhance human power. Human-powered transport remains popular for reasons of cost-saving, leisure, physical exercise, and environmentalism; it is sometimes the only type available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions.
Although humans are able to walk without infrastructure, the transport can be enhanced through the use of roads, especially when using the human power with vehicles, such as bicycles and inline skates. Human-powered vehicles have also been developed for difficult environments, such as snow and water, by watercraft rowing and skiing; even the air can be entered with human-powered aircraft.

Animal-powered[edit]
Main article: Animal-powered transport
Animal-powered transport is the use of working animals for the movement of people and commodities. Humans may ride some of the animals directly, use them as pack animals for carrying goods, or harness them, alone or in teams, to pull sleds or wheeled vehicles.

Air[edit]
Main article: Aviation
 An Air France Airbus A318 lands at London Heathrow Airport.
A fixed-wing aircraft, commonly called an airplane, is a heavier-than-air craft where movement of the air in relation to the wings is used to generate lift. The term is used to distinguish this from rotary-wing aircraft, where the movement of the lift surfaces relative to the air generates lift. A gyroplane is both fixed-wing and rotary wing. Fixed-wing aircraft range from small trainers and recreational aircraft to large airliners and military cargo aircraft.
Two things necessary for aircraft are air flow over the wings for lift and an area for landing. The majority of aircraft also need an airport with the infrastructure for maintenance, restocking, and refueling and for the loading and unloading of crew, cargo, and passengers.[1] While the vast majority of aircraft land and take off on land, some are capable of take-off and landing on ice, snow, and calm water.
The aircraft is the second fastest method of transport, after the rocket. Commercial jets can reach up to 955 kilometres per hour (593 mph), single-engine aircraft 555 kilometres per hour (345 mph). Aviation is able to quickly transport people and limited amounts of cargo over longer distances, but incurs high costs and energy use; for short distances or in inaccessible places, helicopters can be used.[2] As of April 28, 2009, The Guardian article notes that "the WHO estimates that up to 500,000 people are on planes at any time."[3]

Land[edit]
Main article: Land transport
Land transport covers all land-based transport systems that provide for the movement of people, goods, and services. Land transport plays a vital role in linking communities to each other. Land transport is a key factor in urban planning. It consists of two kinds, rail and road.

Rail[edit]
Main article: Rail transport
 Intercity Express, a German high-speed passenger train
 The Beijing Subway is one of the world's largest and busiest rapid transit networks.
Rail transport is where a train runs along a set of two parallel steel rails, known as a railway or railroad. The rails are anchored perpendicular to ties (or sleepers) of timber, concrete, or steel, to maintain a consistent distance apart, or gauge. The rails and perpendicular beams are placed on a foundation made of concrete or compressed earth and gravel in a bed of ballast. Alternative methods include monorail and maglev.
A train consists of one or more connected vehicles that operate on the rails. Propulsion is commonly provided by a locomotive, that hauls a series of unpowered cars, that can carry passengers or freight. The locomotive can be powered by steam, by diesel, or by electricity supplied by trackside systems. Alternatively, some or all the cars can be powered, known as a multiple unit. Also, a train can be powered by horses, cables, gravity, pneumatics, and gas turbines. Railed vehicles move with much less friction than rubber tires on paved roads, making trains more energy efficient, though not as efficient as ships.
Intercity trains are long-haul services connecting cities;[4] modern high-speed rail is capable of speeds up to 350 km/h (220 mph), but this requires specially built track. Regional and commuter trains feed cities from suburbs and surrounding areas, while intra-urban transport is performed by high-capacity tramways and rapid transits, often making up the backbone of a city's public transport. Freight trains traditionally used box cars, requiring manual loading and unloading of the cargo. Since the 1960s, container trains have become the dominant solution for general freight, while large quantities of bulk are transported by dedicated trains.

Road[edit]
Main article: Road transport
 Road transport
A road is an identifiable route, way, or path between two or more places.[5] Roads are typically smoothed, paved, or otherwise prepared to allow easy travel;[6] though they need not be, and historically many roads were simply recognizable routes without any formal construction or maintenance.[7] In urban areas, roads may pass through a city or village and be named as streets, serving a dual function as urban space easement and route.[8]
The most common road vehicle is the automobile; a wheeled passenger vehicle that carries its own motor. Other users of roads include buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, and pedestrians. As of 2010, there were 1.015 billion automobiles worldwide.
Road transport offers complete freedom to road users to transfer the vehicle from one lane to the other and from one road to another according to the need and convenience. This flexibility of changes in location, direction, speed, and timings of travel is not available to other modes of transport. It is possible to provide door-to-door service only by road transport.
Automobiles provide high flexibility with low capacity, but require high energy and area use, and are the main source of harmful noise and air pollution in cities;[9] buses allow for more efficient travel at the cost of reduced flexibility.[10] Road transport by truck is often the initial and final stage of freight transport.

Water[edit]
Main article: Ship transport
 Automobile ferry in Croatia
Water transport is movement by means of a watercraft—such as a barge, boat, ship, or sailboat—over a body of water, such as a sea, ocean, lake, canal, or river. The need for buoyancy is common to watercraft, making the hull a dominant aspect of its construction, maintenance, and appearance.
In the 19th century, the first steam ships were developed, using a steam engine to drive a paddle wheel or propeller to move the ship. The steam was produced in a boiler using wood or coal and fed through a steam external combustion engine. Now most ships have an internal combustion engine using a slightly refined type of petroleum called bunker fuel. Some ships, such as submarines, use nuclear power to produce the steam. Recreational or educational craft still use wind power, while some smaller craft use internal combustion engines to drive one or more propellers or, in the case of jet boats, an inboard water jet. In shallow draft areas, hovercraft are propelled by large pusher-prop fans. (See Marine propulsion.)
Although it is slow compared to other transport, modern sea transport is a highly efficient method of transporting large quantities of goods. Commercial vessels, nearly 35,000 in number, carried 7.4 billion tons of cargo in 2007.[11] Transport by water is significantly less costly than air transport for transcontinental shipping;[12] short sea shipping and ferries remain viable in coastal areas.[13][14]

Other modes[edit]
 Trans-Alaska Pipeline for crude oil
Pipeline transport sends goods through a pipe; most commonly liquid and gases are sent, but pneumatic tubes can also send solid capsules using compressed air. For liquids/gases, any chemically stable liquid or gas can be sent through a pipeline. Short-distance systems exist for sewage, slurry, water, and beer, while long-distance networks are used for petroleum and natural gas.
Cable transport is a broad mode where vehicles are pulled by cables instead of an internal power source. It is most commonly used at steep gradient. Typical solutions include aerial tramways, elevators, and ski lifts; some of these are also categorized as conveyor transport.
Spaceflight is transport out of Earth's atmosphere into outer space by means of a spacecraft. While large amounts of research have gone into technology, it is rarely used except to put satellites into orbit and conduct scientific experiments. However, man has landed on the moon, and probes have been sent to all the planets of the Solar System.
Suborbital spaceflight is the fastest of the existing and planned transport systems from a place on Earth to a distant "other place" on Earth. Faster transport could be achieved through part of a low Earth orbit or by following that trajectory even faster, using the propulsion of the rocket to steer it.

Elements[edit]
Infrastructure[edit]
Main article: Infrastructure
 Bridges, such as Golden Gate Bridge, allow roads and railways to cross bodies of water.
 Tunnels, such as the Tampere Tunnel, allow traffic to pass underground or through rock formations.
Infrastructure is the fixed installations that allow a vehicle to operate. It consists of a roadway, a terminal, and facilities for parking and maintenance. For rail, pipeline, road, and cable transport, the entire way the vehicle travels must be constructed. Air and watercraft are able to avoid this, since the airway and seaway do not need to be constructed. However, they require fixed infrastructure at terminals.
Terminals such as airports, ports, and stations, are locations where passengers and freight can be transferred from one vehicle or mode to another. For passenger transport, terminals are integrating different modes to allow riders, who are interchanging between modes, to take advantage of each mode's benefits. For instance, airport rail links connect airports to the city centres and suburbs. The terminals for automobiles are parking lots, while buses and coaches can operate from simple stops.[15] For freight, terminals act as transshipment points, though some cargo is transported directly from the point of production to the point of use.
The financing of infrastructure can either be public or private. Transport is often a natural monopoly and a necessity for the public; roads, and in some countries railways and airports, are funded through taxation. New infrastructure projects can have high costs and are often financed through debt. Many infrastructure owners, therefore, impose usage fees, such as landing fees at airports or toll plazas on roads. Independent of this, authorities may impose taxes on the purchase or use of vehicles. Because of poor forecasting and overestimation of passenger numbers by planners, there is frequently a benefits shortfall for transport infrastructure projects.[16]

Means of transport[edit]
Animals[edit]
Animals used in transportation include pack animals and riding animals.

Vehicles[edit]
Main article: Vehicle
 A Fiat Uno in 2018
A vehicle is a non-living device that is used to move people and goods. Unlike the infrastructure, the vehicle moves along with the cargo and riders. Unless being pulled/pushed by a cable or muscle-power, the vehicle must provide its own propulsion; this is most commonly done through a steam engine, combustion engine, electric motor, jet engine, or rocket, though other means of propulsion also exist. Vehicles also need a system of converting the energy into movement; this is most commonly done through wheels, propellers, and pressure.
Vehicles are most commonly staffed by a driver. However, some systems, such as people movers and some rapid transits, are fully automated. For passenger transport, the vehicle must have a compartment, seat, or platform for the passengers. Simple vehicles, such as automobiles, bicycles, or simple aircraft, may have one of the passengers as a driver. Recently, the progress related to the Fourth Industrial Revolution has brought a lot of new emerging technologies for transportation and automotive fields such as Connected Vehicles and Autonomous Driving. These innovations are said to form future mobility, but concerns remain on safety and cybersecurity, particularly concerning connected and autonomous mobility. [17]

Operation[edit]
 Incheon International Airport, South Korea
Private transport is only subject to the owner of the vehicle, who operates the vehicle themselves. For public transport and freight transport, operations are done through private enterprise or by governments. The infrastructure and vehicles may be owned and operated by the same company, or they may be operated by different entities. Traditionally, many countries have had a national airline and national railway. Since the 1980s, many of these have been privatized. International shipping remains a highly competitive industry with little regulation,[18] but ports can be public-owned.[19]

Policy[edit]
Further information: List of ministries of transport by country and Traffic management
This section is missing information about most of what constitutes official traffic management and planning, how it integrates with other fields of politics and how it is enforced. Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (December 2021)
As the population of the world increases, cities grow in size and population—according to the United Nations, 55% of the world's population live in cities, and by 2050 this number is expected to rise to 68%.[20] Public transport policy must evolve to meet the changing priorities of the urban world.[21] The institution of policy enforces order in transport, which is by nature chaotic as people attempt to travel from one place to another as fast as possible. This policy helps to reduce accidents and save lives.

Functions[edit]
Relocation of travelers and cargo are the most common uses of transport. However, other uses exist, such as the strategic and tactical relocation of armed forces during warfare, or the civilian mobility construction or emergency equipment.

Passenger[edit]
Main articles: Travel and Public transit
 A local transit bus operated by ACTION in Canberra, Australia
Passenger transport, or travel, is divided into public and private transport. Public transport is scheduled services on fixed routes, while private is vehicles that provide ad hoc services at the riders desire. The latter offers better flexibility, but has lower capacity and a higher environmental impact. Travel may be as part of daily commuting or for business, leisure, or migration.
Short-haul transport is dominated by the automobile and mass transit. The latter consists of buses in rural and small cities, supplemented with commuter rail, trams, and rapid transit in larger cities. Long-haul transport involves the use of the automobile, trains, coaches, and aircraft, the last of which have become predominantly used for the longest, including intercontinental, travel. Intermodal passenger transport is where a journey is performed through the use of several modes of transport; since all human transport normally starts and ends with walking, all passenger transport can be considered intermodal. Public transport may also involve the intermediate change of vehicle, within or across modes, at a transport hub, such as a bus or railway station.
Taxis and buses can be found on both ends of the public transport spectrum. Buses are the cheapest mode of transport but are not necessarily flexible, and taxis are very flexible but more expensive. In the middle is demand-responsive transport, offering flexibility whilst remaining affordable.
International travel may be restricted for some individuals due to legislation and visa requirements.

Medical[edit]
 An ambulance from World War IAn ambulance is a vehicle used to transport people from or between places of treatment,[22] and in some instances will also provide out-of-hospital medical care to the patient. The word is often associated with road-going "emergency ambulances", which form part of emergency medical services, administering emergency care to those with acute medical problems.
Air medical services is a comprehensive term covering the use of air transport to move patients to and from healthcare facilities and accident scenes. Personnel provide comprehensive prehospital and emergency and critical care to all types of patients during aeromedical evacuation or rescue operations, aboard helicopters, propeller aircraft, or jet aircraft.[23][24]

Freight[edit]
Main article: Shipping
 A bulk carrier, BW Fjord
Freight transport, or shipping, is a key in the value chain in manufacturing.[25] With increased specialization and globalization, production is being located further away from consumption, rapidly increasing the demand for transport.[26] Transport creates place utility by moving the goods from the place of production to the place of consumption.[27] While all modes of transport are used for cargo transport, there is high differentiation between the nature of the cargo transport, in which mode is chosen.[28] Logistics refers to the entire process of transferring products from producer to consumer, including storage, transport, transshipment, warehousing, material-handling, and packaging, with associated exchange of information.[29] Incoterm deals with the handling of payment and responsibility of risk during transport.[30]

 Freight train with shipping containers in the United Kingdom
Containerization, with the standardization of ISO containers on all vehicles and at all ports, has revolutionized international and domestic trade, offering a huge reduction in transshipment costs. Traditionally, all cargo had to be manually loaded and unloaded into the haul of any ship or car; containerization allows for automated handling and transfer between modes, and the standardized sizes allow for gains in economy of scale in vehicle operation. This has been one of the key driving factors in international trade and globalization since the 1950s.[31]
Bulk transport is common with cargo that can be handled roughly without deterioration; typical examples are ore, coal, cereals, and petroleum. Because of the uniformity of the product, mechanical handling can allow enormous quantities to be handled quickly and efficiently. The low value of the cargo combined with high volume also means that economies of scale become essential in transport, and gigantic ships and whole trains are commonly used to transport bulk. Liquid products with sufficient volume may also be transported by pipeline.
Air freight has become more common for products of high value; while less than one percent of world transport by volume is by airline, it amounts to forty percent of the value. Time has become especially important in regards to principles such as postponement and just-in-time within the value chain, resulting in a high willingness to pay for quick delivery of key components or items of high value-to-weight ratio.[32] In addition to mail, common items sent by air include electronics and fashion clothing.

Industry[edit]
Main article: Transport industry
Impact[edit]
Main article: Sustainable transport
Economic[edit]
Main article: Transport economics
 Transport is a key component of growth and globalization, such as in Seattle, Washington, United States.
Transport is a key necessity for specialization—allowing production and consumption of products to occur at different locations.  Throughout history, transport has been a spur to expansion; better transport allows more trade and a greater spread of people. Economic growth has always been dependent on increasing the capacity and rationality of transport.[33] But the infrastructure and operation of transport have a great impact on the land, and transport is the largest drainer of energy, making transport sustainability a major issue.
Due to the way modern cities and communities are planned and operated, a physical distinction between home and work is usually created, forcing people to transport themselves to places of work, study, or leisure, as well as to temporarily relocate for other daily activities. Passenger transport is also the essence of tourism, a major part of recreational transport. Commerce requires the transport of people to conduct business, either to allow face-to-face communication for important decisions or to move specialists from their regular place of work to sites where they are needed.

Planning[edit]
Main article: Transport planning
Transport planning allows for high utilization and less impact regarding new infrastructure. Using models of transport forecasting, planners are able to predict future transport patterns. On the operative level, logistics allows owners of cargo to plan transport as part of the supply chain. Transport as a field is also studied through transport economics, a component for the creation of regulation policy by authorities. Transport engineering, a sub-discipline of civil engineering, must take into account trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice, and route assignment, while the operative level is handled through traffic engineering.

 The engineering of this roundabout in Bristol, United Kingdom, attempts to make traffic flow free-moving.
Because of the negative impacts incurred, transport often becomes the subject of controversy related to choice of mode, as well as increased capacity. Automotive transport can be seen as a tragedy of the commons, where the flexibility and comfort for the individual deteriorate the natural and urban environment for all. Density of development depends on mode of transport, with public transport allowing for better spatial utilization. Good land use keeps common activities close to people's homes and places higher-density development closer to transport lines and hubs, to minimize the need for transport. There are economies of agglomeration. Beyond transport, some land uses are more efficient when clustered. Transport facilities consume land, and in cities pavement (devoted to streets and parking) can easily exceed 20 percent of the total land use. An efficient transport system can reduce land waste.
Too much infrastructure and too much smoothing for maximum vehicle throughput mean that in many cities there is too much traffic and many—if not all—of the negative impacts that come with it. It is only in recent years that traditional practices have started to be questioned in many places; as a result of new types of analysis which bring in a much broader range of skills than those traditionally relied on—spanning such areas as environmental impact analysis, public health, sociology, and economics—the viability of the old mobility solutions is increasingly being questioned.


Environment[edit]











Global greenhouse gas emissions from transportation:[34]

  Cars (40%)  Trucks (34%)  Planes (11%)  Boats (11%)  Trains (4%)


Main article: Environmental impact of transport
 Traffic congestion persists in São Paulo, Brazil, despite the no-drive days based on license numbers.
Transport is a major use of energy and burns most of the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide,[35] for which transport is the fastest-growing emission sector.[36] By sub-sector, road transport is the largest contributor to global warming.[37] Environmental regulations in developed countries have reduced individual vehicles' emissions; however, this has been offset by increases in the numbers of vehicles and in the use of each vehicle.[35] Some pathways to reduce the carbon emissions of road vehicles considerably have been studied.[38][39] Energy use and emissions vary largely between modes, causing environmentalists to call for a transition from air and road to rail and human-powered transport, as well as increased transport electrification and energy efficiency. 
Other environmental impacts of transport systems include traffic congestion and automobile-oriented urban sprawl, which can consume natural habitat and agricultural lands. By reducing transport emissions globally, it is predicted that there will be significant positive effects on Earth's air quality, acid rain, smog, and climate change.[40]
While electric cars are being built to cut down CO2 emission at the point of use, an approach that is becoming popular among cities worldwide is to prioritize public transport, bicycles, and pedestrian movement. Redirecting vehicle movement to create 20-minute neighbourhoods[41] that promotes exercise while greatly reducing vehicle dependency and pollution. Some policies are levying a congestion charge[42] to cars for travelling within congested areas during peak time.

Sustainable development[edit]
The United Nations first formally recognized the role of transport in sustainable development in the 1992 United Nations Earth summit. In the 2012 United Nations World Conference, global leaders unanimously recognized that transport and mobility are central to achieving the sustainability targets. In recent years, data has been collected to show that the transport sector contributes to a quarter of the global greenhouse gas emissions, and therefore sustainable transport has been mainstreamed across several of the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, especially those related to food, security, health, energy, economic growth, infrastructure, and cities and human settlements. Meeting sustainable transport targets is said to be particularly important to achieving the Paris Agreement.[43]
There are various Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that are promoting sustainable transport in order to meet the defined goals. These include SDG 3 on health (increased road safety), SDG 7 on energy, SDG 8 on decent work and economic growth, SDG 9 on resilient infrastructure, SDG 11 on sustainable cities (access to transport and expanded public transport), SDG 12 on sustainable consumption and production (ending fossil fuel subsidies), and SDG 14 on oceans, seas, and marine resources.[44]

History[edit]
Main article: History of transport
Further information: Timeline of transportation technology
 Bronocice pot with the earliest known image of a wheeled vehicle in the world, found in Poland
 A bullock team hauling wool in Australia
Natural[edit]
Humans' first ways to move included walking, running, and swimming. The domestication of animals introduced a new way to lay the burden of transport on more powerful creatures, allowing the hauling of heavier loads, or humans riding animals for greater speed and duration. Inventions such as the wheel and the sled (U.K. sledge) helped make animal transport more efficient through the introduction of vehicles.
The first forms of road transport involved animals, such as horses (domesticated in the 4th or the 3rd millennium BCE), oxen (from about 8000 BCE),[45] or humans carrying goods over dirt tracks that often followed game trails.

Infrastructure[edit]
Many early civilizations, including those in Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley, constructed paved roads.  In classical antiquity, the Persian and Roman empires built stone-paved roads to allow armies to travel quickly. Deep roadbeds of crushed stone underneath kept such roads dry. The medieval Caliphate later built tar-paved roads. 

Water transport[edit]
Water transport, including rowed and sailed vessels, dates back to time immemorial and was the only efficient way to transport large quantities or over large distances prior to the Industrial Revolution. The first watercraft were canoes cut out from tree trunks. Early water transport was accomplished with ships that were either rowed or used the wind for propulsion, or a combination of the two. The importance of water has led to most cities that grew up as sites for trading being located on rivers or on the sea-shore, often at the intersection of two bodies of water. 

Mechanical[edit]
Until the Industrial Revolution, transport remained slow and costly, and production and consumption gravitated as close to each other as feasible.[citation needed] The Industrial Revolution in the 19th century saw several inventions fundamentally change transport. With telegraphy, communication became instant and independent of the transport of physical objects. The invention of the steam engine, closely followed by its application in rail transport, made land transport independent of human or animal muscles. Both speed and capacity increased, allowing specialization through manufacturing being located independently of natural resources. The 19th century also saw the development of the steam ship, which sped up global transport.
With the development of the combustion engine and the automobile around 1900, road transport became more competitive again, and mechanical private transport originated. The first "modern" highways were constructed during the 19th century[citation needed] with macadam. Later, tarmac and concrete became the dominant paving materials. 

 The Wright brothers' first flight in 1903
In 1903 the Wright brothers demonstrated the first successful controllable airplane, and after World War I (1914–1918) aircraft became a fast way to transport people and express goods over long distances.[46]
After World War II (1939–1945) the automobile and airlines took higher shares of transport, reducing rail and water to freight and short-haul passenger services.[47] Scientific spaceflight began in the 1950s, with rapid growth until the 1970s, when interest dwindled. In the 1950s the introduction of containerization gave massive efficiency gains in freight transport, fostering globalization.[31] International air travel became much more accessible in the 1960s with the commercialization of the jet engine. Along with the growth in automobiles and motorways, rail and water transport declined in relative importance. After the introduction of the Shinkansen in Japan in 1964, high-speed rail in Asia and Europe started attracting passengers on long-haul routes away from the airlines.[47]
Early in U.S. history,[when?] private joint-stock corporations owned most aqueducts, bridges, canals, railroads, roads, and tunnels. Most such transport infrastructure came under government control in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, culminating in the nationalization of inter-city passenger rail-service with the establishment of Amtrak. Recently,[when?] however, a movement to privatize roads and other infrastructure has gained some[quantify] ground and adherents.[48]

See also[edit]


Transport portal

Environmental impact of aviation
Energy efficiency in transport
Green transport hierarchy
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society
List of emerging transportation technologies
Journal of Transport and Land Use
Outline of transport
Public transport
Rail transport by country
Speed record
Taxicabs by country
Transportation engineering

References[edit]


^ Crawford, Amy (2021-10-25). "Could flying electric 'air taxis' help fix urban transportation?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2021-11-19. Retrieved 2021-11-19.

^ Cooper et al., 1998: 281

^ Swine flu prompts EU warning on travel to US Archived 2015-09-26 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. April 28, 2009.

^ Cooper et al., 1998: 279

^ "Major Roads of the United States". United States Department of the Interior. 2006-03-13. Archived from the original on 13 April 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007.

^ "Road Infrastructure Strategic Framework for South Africa". National Department of Transport (South Africa). Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007.

^ Lay, 1992: 6–7

^ "What is the difference between a road and a street?". Word FAQ. Lexico Publishing Group. 2007. Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007.

^ Harvey, Fiona (2020-03-05). "One in five Europeans exposed to harmful noise pollution – study". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2020-03-05. Retrieved 2020-03-05.

^ Cooper et al., 1998: 278

^ The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 2007, p. x and p. 32.

^ Stopford, 1997: 4–6

^ Stopford, 1997: 8–9

^ Cooper et al., 1998: 280

^ Cooper et al., 1998: 275–76

^ Bent Flyvbjerg, Mette K. Skamris Holm, and Søren L. Buhl, "How (In)Accurate Are Demand Forecasts in Public Works Projects", Journal of the American Planning Association 71:2, pp. 131–46.

^ Hamid, Umar Zakir Abdul;  et al. (2021). "Facilitating a Reliable, Feasible, and Comfortable Future Mobility". SAE International Journal of Connected and Automated Vehicles. 4 (1). Retrieved 5 September 2022.

^ Stopford, 1997: 422

^ Stopford, 1997: 29

^ Meredith, Sam (2018-05-17). "Two-thirds of global population will live in cities by 2050, UN says". CNBC. Archived from the original on 2020-11-12. Retrieved 2018-11-20.

^ Jones, Peter (July 2014). "The evolution of urban mobility: The interplay of academic and policy perspectives". IATSS Research. 38: 7–13. doi:10.1016/j.iatssr.2014.06.001.

^ Skinner, Henry Alan. 1949, "The Origin of Medical Terms". Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins

^ Branas CC, MacKenzie EJ, Williams JC, Schwab CW, Teter HM, Flanigan MC,  et al. (2005). "Access to trauma centers in the United States". JAMA. 293 (21): 2626–33. doi:10.1001/jama.293.21.2626. PMID 15928284.

^ Burney RE, Hubert D, Passini L, Maio R (1995). "Variation in air medical outcomes by crew composition: a two-year follow-up". Ann Emerg Med. 25 (2): 187–92. doi:10.1016/s0196-0644(95)70322-5. PMID 7832345.

^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 3

^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 63–64

^ McLeod, Sam; Curtis, Carey (2020-03-14). "Understanding and Planning for Freight Movement in Cities: Practices and Challenges". Planning Practice & Research. 35 (2): 201–219. doi:10.1080/02697459.2020.1732660. ISSN 0269-7459. S2CID 214463529. Archived from the original on 2022-07-30. Retrieved 2021-01-14.

^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 54

^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 4

^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 473

^ a b Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 211–14

^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 328

^ Stopford, 1997: 2

^ International Council on Clean Transportation, A world of thoughts on Phase 2 Archived 2018-11-19 at the Wayback Machine, 16 September 2016 (page visited on 18 November 2018).

^ a b Fuglestvet;  et al. (2007). "Climate forcing from the transport sectors" (PDF). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Center for International Climate and Environmental Research. 105 (2): 454–458. Bibcode:2008PNAS..105..454F. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702958104. PMC 2206557. PMID 18180450. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2008-06-25. Retrieved 2008-01-14.

^ Worldwatch Institute (16 January 2008). "Analysis: Nano Hypocrisy?". Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 17 January 2008.

^ Jan Fuglestvedt;  et al. (Jan 15, 2008). "Climate forcing from the transport sectors" (PDF). PNAS. 105 (2): 454–458. Bibcode:2008PNAS..105..454F. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702958104. PMC 2206557. PMID 18180450. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved November 20, 2018.

^ "Claverton-Energy.com". Claverton-Energy.com. 2009-02-17. Archived from the original on 2021-03-18. Retrieved 2010-05-23.

^ Data on the barriers and motivators to more sustainable transport behaviour is available in the UK Department for Transport study "Climate Change and Transport Choices Archived 2011-05-30 at the Wayback Machine" published in December 2010.

^ Environment Canada. "Transportation". Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved 30 July 2008.

^ Planning (2020-09-09). "20-minute neighbourhoods". Planning. Archived from the original on 2021-09-20. Retrieved 2020-09-26.

^ "Congestion Charge (Official)". Transport for London. Archived from the original on 2021-03-09. Retrieved 2020-09-26.

^ "Sustainable transport .:. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform". sustainabledevelopment.un.org. Archived from the original on 2020-10-09. Retrieved 2020-09-26.

^ "Sustainable transport at the heart of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) .:. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform". sustainabledevelopment.un.org. Archived from the original on 2020-10-15. Retrieved 2020-09-26.

^ 
Watts, Martin (1999). Working Oxen. Shire Album. Vol. 342. Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire: Osprey Publishing. p. 4. ISBN 9780747804154. Retrieved 2016-02-08. [...] tamed aurochs became the first domestic oxen. The earliest evidence for domestication is found in the Middle East around ten thousand years ago.

^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 158

^ a b Cooper et al., 1998: 277

^ 
Clifford Winston, Last Exit: Privatization and Deregulation of the U.S. Transportation System (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2010).


Bibliography[edit]
Bardi, Edward; John Coyle & Robert Novack (2006). Management of Transportation. Thomson South-Western. ISBN 0-324-31443-4.
Chopra, Sunil & Peter Meindl (2007). Supply Chain Management. Pearson. ISBN 978-0-13-208608-0.
Christopher P. Cooper; Rebecca Shepherd (1998). Tourism: Principles and Practice. Financial Times Prent.Int. ISBN 978-0-582-31273-9. Retrieved 22 December 2012.
Lay, Maxwell G (1992). Ways of the World: A History of the World's Roads and of the Vehicles that Used Them. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0-8135-2691-4.
Stopford, Martin (1997). Maritime Economics. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-15310-7.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transport.




Look up transport or transportation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Transport.




Wikivoyage has travel related information for Transportation.

Transportation from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Transportation at Curlie
America On the Move An online transportation exhibition from the National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution
World Transportation Organization The world transportation organization (The Non-Profit Advisory Organization)
vtePublic transportBus service
Bus
driver
list
Bus rapid transit
Charabanc
Circle route
Cross-city route
Express bus
Guided bus
Intercity bus
driver
Marshrutka
Open top bus
Pesero
Public light bus
Rail replacement bus
Share taxi/Taxibus
Shuttle bus
Transit bus
Trolleybus
Rail
Passenger rail terminology
glossary
Airport rail link
Cable car
Commuter rail
Conservation and restoration of rail vehicles
Circle route
Cross-city route
Elevated railway
Funicular
Heavy rail
Heritage railway
High-speed rail
Higher-speed rail
Horsecar
Inter-city rail
Interurban
Light rail
Maglev Train
Medium-capacity rail system
Monorail
Narrow-gauge railway
People mover
Platform screen doors
Railbus
Metro/Rapid Transit
Rubber-tyred metro
Regional rail
Street running
Suspension railway
Tram
Tram-train
Vehicles for hire
Auto rickshaw taxi
Boda boda
Combination bus
Cycle rickshaw
Demand-responsive transport
Microtransit
Paratransit
Dollar van
Dolmuş
Gondola
Hackney carriage
Jeepney
Limousine
Motorcycle taxi
Marshrutka
Nanny van
Personal rapid transit
Pesero
Public light bus
Pulled rickshaw
Share taxi
Songthaew
Taxi
Tuk tuk
Carpooling
Car jockey
Flexible carpooling
Real-time ridesharing
Slugging
Vanpool
Ship
Cable ferry
Ferry
Hovercraft
Hydrofoil
Ocean liner
Water taxi
Cable
Aerial tramway
Cable ferry
Cable railway
Elevator
Funicular
Gondola lift
bicable
tricable
Inclined elevator
Building Transport
Elevator
Escalator
Moving walkway
Inclined elevator
Othertransport
Airline
Airliner
Carsharing
Bicycle-sharing
Scooter-sharing
Elevator
Escalator
Horse-drawn vehicle
Hyperloop
Inclined elevator
Moving walkway
Personal transporter
Robotaxi
Shweeb
Slope car
Trackless train
Vactrain
Locations
Airport
Bus bulb
Bus garage (bus depot)
Bus lane
Bus stand
Bus station
Bus stop
Bus terminus
Bus turnout (bus bay)
Dry dock
Ferry terminal
Hangar
Harbor
Interchange station
Kassel kerb
Layover
Metro station
Park and ride
Port
Queue jump
Taxicab stand
Train station
Tram stop
Transit mall
Transport hub
Ticketingand fares
Automated fare collection
Bus advertising
Contract of carriage
Dead mileage
Exit fare
Fare avoidance
Fare evasion
Farebox recovery ratio
Free public transport
Free travel pass
Integrated ticketing
Manual fare collection
Money train
Paid area
Penalty fare
Proof-of-payment
Reduced fare program
Smart cards (CIPURSE, Calypso)
Ticket machine
Transfer
Transit pass
Routing
Circle route
Cross-city route
Network length
Non-revenue track
Radial route
Transport network
Facilities
Checked baggage
First class
Sleeper
Standing passenger
Travel class
Scheduling
Bus bunching
Clock-face scheduling
Headway
Night (owl) service
On-time performance
Public transport timetable
Short turn
Politics
Airport security
Complete streets
Green transport hierarchy
Rail subsidies
Security
Street hierarchy
Transit district
Transit police
Transit-oriented development (TOD)
Transportation authority
Transportation demand management
Transportation planning
Technologyand signage
Destination sign
Passenger information system
Platform display
Timetable
Other topics
Boarding
Bus rapid transit creep
Crush load
Destination sign
Dwell time
Hail and ride
Land transport
Outline of transport
Passenger load factor
Public good
Request stop
Service
Sustainable transport
Transit map
Transport economics
Micromobility

vteTourismTypes
Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Backpacking
Bicycle touring
Birth
Business
Culinary
Enotourism
Cultural
Archaeological
Literary
Bookstore
Tolkien
Music
Pop-culture
Dark
Disaster
Holocaust
War
Domestic
Ecotourism
Shark
Experiential
Extreme
Fashion
Garden
Genealogy
Heritage
Identity
Geotourism
Industrial
International
Volunteering
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical
MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions)
Nautical
Orphanage
Recreational drug
Religious
Christian
Halal
Kosher
Pilgrimage
Rural
Science
Sensory
Slum
Smart
Space
Lunar
Sports
Sustainable
Urban
Virtual
Visiting friends and relatives
Wellness
Wildlife
Safari
Scuba
Yoga
Hospitality industry
Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Convention center
Destination spa
Front desk
Guest house
Guest ranch
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hostel
Hotel
Manager
Inn
Motel
Pension
Referral chain
Resort
Hotel
Island
Seaside
Ski
Town
Restaurant
Terminology
College tour
Convention (meeting)
Destination marketing organization
Escorted tour
Excursion
Factory tour
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday
Honeymoon
Hypermobility
Journey planner
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Tour bus service
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel visa
Travel warning
Travel website
Vacation
Visitor center
Travel literature
Guide book
Outdoor literature
Tourism journals
Travel magazines
Wikivoyage
Trade associations
American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
European Travel Commission
Historical Archive on Tourism
Life Beyond Tourism
Musement
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor
Trade fairs and events
Akwaaba African Travel Market
Arabian Travel Market
Festival del Viaggio
FITUR
ITB Berlin
World Tourism Day
Issues
Heritage commodification
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism
Impacts of tourism
Leakage effect
Overtourism
Tourism improvement district
Tourist tax
Lists
Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Cities by international visitors
Convention and exhibition centers
Cruise lines
Hotels
Largest
Motels
Passenger airlines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country

 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vteSupply chain performance drivers
Facilities
Information
Inventory
Pricing
Sourcing
Transportation

vteTechnology and related conceptsMajor technologiesNecessities
Agriculture
Domestication
Grafting
Working animal
Clothing
Sewing machine
Cooking
Beer
Bread
Cheese
Milling
Wine
Food storage
Pottery
Sanitation
Plumbing
Toilet
Tool
Blade
Hammer
Plough
Wedge
Weapon
Gun
Social
Accounting
Calculation
Abacus
Calendar
Cryptography
Lock and key
Money
Banknote
Coin
Musical instrument
Phonograph
Toy
Game
Video game
Writing
Book
Map
Printing press
Typewriter
Construction
Aqueduct
Canal
Irrigation
Arch
Bridge
Building
Fortification
Foundation
Scaffolding
Tower
Dam
Caisson
Road
Tunnel
Transport
Aircraft
Aerostat
Airplane
Compass
Elevator
Horseback riding
Stirrup
Jet engine
Rocket
Motor vehicle
Railroad
Train
Scuba set
Spacecraft
Satellite
Space station
Space suit
Watercraft
Sailing
Ship
Submarine
Manufacturing
3D printing
Carpentry
Casting
Injection moulding
Lost-wax casting
Mass production
Assembly line
Interchangeable parts
Machine tool
Welding
Simple machine
Axle
Bearing
Ball bearing
Belt
Chain
Lever
Catapult
Crane
Shadoof
Linkage
Cam
Clutch
Four-bar linkage
Piston
Rack and pinion
Pendulum
Screw
Archimedes' screw
Propeller
Spring
Valve
Wheel
Block and tackle
Flywheel
Gear
Potter's wheel
Pulley
Wing
Machinery
Agricultural machinery
Appliance
Dishwasher
Washing machine
Engine
Electric motor
Internal combustion
Turbine
Waterwheel
Windmill
Heavy equipment
Hydraulics
Cylinder
Manifold
Pump
Mechanism
Clock
Differential
Epicyclic gearing
Gimbal
Gyroscope
Whippletree
MEMS
Pneumatics
Compressor
Jackhammer
Rivet gun
Vacuum pump
Robotics
Arm
Leg
Energy
Fire
Charcoal
Oven
Energy storage
Battery
Geothermal power
Heat exchanger
Heat pump
Nuclear power
Nuclear weapon
Oil drilling
Fracking
Refrigeration
Air conditioning
Refrigerator
Solar power
Photovoltaics
Material
Cement
Concrete
Ceramic
Brick
Chipped stone
Glass
Masonry
Metallurgy
Aluminum
Bronze
Ironworking
Steel
Nanomaterials
Paper
Plastic
Rammed earth
Recycling
Rubber
Vulcanization
Textile
Loom
Spinning wheel
Biotechnology
Birth control
Blood transfusion
Dentistry
Genetic engineering
CRISPR gene editing
Genetic testing
PCR
Hospital
Medical imaging
Medication
Anesthesia
Antibiotic
Prosthesis
Surgery
Vaccine
Chemical
Detergent
Soap
Dye
Explosive
Dynamite
Fireworks
Gunpowder
TNT
Fertilizer
Haber process
Laboratory glassware
Pesticide
Pigment
Separation
Chromatography
Distillation
Filtration
Spectrometer
Synthesis
Electromagnetism
Electromagnet
Laser
Optical disc
Lens
Eyeglasses
Magnetic storage
Microwave oven
Mirror
Optical fiber
Optical instrument
Microscope
Telescope
Photography
Camera
Motion picture
Radar
Telecommunications
Mobile phone
Radio
Telegraph
Telephone
Television
Electricity
Circuit
AC
Circuit breaker
DC
Electrical grid
Fuse
Generator
Switch
Transformer
Electric light
Fluorescent
Incandescent
LED
Neon
Electronics
Capacitor
Circuit board
Resistor
Inductor
Vacuum tube
Lightning rod
Multimeter
Oscilloscope
Semiconductor
Diode
Integrated circuit
Transistor
Superconductor
Computer
Artificial intelligence
Hardware
CPU
GPU
Modem
Motherboard
Mouse
RAM
Router
Storage
Touchscreen
Networking
Client–server model
Email
Internet
Peer-to-peer
Social media
World Wide Web
Programming language
Software
Compiler
Database
GUI
Graphics software
Operating system
Spreadsheet
Web browser
Word processor
PerspectivesCriticism
Appropriate technology
Low technology
Luddite
Neo-Luddism
Precautionary principle
Ecotechnology
Environmental technology
Clean technology
Sustainable design
Sustainable engineering
Policy & politics
Government by algorithm
Intellectual property
Patent
Trade secret
Persuasive technology
Science policy
Strategy of Technology
Technology assessment
Technorealism
Progressivism
Futures studies
Technology forecasting
Technological utopianism
Technocracy movement
Technological singularity
Transhumanism
Studies
Diffusion of innovations
Technology transfer
History
Timeline of historic inventions
Philosophy
Social construction of technology
Technological determinism
Technology acceptance model
Related conceptsApplied science
Agronomy
Architecture
Construction
Engineering
Forensics
Forestry
Logistics
Medicine
Mining
Navigation
Surveying
Innovation
Design
High tech
Invention
Mature technology
Research and development
Technological convergence
Technology lifecycle

 Category
 Outline
 Portal

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transport&oldid=1114434985"
Categories: TransportLogisticsEconomics of transport and utility industriesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from March 2020All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles to be expanded from December 2021All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2022Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2016Commons category link from WikidataArticles with Curlie linksArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBamanankanবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalego贛語한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKalaallisutಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLingua Franca NovaMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuMinangkabauMirandésမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNaijáNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsNedersaksies日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanОлык марийOromooOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏپښتوPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийसंस्कृतम्SarduScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaไทยትግርኛТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوVènetoTiếng ViệtVõroWinaray吴语Xitsongaייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 6 October 2022, at 13:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










