



Bronze - Wikipedia










































Bronze

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the metal alloy. For other uses, see Bronze (disambiguation).
Metal alloy consisting of copper and tin
Various examples of bronze artworks throughout history
Bronze is an alloy consisting primarily of copper, commonly with about 12–12.5% tin and often with the addition of other metals (including aluminium, manganese, nickel, or zinc) and sometimes non-metals, such as phosphorus, or metalloids such as arsenic or silicon. These additions produce a range of alloys that may be harder than copper alone, or have other useful properties, such as strength, ductility, or machinability.
The archaeological period in which bronze was the hardest metal in widespread use is known as the Bronze Age. The beginning of the Bronze Age in western Eurasia and India is conventionally dated to the mid-4th millennium BCE, and to the early 2nd millennium BCE in China;[1] elsewhere it gradually spread across regions. The Bronze Age was followed by the Iron Age starting from about 1300 BCE and reaching most of Eurasia by about 500 BCE, although bronze continued to be much more widely used than it is in modern times.
Because historical artworks were often made of brasses (copper and zinc) and bronzes with different compositions, modern museum and scholarly descriptions of older artworks increasingly use the generalized term "copper alloy" instead.[2]

Contents

1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Transition to iron


3 Composition
4 Properties
5 Uses

5.1 Sculptures
5.2 Mirrors
5.3 Musical instruments
5.4 Biblical references
5.5 Coins and medals


6 See also
7 References
8 External links


Etymology[edit]
 Houmuwu ding (Chinese: 后母戊鼎; pinyin: Hòumǔwù dǐng), the heaviest Chinese ritual bronze ever found; 1300–1046 BCE; National Museum of China (Beijing). This ding's name is based on the inscription in the bronze interior wall, which reads Hòumǔwù, meaning 'Queen Mother Wu'
The word bronze (1730–1740) is borrowed from Middle French bronze (1511), itself borrowed from Italian bronzo 'bell metal, brass' (13th century, transcribed in Medieval Latin as bronzium) from either:

bróntion, back-formation from Byzantine Greek brontēsíon (βροντησίον, 11th century), perhaps from Brentḗsion (Βρεντήσιον, 'Brindisi', reputed for its bronze;[3][4] or originally:
in its earliest form from Old Persian birinj, biranj (برنج, 'brass', modern berenj) and piring (پرنگ) 'copper',[5] from which also came Georgian brinǯi (ბრინჯი ), Turkish pirinç, and Armenian brinj (բրինձ), also meaning 'bronze'.
History[edit]
 Hoard of bronze socketed axes from the Bronze Age found in modern Germany. This was the top tool of the period, and also seems to have been used as a store of value.
 Roman bronze nails with magical signs and inscriptions, 3rd-4th century AD.
The discovery of bronze enabled people to create metal objects that were harder and more durable than previously possible. Bronze tools, weapons, armor, and building materials such as decorative tiles were harder and more durable than their stone and copper ("Chalcolithic") predecessors. Initially, bronze was made out of copper and arsenic, forming arsenic bronze, or from naturally or artificially mixed ores of copper and arsenic.[6]
The earliest artifacts so far known come from the Iranian plateau, in the 5th millennium BCE, and are smelted from native arsenical copper and copper-arsenides, such as algodonite and domeykite.[7]  The earliest tin-copper-alloy artifact has been dated to c. 4650 BCE, in a Vinča culture site in Pločnik (Serbia), and believed to have been smelted from a natural tin-copper ore, stannite.[8] Other early examples date to the late 4th millennium BCE in Egypt, Susa (Iran) and some ancient sites in China, Luristan (Iran),[7] Tepe Sialk (Iran),[7] Mundigak (Afghanistan),[7] and Mesopotamia (Iraq).[citation needed]
Tin bronze was superior to arsenic bronze in that the alloying process could be more easily controlled, and the resulting alloy was stronger and easier to cast. Also, unlike arsenic, metallic tin and fumes from tin refining are not toxic. 
Tin became the major non-copper ingredient of bronze in the late 3rd millennium BCE.[9]
Ores of copper and the far rarer tin are not often found together (exceptions include Cornwall in the United Kingdom, one ancient site in Thailand and one in Iran), so serious bronze work has always involved trade. Tin sources and trade in ancient times had a major influence on the development of cultures. In Europe, a major source of tin was the British deposits of ore in Cornwall, which were traded as far as Phoenicia in the eastern Mediterranean.
In many parts of the world, large hoards of bronze artifacts are found, suggesting that bronze also represented a store of value and an indicator of social status. In Europe, large hoards of bronze tools, typically socketed axes (illustrated above), are found, which mostly show no signs of wear. With Chinese ritual bronzes, which are documented in the inscriptions they carry and from other sources, the case is clear. These were made in enormous quantities for elite burials, and also used by the living for ritual offerings.

Transition to iron[edit]
Though bronze is generally harder than wrought iron, with Vickers hardness of 60–258 vs. 30–80,[10] the Bronze Age gave way to the Iron Age after a serious disruption of the tin trade: the population migrations of around 1200–1100 BCE reduced the shipping of tin around the Mediterranean and from Britain, limiting supplies and raising prices.[11] As the art of working in iron improved, iron became cheaper and improved in quality. As cultures advanced from hand-wrought iron to machine-forged iron (typically made with trip hammers powered by water), blacksmiths learned how to make steel. Steel is stronger than bronze and holds a sharper edge longer.[12]
Bronze was still used during the Iron Age, and has continued in use for many purposes to the modern day.

Composition[edit]
 Bronze bell with a visible crystallite structure.
There are many different bronze alloys, but typically modern bronze is 88% copper and 12% tin.[13] Alpha bronze consists of the alpha solid solution of tin in copper. Alpha bronze alloys of 4–5% tin are used to make coins, springs, turbines and blades. Historical "bronzes" are highly variable in composition, as most metalworkers probably used whatever scrap was on hand; the metal of the 12th-century English Gloucester Candlestick is bronze containing a mixture of copper, zinc, tin, lead, nickel, iron, antimony, arsenic and an unusually large amount of silver – between 22.5% in the base and 5.76% in the pan below the candle. The proportions of this mixture suggest that the candlestick was made from a hoard of old coins. The 13th-century Benin Bronzes are in fact brass, and the 12th-century Romanesque Baptismal font at St Bartholomew's Church, Liège is described as both bronze and brass.
In the Bronze Age, two forms of bronze were commonly used: "classic bronze", about 10% tin, was used in casting; and "mild bronze", about 6% tin, was hammered from ingots to make sheets. Bladed weapons were mostly cast from classic bronze, while helmets and armor were hammered from mild bronze.
Commercial bronze (90% copper and 10% zinc) and architectural bronze (57% copper, 3% lead, 40% zinc) are more properly regarded as brass alloys because they contain zinc as the main alloying ingredient. They are commonly used in architectural applications.[14][15]
Plastic bronze contains a significant quantity of lead, which makes for improved plasticity[16] possibly used by the ancient Greeks in their ship construction.[17]
Silicon bronze has a composition of Si: 2.80–3.80%, Mn: 0.50–1.30%, Fe: 0.80% max., Zn: 1.50% max., Pb: 0.05% max., Cu: balance.[18]
Other bronze alloys include aluminium bronze, phosphor bronze, manganese bronze, bell metal, arsenical bronze, speculum metal and cymbal alloys.

Properties[edit]
Bronzes are typically ductile alloys, considerably less brittle than cast iron. Typically bronze oxidizes only superficially; once a copper oxide (eventually becoming copper carbonate) layer is formed, the underlying metal is protected from further corrosion. This can be seen on statues from the Hellenistic period. However, if copper chlorides are formed, a corrosion-mode called "bronze disease" will eventually completely destroy it.[19] Copper-based alloys have lower melting points than steel or iron and are more readily produced from their constituent metals. They are generally about 10 percent denser than steel, although alloys using aluminum or silicon may be slightly less dense. Bronze is a better conductor of heat and electricity than most steels. The cost of copper-base alloys is generally higher than that of steels but lower than that of nickel-base alloys.
Copper and its alloys have a huge variety of uses that reflect their versatile physical, mechanical, and chemical properties. Some common examples are the high electrical conductivity of pure copper, low-friction properties of bearing bronze (bronze that has a high lead content— 6–8%), resonant qualities of bell bronze (20% tin, 80% copper), and resistance to corrosion by seawater of several bronze alloys.
The melting point of bronze varies depending on the ratio of the alloy components and is about 950 °C (1,742 °F). Bronze is usually nonmagnetic, but certain alloys containing iron or nickel may have magnetic properties.

Uses[edit]
 Bronze weight with an inscribed imperial order, Qin dynasty
 Industrial products of the Bunting Brass and Bronze Company, 1912
Bronze, or bronze-like alloys and mixtures, were used for coins over a longer period. Bronze was especially suitable for use in boat and ship fittings prior to the wide employment of stainless steel owing to its combination of toughness and resistance to salt water corrosion. Bronze is still commonly used in ship propellers and submerged bearings.
In the 20th century, silicon was introduced as the primary alloying element, creating an alloy with wide application in industry and the major form used in contemporary statuary. Sculptors may prefer silicon bronze because of the ready availability of silicon bronze brazing rod, which allows color-matched repair of defects in castings. Aluminum is also used for the structural metal aluminum bronze.
Bronze parts are tough and typically used for bearings, clips, electrical connectors and springs.
Bronze also has low friction against dissimilar metals, making it important for cannons prior to modern tolerancing, where iron cannonballs would otherwise stick in the barrel.[20] It is still widely used today for springs, bearings, bushings, automobile transmission pilot bearings, and similar fittings, and is particularly common in the bearings of small electric motors. Phosphor bronze is particularly suited to precision-grade bearings and springs. It is also used in guitar and piano strings.
Unlike steel, bronze struck against a hard surface will not generate sparks, so it (along with beryllium copper) is used to make hammers, mallets, wrenches and other durable tools to be used in explosive atmospheres or in the presence of flammable vapors. Bronze is used to make bronze wool for woodworking applications where steel wool would discolor oak.
Phosphor bronze is used for ships' propellers, musical instruments, and electrical contacts.[21] Bearings are often made of bronze for its friction properties. It can be impregnated with oil to make the proprietary Oilite and similar material for bearings. Aluminum bronze is hard and wear-resistant, and is used for bearings and machine tool ways.[22]

Sculptures[edit]
Main article: Bronze sculpture
See also: Ormolu
Bronze is widely used for casting bronze sculptures. Common bronze alloys have the unusual and desirable property of expanding slightly just before they set, thus filling the finest details of a mould. Then, as the bronze cools, it shrinks a little, making it easier to separate from the mould.[23]
The Assyrian king Sennacherib (704–681 BCE) claims to have been the first to cast monumental bronze statues (of up to 30 tonnes) using two-part moulds instead of the lost-wax method.[24]
Bronze statues were regarded as the highest form of sculpture in Ancient Greek art, though survivals are few, as bronze was a valuable material in short supply in the Late Antique and medieval periods. Many of the most famous Greek bronze sculptures are known through Roman copies in marble, which were more likely to survive.
In India, bronze sculptures from the Kushana (Chausa hoard) and Gupta periods (Brahma from Mirpur-Khas, Akota Hoard, Sultanganj Buddha) and later periods (Hansi Hoard) have been found.[25] Indian Hindu artisans from the period of the Chola empire in Tamil Nadu used bronze to create intricate statues via the lost-wax casting method with ornate detailing depicting the deities of Hinduism. The art form survives to this day, with many silpis, craftsmen, working in the areas of Swamimalai and Chennai.
In antiquity other cultures also produced works of high art using bronze. For example: in Africa, the bronze heads of the Kingdom of Benin; in Europe, Grecian bronzes typically of figures from Greek mythology; in east Asia, Chinese ritual bronzes of the Shang and Zhou dynasty—more often ceremonial vessels but including some figurine examples. Bronze sculptures, although known for their longevity, still undergo microbial degradation; such as from certain species of yeasts.[26]
Bronze continues into modern times as one of the materials of choice for monumental statuary.





The Dancing Girl, an Harappan artwork; 2400–1900 BCE; bronze; height: 10.8 cm; National Museum (New Delhi, India)






Ritual tripod cauldron (ding); circa 13th century BCE; bronze: height with handles: 25.4 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)






Ancient Egyptian statuette of a Kushite pharaoh; 713–664 BCE; bronze, precious-metal leaf; height: 7.6 cm, width: 3.2 cm, depth: 3.6 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Etruscan tripod base for a thymiaterion (incense burner); 475-450 BCE; bronze; height: 11 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






The Artemision Bronze; 460-450 BCE; bronze; height: 2.1 m; National Archaeological Museum (Athens)






Ancient Egyptian statuette of Isis and Horus; 305–30 BCE; solid cast of bronze; 4.8 × 10.3 cm; Cleveland Museum of Art (Cleveland, Ohio, US)






Ancient Greek statue of Eros sleeping; 3rd–2nd century BCE; bronze; 41.9 × 35.6 × 85.2 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Gupta sculpture of Buddha offering protection; late 6th–early 7th century; copper alloy; height: 47 cm, width: 15.6 cm, diameter: 14.3 cm; from India (probably Bihar); Metropolitan Museum of Art






French or South Netherlandish Medieval caldron; 13th or 14th century; bronze and wrought iron; height: 37.5 cm, diameter: 34.3 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Pair of French Rococo firedogs (chenets); circa 1750; gilt bronze; dimensions of the first: 52.7 x 48.3 x 26.7 cm, of the second: 45.1 x 49.1 x 24.8 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






French Neoclassical mantel clock (pendule de cheminée); 1757–1760; gilded and patinated bronze, oak veneered with ebony, white enamel with black numerals, and other materials; 48.3 × 69.9 × 27.9 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Pair of French Chinoiserie firedogs; 1760–1770; gilt bronze; height (each): 41.9 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Pair of Chinese vases with French Rococo mounts; the vases: early 18th century, the mounts: 1760–70; hard-paste porcelain with gilt-bronze mounts; 32.4 x 16.5 x 12.4 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






French Neoclassical mantel clock ("Pendule Uranie"); 1764–1770; case: patinated bronze and gilded bronze, Dial: white enamel, movement: brass and steel; 71.1 × 52.1 × 26.7 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Pair of mounted vases (vase à monter); 1765–70; soft-paste porcelain and French gilt bronze; 28.9 x 17.1 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art






Winter; by Jean-Antoine Houdon; 1787; bronze; 143.5 x 39.1 x 50.5 cm, height of the pedestal: 86.4 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art




Mirrors[edit]
See also: Bronze mirror
Before it became possible to produce glass with acceptably flat surfaces, bronze was a standard material for mirrors. The reflecting surface was typically made slightly convex so that the whole face could be seen in a small mirror. Bronze was used for this purpose in many parts of the world, probably based on independent discoveries.
Bronze mirrors survive from the Egyptian Middle Kingdom (2040–1750 BCE). In Europe, the Etruscans were making bronze mirrors in the sixth century BCE, and Greek and Roman mirrors followed the same pattern. Although other materials such as speculum metal had come into use, bronze mirrors were still being made in Japan in the eighteenth century AD.

Musical instruments[edit]
 Chinese bells:Bianzhong of Marquis Yi of Zeng, Spring and Autumn period (476–221 BCE)
 Singing bowls from the 16th to 18th centuries. Annealed bronze continues to be made in the Himalayas
Bronze is the preferred metal for bells in the form of a high tin bronze alloy known colloquially as bell metal, which is about 23% tin.
Nearly all professional cymbals are made from bronze, which gives a desirable balance of durability and timbre. Several types of bronze are used, commonly B20 bronze, which is roughly 20% tin, 80% copper, with traces of silver, or the tougher B8 bronze made from 8% tin and 92% copper. As the tin content in a bell or cymbal rises, the timbre drops.[27]
Bronze is also used for the windings of steel and nylon strings of various stringed instruments such as the double bass, piano, harpsichord, and guitar. Bronze strings are commonly reserved on pianoforte for the lower pitch tones, as they possess a superior sustain quality to that of high-tensile steel.[28]
Bronzes of various metallurgical properties are widely used in struck idiophones around the world, notably bells, singing bowls, gongs, cymbals, and other idiophones from Asia. Examples include Tibetan singing bowls, temple bells of many sizes and shapes, Javanese gamelan, and other bronze musical instruments. The earliest bronze archeological finds in Indonesia date from 1–2 BCE, including flat plates probably suspended and struck by a wooden or bone mallet.[28][29] Ancient bronze drums from Thailand and Vietnam date back 2,000 years. Bronze bells from Thailand and Cambodia date back to 3,600 BCE.
Some companies are now making saxophones from phosphor bronze (3.5 to 10% tin and up to 1% phosphorus content).[30] Bell bronze/B20 is used to make the tone rings of many professional model banjos.[31] The tone ring is a heavy (usually 3 lb, 1.4 kg) folded or arched metal ring attached to a thick wood rim, over which a skin, or most often, a plastic membrane (or head) is stretched – it is the bell bronze that gives the banjo a crisp powerful lower register and clear bell-like treble register.[citation needed]

Biblical references[edit]
There are over 125 references to bronze (‘nehoshet’), which appears to be the Hebrew word used for copper and any of its alloys.  However, the Old Testament era Hebrews are not thought to have had the capability to manufacture zinc (needed to make brass) and so it is likely that 'nehoshet’ refers to copper and its alloys with tin, now called bronze.[32]  In the King James Version, there is no use of the word 'bronze' and ‘nehoshet’ was translated as 'brass'.  Modern translations use 'bronze'.   Bronze (nehoshet) was used widely in the Tabernacle for items such as the bronze altar (Exodus Ch.27), bronze laver (Exodus Ch.30), utensils, and mirror (Exodus Ch.38). It was mentioned in the account of Moses holding up a bronze snake on a pole in Numbers Ch.21. In First Kings, it is mentioned that Hiram was very skilled in working with bronze, and he made many furnishings for Solomon's Temple including pillars, capitals, stands, wheels, bowls, and plates, some of which were highly decorative (see I King 7:13-47). Bronze was also widely used as battle armor and helmet, as in the battle of David and Goliath in I Samuel 17:5-6;38 (also see II Chron. 12:10).

Coins and medals[edit]
See also: Bronze medal
Bronze has also been used in coins; most "copper" coins are actually bronze, with about 4 percent tin and 1 percent zinc.[33]
As with coins, bronze has been used in the manufacture of various types of medals for centuries, and are known in contemporary times for being awarded for third place in sporting competitions and other events. The later usage was in part attributed to the choices of gold, silver and bronze to represent the first three Ages of Man in Greek mythology: the Golden Age, when men lived among the gods; the Silver age, where youth lasted a hundred years; and the Bronze Age, the era of heroes, and was first adopted at the 1904 Summer Olympics. At the 1896 event, silver was awarded to winners and bronze to runners-up, while at 1900 other prizes were given rather than medals.

See also[edit]

Art object
Bell founding
Bronze and brass ornamental work
Bronzing
Chinese bronze inscriptions
Dezincification resistant brass
French Empire mantel clock
List of copper alloys
Ormolu
Seagram Building, the first office building in the world to use extruded bronze on a facade
UNS C69100 (Tungum), a bronze alloy of copper, aluminium, nickel, tin, and zinc
Yoruba art
References[edit]


^ Thorp, Robert L. (2013). China in the Early Bronze Age: Shang Civilization. University of Pennsylvania Press.[page needed]

^ "British Museum, "Scope Note" for "copper alloy"". British Museum. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 14 September 2014.

^ Kahane, Henry; Kahane, Renée (1981). "Byzantium's Impact on the West: The Linguistic Evidence". Illinois Classical Studies. 6 (2): 395.

^ Originally Berthelot, M.P.E. (1888). "Sur le nom du bronze chez les alchimistes grecs". Revue archéologique (in French): 294–98.

^ Originally Lokotsch, Karl (1927). Etymologisches Wörterbuch der europäischen Wörter orientalischen Ursprungs (in German). Heidelberg: Carl Winter's Universitätsbuchhandlung. p. 1657.

^ 
Tylecote, R.F. (1992). A History of Metallurgy, Second Edition. London: Maney Publishing, for the Institute of Materials. ISBN 978-1-902653-79-2. Archived from the original on 2015-04-02.

^ a b c d Thornton, C.; Lamberg-Karlovsky, C.C.; Liezers, M.; Young, S.M.M. (2002). "On pins and needles: tracing the evolution of copper-based alloying at Tepe Yahya, Iran, via ICP-MS analysis of Common-place items". Journal of Archaeological Science. 29 (12): 1451–60. doi:10.1006/jasc.2002.0809.

^ Radivojević, Miljana; Rehren, Thilo (December 2013). "Tainted ores and the rise of tin bronzes in Eurasia, c. 6500 years ago". Antiquity Publications Ltd. Archived from the original on 2014-02-05.

^ Kaufman, Brett. "Metallurgy and Ecological Change in the Ancient Near East". Backdirt: Annual Review. 2011: 86.

^ Smithells Metals Reference Book, 8th Edition, ch. 22

^ Cramer, Clayton E. (10 December 1995). "What Caused The Iron Age?" (PDF). claytoncramer.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-12-28.

^ Sherby, O. D.; Wadsworth, J. (2000). "Ancient Blacksmiths, the Iron Age, Damascus Steels, and Modern Metallurgy" (PDF). Thermec 2000. Las Vegas, Nevada: U.S. Department of Commerce. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-06-26. Retrieved 24 August 2022.

^ Knapp, Brian. (1996) Copper, Silver and Gold. Reed Library, Australia.

^ "Copper alloys". Archived from the original on 11 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2014.

^ "CDA UNS Standard Designations for Wrought and Cast Copper and Copper Alloys: Introduction". Archived from the original on 24 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2014.

^ "plastic bronze". The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 24 August 2022.

^ Adams, Jonathan R. (2012). "The Belgammel Ram, a Hellenistic-Roman BronzeProembolionFound off the Coast of Libya: test analysis of function, date and metallurgy, with a digital reference archive" (PDF). International Journal of Nautical Archaeology. 42 (1): 60–75. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.738.4024. doi:10.1111/1095-9270.12001. S2CID 39339094. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-08-28.

^ ASTM B124 / B124M – 15. ASTM International. 2015.

^ "Bronze Disease, Archaeologies of the Greek Past". The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology Classroom. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2014.

^ Alavudeen, A.; Venkateshwaran, N.; Winowlin Jappes, J. T. (1 January 2006). A Textbook of Engineering Materials and Metallurgy. Firewall Media. pp. 136–. ISBN 978-81-7008-957-5. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2013.

^ "Resources: Standards & Properties – Copper & Copper Alloy Microstructures: Phosphor Bronze". Copper Development Association Inc. Archived from the original on 2015-12-08. Retrieved 24 August 2022.

^ "Resources: Standards & Properties – Copper & Copper Alloy Microstructures: Aluminum Bronzes". Copper Development Association Inc. Archived from the original on 2013-12-05. Retrieved 24 August 2022.

^ Savage, George (1968). A Concise History of Bronzes. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, Inc. Publishers. p. 17.

^ for a translation of his inscription see the appendix in Dalley, Stephanie (2013). The Mystery of the Hanging Garden of Babylon: an elusive World Wonder traced. OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-966226-5.

^ Indian bronze masterpieces: the great tradition: specially published for the Festival of India, Asharani Mathur, Sonya Singh, Festival of India, Brijbasi Printers, Dec 1, 1988

^ Cappitelli, Francesca; Sorlini, Claudia (2008). "Microorganisms Attack Synthetic Polymers in Items Representing Our Cultural Heritage". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 74 (3): 564–69. Bibcode:2008ApEnM..74..564C. doi:10.1128/AEM.01768-07. PMC 2227722. PMID 18065627.

^ Von Falkenhausen, Lothar (1993). Suspended Music: Chime-Bells in the Culture of Bronze Age China. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-520-07378-4. Archived from the original on 2016-05-26.

^ a b McCreight, Tim (1992). Metals technic: a collection of techniques for metalsmiths. Brynmorgen Press. ISBN 0-9615984-3-3.[page needed]

^ LaPlantz, David (1991). Jewelry – Metalwork 1991 Survey: Visions – Concepts – Communication. S. LaPlantz. ISBN 0-942002-05-9.[page needed]

^ "www.sax.co.uk". Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 18 September 2014.

^ Siminoff, Roger H. (2008). Siminoff's Luthiers Glossary. New York: Hal Leonard. p. 13. ISBN 9781423442929.

^ Meschel, Susan V. "Nehoshet: Copper, Bronze or Brass? Which are Plausible in the Tanakh?". Jewish Bible Quarterly. Retrieved 24 August 2022.

^ "bronze | alloy". Encyclopædia Britannica (Online ed.). Archived from the original on 2016-07-30. Retrieved 2016-07-21.


External links[edit]


Bronze  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata

Bronze at Curlie
Bronze bells
"Lost Wax, Found Bronze": lost-wax casting explained
"Flash animation of the lost-wax casting process". James Peniston Sculpture. Retrieved 2008-11-03.
Viking Bronze – Ancient and Early Medieval bronze casting
vteJewelleryForms
Anklet
Barrette
Belly chain
Belt buckle
Bindi
Bolo tie
Bracelet
Brooch
Chatelaine
Collar pin
Crown
Cufflink
Earring
Ferronnière
Genital
Lapel pin
Necklace
Pectoral
Pendant
Ring
Tiara
Tie chain
Tie clip
Tie pin
Toe ring
Watch
pocket
strap
MakingPeople
Bench jeweler
Clockmaker
Goldsmith
Jewellery designer
Lapidarist
Silversmith
Watchmaker
Processes
Carving
Casting
centrifugal
lost-wax
vacuum
Enameling
Engraving
Filigree
Kazaziye
Metal clay
Plating
Polishing
Repoussé and chasing
Soldering
Stonesetting
Wire sculpture
Wire wrapped jewelry
Tools
Draw plate
File
Hammer
Mandrel
Pliers
MaterialsPrecious metals
Gold
Palladium
Platinum
Rhodium
Silver
Precious metal alloys
Britannia silver
Colored gold
Crown gold
Electrum
Shakudō
Shibuichi
Sterling silver
Argentium
Tumbaga
Base metals
Brass
Bronze
Copper
Mokume-gane
Nickel silver (alpacca)
Pewter
Pinchbeck
Stainless steel
Titanium
Tungsten
Mineral gemstones
Agate
Amazonite
Amethyst
Aventurine
Beryl
Carnelian
Chrysoberyl
Chrysocolla
Diamond
Diopside
Emerald
Fluorite
Garnet
Howlite
Jade
Jasper
Kyanite
Labradorite
Lapis lazuli
Larimar
Malachite
Marcasite
Moonstone
Obsidian
Onyx
Opal
Peridot
Prasiolite
Quartz
Ruby
Sapphire
Sodalite
Spinel
Sunstone
Tanzanite
Tiger's eye
Topaz
Tourmaline
Turquoise
Variscite
Zircon
Organic gemstones
Abalone
Amber
Ammolite
Copal
Coral
Black
Precious
Ivory
Jet
Nacre
Operculum
Pearl
Tortoiseshell
Other natural objects
Bezoar
Bog-wood
Ebonite (vulcanite)
Gutta-percha
Hair
Shell
Spondylus shell
Toadstone
Terms
Art jewelry
Carat (mass)
Carat (purity)
Finding
Fineness

Related topics
Body piercing
Fashion
Gemology
Metalworking
Phaleristics
Wearable art

Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bronze&oldid=1113886653"
Categories: BronzeCopper alloysTin alloysHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2022CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesArticles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing Middle French (ca. 1400-1600)-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing Medieval Latin-language textArticles containing undetermined-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textArticles containing Persian-language textArticles containing Georgian-language textArticles containing Armenian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2012Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with Curlie linksArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia Commons




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésAsturianuAzərbaycancaBasa BaliবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)Bikol CentralБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenКыргызчаLadinЛаккуLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuMirandésမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийСаха тылаᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtVõro文言Winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 3 October 2022, at 18:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










