



Fashion - Wikipedia










































Fashion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Popular style or practice in clothing, personal adornment, or decorative arts


For other uses, see Fashion (disambiguation). "Menswear" redirects here. For the music group, see Menswear (band).
 Rihanna in 2017 at the Met Gala in Manhattan, widely regarded to be the world's most prestigious haute couture fashion event, where the theme was "Rei Kawakubo/Comme des Garçons: Art of the In-Between"
Fashion is a form of self-expression and autonomy at a particular period and place and in a specific context, of clothing, footwear, lifestyle, accessories, makeup, hairstyle, and body posture.[1] The term implies a look defined by the fashion industry as that which is trending. Everything that is considered fashion is available and popularized by the fashion system (industry and media).
Given the rise in mass production of commodities and clothing at lower prices and global reach, sustainability has become an urgent issue among politicians, brands, and consumers.[2][3]

Contents

1 Definitions
2 History of fashion

2.1 Orientalism and Western Imperialism
2.2 Fashion in Africa
2.3 Fashion in the Western world
2.4 Fashion influence from the Eastern world


3 Fashion industry
4 Fashion trends

4.1 Social influences
4.2 Economic influences

4.2.1 Circular economy


4.3 Marketing

4.3.1 Market research
4.3.2 Symbolic consumption


4.4 Political influences
4.5 Technology influences


5 Media

5.1 Fashion in printed media
5.2 Fashion in television
5.3 Controversial advertisements in fashion industry

5.3.1 Racism in fashion advertisements
5.3.2 Sexism in fashion advertisements




6 Public relations and social media
7 Fashion and political activism
8 Anthropological perspective
9 Intellectual property
10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links


Definitions
The French word mode, meaning "fashion", dates as far back as 1482, while the English word denoting something "in style" dates only to the 16th century. Other words exist related to concepts of style and appeal that precede mode. In the 12th and 13th century Old French the concept of elegance begins to appear in the context of aristocratic preferences to enhance beauty and display refinement, and cointerie, the idea of making oneself more attractive to others by style or artifice in grooming and dress, appears in a 13th century poem by Guillaume de Lorris advising men that "handsome clothes and handsome accessories improve a man a great deal".[4]
Fashion scholar Susan B. Kaiser states that everyone is "forced to appear", unmediated before others.[5] Everyone is evaluated by their attire, and evaluation includes the consideration of colors, materials, silhouette, and how garments appear on the body. Garments identical in style and material also appear different depending on the wearer's body shape, or whether the garment has been washed, folded, mended, or is new.
Fashion is defined in a number of different ways, and its application can be sometimes unclear. Though the term fashion connotes difference, as in "the new fashions of the season", it can also connote sameness, for example in reference to "the fashions of the 1960s", implying a general uniformity. Fashion can signify the latest trends, but may often reference fashions of a previous era, leading to the reappearance of fashions from a different time period. While what is fashionable can be defined by a relatively insular, esteemed and often rich aesthetic elite who make a look exclusive, such as fashion houses and haute couturiers, this 'look' is often designed by pulling references from subcultures and social groups who are not considered elite, and are thus excluded from making the distinction of what is fashion themselves.
Whereas a trend often connotes a peculiar aesthetic expression, often lasting shorter than a season and being identifiable by visual extremes, fashion is a distinctive and industry-supported expression traditionally tied to the fashion season and collections.[6] Style is an expression that lasts over many seasons and is often connected to cultural movements and social markers, symbols, class, and culture (such as Baroque and Rococo). According to sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, fashion connotes "the latest difference."[7]
Even though the terms fashion, clothing and costume are often used together, fashion differs from both. Clothing describes the material and the technical garment, devoid of any social meaning or connections; costume has come to mean fancy dress or masquerade wear. Fashion, by contrast, describes the social and temporal system that influences and "activates" dress as a social signifier in a certain time and context. Philosopher Giorgio Agamben connects fashion to the qualitative Ancient Greek concept of kairos, meaning "the right, critical, or opportune moment", and clothing to the quantitative concept of chronos, the personification of chronological or sequential time.[8]
While some exclusive brands may claim the label haute couture, the term is technically limited to members of the Chambre Syndicale de la Haute Couture[9] in Paris.[6] Haute couture is more aspirational; inspired by art and culture, and in most cases, reserved for the economic elite.
Fashion is also a source of art, allowing people to display their unique tastes and styling.[10] Different fashion designers are influenced by outside stimuli and reflect this inspiration in their work. For example, Gucci's 'stained green' jeans[11] may look like a grass stain, but to others, they display purity, freshness, and summer.[1]
Fashion is unique, self-fulfilling and may be a key part of someone's identity. Similarly to art, the aims of a person's choices in fashion are not necessarily to be liked by everyone, but instead to be an expression of personal taste.[10] A person's personal style functions as a "societal formation always combining two opposite principles. It is a socially acceptable and secure way to distinguish oneself from others and, at the same time, it satisfies the individual's need for social adaptation and imitation."[12] While philosopher Immanuel Kant believed that fashion "has nothing to do with genuine judgements of taste", and was instead "a case of unreflected and 'blind' imitation",[12] sociologist Georg Simmel[13] thought of fashion as something that "helped overcome the distance between an individual and his society".[12]

History of fashion
Changes in clothing often took place at times of economic or social change, as occurred in ancient Rome and the medieval Caliphate, followed by a long period without significant changes. In eighth-century Moorish Spain, the musician Ziryab introduced to Córdoba[14][unreliable source][15] sophisticated clothing styles based on seasonal and daily fashions from his native Baghdad, modified by his inspiration. Similar changes in fashion occurred in the 11th century in the Middle East following the arrival of the Turks, who introduced clothing styles from Central Asia and the Far East.[16]

Orientalism and Western Imperialism
Early Western[when?] travellers who visited India, Persia, Turkey, or China, would frequently remark on the absence of change in fashion in those countries. In 1609, the secretary of the Japanese shōgun bragged inaccurately to a Spanish visitor that Japanese clothing had not changed in over a thousand years.[17]: 312–313  However, these conceptions of non-Western clothing undergoing little, if any, evolution are generally held to be untrue; for instance, there is considerable evidence in Ming China of rapidly changing fashions in Chinese clothing.[18] In imperial China, clothing were not only an embodiment of freedom and comfort or used to cover the body or protect against the cold or used for decorative purposes; it was also regulated by strong sumptuary laws which was based on strict social hierarchy system and the ritual system of the Chinese society.[19]: 14–15  It was expected for people to be dressed accordingly to their gender, social status and occupation; the Chinese clothing system had cleared evolution and varied in appearance in each period of history.[19]: 14–15  However, ancient Chinese fashion, like in other cultures, was an indicator of the socioeconomic conditions of its population; for Confucian scholars, however, changing fashion was oftentimes associated with social disorder which was brought by rapid commercialization.[20]: 204  Clothing which experienced fast changing fashion in ancient China was recorded in ancient Chinese texts, where it was sometimes referred as shiyang, "contemporary-styles", and was associated with the concept of fuyao, "outrageous dress",[21]: 44  which typically holds a negative connotation. Similar changes in clothing can be seen in Japanese clothing between the Genroku period and the later centuries of the Edo period (1603–1867), during which a time clothing trends switched from flashy and expensive displays of wealth to subdued and subverted ones.

The myth on the lack of fashion in what was considered the Orient was related to Western Imperialism also often accompanied Orientalism, and European imperialism was especially at its highest in the 19th century.[22]: 10  In the 19th century time, Europeans described China in binary opposition to Europe, describing China as "lacking in fashion" among many other things, while Europeans deliberately placed themselves in a superior position when they would compare themselves to the Chinese[22]: 10  as well as to other countries in Asia:[22]: 166 Latent orientalism is an unconscious, untouchable certainty about what the Orient is, static and unanimous, separate, eccentric, backward, silently different, sensual, and passive. It has a tendency towards despotism and away from progress. [...] Its progress and value are judged in comparison to the West, so it is the Other. Many rigorous scholars [...] saw the Orient as a locale requiring Western attention, reconstruction, even redemption.— Laura Fantone quoted Said (1979), Local Invisibility, Postcolonial Feminisms Asian American Contemporary Artists in California, page 166Similar ideas were also applied to other countries in the East Asia, in India, and Middle East, where the perceived lack of fashion were associated with offensive remarks on the Asian social and political systems:[23]: 187 I confess that the unchanging fashions of the Turks and other Eastern peoples do not attract me. It seems that their fashions tend to preserve their stupid despotism.— Jean Baptiste Say (1829)
Fashion in Africa
Additionally, there is a long history of fashion in West Africa.[24] Cloth was used as a form of currency in trade with the Portuguese and Dutch as early as the 16th century,[24] and locally produced cloth and cheaper European imports were assembled into new styles to accommodate the growing elite class of West Africans and resident gold and slave traders.[24] There was an exceptionally strong tradition of weaving in the Oyo Empire, and the areas inhabited by the Igbo people.[24]

Fashion in the Western world
See also: History of Western fashion, Chinoiserie in European and American fashion, and Fashion week
The beginning in Europe of continual and increasingly-rapid change in clothing styles can be fairly reliably dated to late medieval times. Historians, including James Laver and Fernand Braudel, date the start of Western fashion in clothing to the middle of the 14th century,[17]: 317 [25]: 62  though they tend to rely heavily on contemporary imagery,[26] as illuminated manuscripts were not common before the 14th century.[27] The most dramatic early change in fashion was a sudden drastic shortening and tightening of the male over-garment from calf-length to barely covering the buttocks,[28] sometimes accompanied with stuffing in the chest to make it look bigger. This created the distinctive Western outline of a tailored top worn over leggings or trousers.
The pace of change accelerated considerably in the following century, and women's and men's fashion, especially in the dressing and adorning of the hair, became equally complex. Art historians are, therefore, able to use fashion with confidence and precision to date images, often to within five years, particularly in the case of images from the 15th century. Initially, changes in fashion led to a fragmentation across the upper classes of Europe of what had previously been a very similar style of dressing and the subsequent development of distinctive national styles. These national styles remained very different until a counter-movement in the 17th to 18th centuries imposed similar styles once again, mostly originating from Ancien Régime France.[17]: 317–324  Though the rich usually led fashion, the increasing affluence of early modern Europe led to the bourgeoisie and even peasants following trends at a distance, but still uncomfortably close for the elites – a factor that Fernand Braudel regards as one of the main motors of changing fashion.[17]: 313–315 

 Albrecht Dürer's drawing contrasts a well-turned out bourgeoise from Nuremberg (left) with her counterpart from Venice. The Venetian lady's high chopines make her look taller.
 Marie Antoinette, wife of Louis XVI, was a leader of fashion. Her choices, such as this 1783 white muslin dress called a chemise a la Reine, were highly influential and widely worn.[29]
In the 16th century, national differences were at their most pronounced. Ten 16th century portraits of German or Italian gentlemen may show ten entirely different hats. Albrecht Dürer illustrated the differences in his actual (or composite) contrast of Nuremberg and Venetian fashions at the close of the 15th century (illustration, right). The "Spanish style" of the late 16th century began the move back to synchronicity among upper-class Europeans, and after a struggle in the mid-17th century, French styles decisively took over leadership, a process completed in the 18th century.[17]: 317–321 
Though different textile colours and patterns changed from year to year,[30] the cut of a gentleman's coat and the length of his waistcoat, or the pattern to which a lady's dress was cut, changed more slowly. Men's fashions were primarily derived from military models, and changes in a European male silhouette were galvanized in theaters of European war where gentleman officers had opportunities to make notes of different styles such as the "Steinkirk" cravat or necktie. Both parties wore shirts under their clothing, the cut and style of which had little cause to change over a number of centuries.
Though there had been distribution of dressed dolls from France since the 16th century and Abraham Bosse had produced engravings of fashion in the 1620s, the pace of change picked up in the 1780s with increased publication of French engravings illustrating the latest Paris styles. By 1800, all Western Europeans were dressing alike (or thought they were); local variation became first a sign of provincial culture and later a badge of the conservative peasant.[17]: 317 [25]: 62 
Although tailors and dressmakers were no doubt responsible for many innovations, and the textile industry indeed led many trends, the history of fashion design is generally understood to date from 1858 when the English-born Charles Frederick Worth opened the first authentic haute couture house in Paris. The Haute house was the name established by the government for the fashion houses that met the standards of the industry. These fashion houses continue to adhere to standards such as keeping at least twenty employees engaged in making the clothes, showing two collections per year at fashion shows, and presenting a certain number of patterns to costumers.[31] Since then, the idea of the fashion designer as a celebrity in their own right has become increasingly dominant.[32]
Although fashion can be feminine or masculine, additional trends are androgynous.[33] The idea of unisex dressing originated in the 1960s, when designers such as Pierre Cardin and Rudi Gernreich created garments, such as stretch jersey tunics or leggings, meant to be worn by both males and females. The impact of unisex wearability expanded more broadly to encompass various themes in fashion, including androgyny, mass-market retail, and conceptual clothing.[34] The fashion trends of the 1970s, such as sheepskin jackets, flight jackets, duffel coats, and unstructured clothing, influenced men to attend social gatherings without a dinner jacket and to accessorize in new ways. Some men's styles blended the sensuality and expressiveness, and the growing gay-rights movement and an emphasis on youth allowed for a new freedom to experiment with style and with fabrics such as wool crepe, which had previously been associated with women's attire.[35]

 Cover of Marcus Clarks' spring and summer catalogue 1926–27
The four major current fashion capitals are acknowledged to be New York City, Paris, Milan, and London, which are all headquarters to the most significant fashion companies and are renowned for their major influence on global fashion. Fashion weeks are held in these cities, where designers exhibit their new clothing collections to audiences. A succession of major designers such as Coco Chanel and Yves Saint-Laurent have kept Paris as the centre most watched by the rest of the world, although haute couture is now subsidized by the sale of ready-to-wear collections and perfume using the same branding.
Modern Westeners have a vast number of choices in the selection of their clothes. What a person chooses to wear can reflect their personality or interests. When people who have high cultural status start to wear new or different styles, they may inspire a new fashion trend. People who like or respect these people are influenced by their style and begin wearing similarly styled clothes.
Fashions may vary considerably within a society according to age, social class, generation, occupation, and geography, and may also vary over time. The terms fashionista and fashion victim refer to someone who slavishly follows current fashions.

Fashion influence from the Eastern world
In the early 2000s, Asian fashion influences became increasingly significant in local and global markets. Countries such as China, Japan, India, and Pakistan have traditionally had large textile industries with a number of rich traditions; though these were often drawn upon by Western designers, Asian clothing styles gained considerable influence in the early- to mid-2000s.[36]

Fashion industry
See also: Clothing industry, Fashion design, Fashion show, and Fashion week
 Liu Wen, supermodel, walks the runway modeling fashions by designer Diane von Fürstenberg at New York Fashion Week 2013.
In its most common use, the term fashion refers to the current expressions on sale through the fashion industry. The global fashion industry is a product of the modern age.[37] In the Western world, tailoring has since medieval times been controlled by guilds, but with the emergence of industrialism, the power of the guilds was undermined. Before the mid-19th century, most clothing was custom-made. It was handmade for individuals, either as home production or on order from dressmakers and tailors. By the beginning of the 20th century, with the rise of new technologies such as the sewing machine, the rise of global trade, the development of the factory system of production, and the proliferation of retail outlets such as department stores, clothing became increasingly mass-produced in standard sizes and sold at fixed prices.
Although the fashion industry developed first in Europe and America, as of 2017[update], it is an international and highly globalized industry, with clothing often designed in one country, manufactured in another, and sold worldwide. For example, an American fashion company might source fabric in China and have the clothes manufactured in Vietnam, finished in Italy, and shipped to a warehouse in the United States for distribution to retail outlets internationally.
The fashion industry has for a long time been one of the largest employers in the United States,[37] and it remains so in the 21st century. However, U.S. employment in fashion began to decline considerably as production increasingly moved overseas, especially to China. Because data on the fashion industry typically are reported for national economies and expressed in terms of the industry's many separate sectors, aggregate figures for the world production of textiles and clothing are difficult to obtain. However, by any measure, the clothing industry accounts for a significant share of world economic output.[38]
The fashion industry consists of four levels:

The production of raw materials, principally fiber, and textiles but also leather and fur.
The production of fashion goods by designers, manufacturers, contractors, and others.
Retail sales.
Various forms of advertising and promotion.
The levels of focus in the fashion industry consist of many separate but interdependent sectors. These sectors include textile design and production, fashion design and manufacturing, fashion retailing, marketing and merchandising, fashion shows, and media and marketing. Each sector is devoted to the goal of satisfying consumer demand for apparel under conditions that enable participants in the industry to operate at a profit.[37]

Fashion trends
Main articles: Fashion trend and 2010s in fashion
A fashion trend signifies a specific look or expression that is spread across a population at a specific time and place. A trend is considered a more ephemeral look, not defined by the seasons when collections are released by the fashion industry. A trend can thus emerge from street style, across cultures, and from influencers and other celebrities.
Fashion trends are influenced by several factors, including cinema, celebrities, climate, creative explorations, innovations, designs, political, economic, social, and technological. Examining these factors is called a PEST analysis. Fashion forecasters can use this information to help determine the growth or decline of a particular trend.

Social influences
 Celebrities such as Britney Spears have popularized the concept of wearing underwear as outerwear.
Fashion is inherently a social phenomenon. A person cannot have a fashion by oneself, but for something to be defined as fashion, there needs to be dissemination and followers. This dissemination can take several forms; from the top-down ("trickle-down") to bottom-up ("bubble up/trickle-up"), or transversally across cultures and through viral memes and media ("trickle-across").
Fashion relates to the social and cultural context of an environment. According to Matika,[39] "Elements of popular culture become fused when a person's trend is associated with a preference for a genre of music […] like music, news,or literature, fashion has been fused into everyday lives." Fashion is not only seen as purely aesthetic; fashion is also a medium for people to create an overall effect and express their opinions and overall art.
This mirrors what performers frequently accomplish through music videos. In the music video 'Formation' by Beyoncé, according to Carlos,[40]
The annual or seasonal runway show is a reflection of fashion trends and a designer's inspirations. For designers like Vivienne Westwood, runway shows are a platform for her voice on politics and current events. For her AW15 menswear show, according to Water,[41] "where models with severely bruised faces channeled eco-warriors on a mission to save the planet." Another recent example is a staged feminist protest march for Chanel's SS15 show, rioting models chanting words of empowerment using signs like "Feminist but feminine" and "Ladies first." According to Water,[41] "The show tapped into Chanel's long history of championing female independence: founder Coco Chanel was a trailblazer for liberating the female body in the post-WWI era, introducing silhouettes that countered the restrictive corsets then in favour."
The annual Met Gala ceremony in Manhattan is a venue where fashion designers and their creations are celebrated. Social media is also a place where fashion is presented most often. Some influencers are paid huge amounts of money to promote a product or clothing item, where the business hopes many viewers will buy the product off the back of the advertisement. Instagram is the most popular platform for advertising, but Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter and other platforms are also used.[42] In New York, the LGBT fashion design community contributes very significantly to promulgating fashion trends, and drag celebrities have developed a profound influence upon New York Fashion Week.[43]

Economic influences
Circular economy
With increasing environmental awareness, the economic imperative to "Spend now, think later" is getting increasingly scrutinized.[44] Today's consumer tends to be more mindful about consumption, looking for just enough and better, more durable options. People have also become more conscious of the impact their everyday consumption exerts upon the environment and on society, and these initiatives are often described as a move towards sustainable fashion, yet some argue that a circular economy based on growth is an oxymoron, or an increasing spiral of consumption, rather than a utopian cradle-to-cradle circular solution.
In today's linear economic system, manufacturers extract resources from the earth to make products that will soon be discarded in landfills, on the other hand, under the circular model, the production of goods operates like systems in nature, where the waste and demise of a substance becomes the food and source of growth for something new.

Marketing
Market research
 Fur fashion for sale in Tallinn, Estonia
Consumers of different groups have varying needs and demands. Factors taken into consideration when analyzing consumers' needs include key demographics.[45]
To understand consumers' needs and predict fashion trends, fashion companies have to do market research[46] There are two research methods: primary and secondary.[47] Secondary methods are taking other information that has already been collected, for example using a book or an article for research. Primary research is collecting data through surveys, interviews, observation, and/or focus groups. Primary research often focuses on large sample sizes to determine customer's motivations to shop.[48]
The benefits of primary research are specific information about a fashion brand's consumer is explored. Surveys are helpful tools; questions can be open-ended or closed-ended. Negative factor surveys and interviews present is that the answers can be biased, due to wording in the survey or on face-to-face interactions. Focus groups, about 8 to 12 people, can be beneficial because several points can be addressed in depth. However, there are drawbacks to this tactic, too. With such a small sample size, it is hard to know if the greater public would react the same way as the focus group.[47] Observation can really help a company gain insight on what a consumer truly wants. There is less of a bias because consumers are just performing their daily tasks, not necessarily realizing they are being observed. For example, observing the public by taking street style photos of people, the consumer did not get dressed in the morning knowing that would have their photo taken necessarily. They just wear what they would normally wear. Through observation patterns can be seen, helping trend forecasters know what their target market needs and wants.
Knowing the needs of consumers will increase fashion companies' sales and profits. Through research and studying the consumers' lives the needs of the customer can be obtained and help fashion brands know what trends the consumers are ready for.

Symbolic consumption
Consumption is driven not only by need, the symbolic meaning for consumers is also a factor. Consumers engaging in symbolic consumption may develop a sense of self over an extended period of time as various objects are collected as part of the process of establishing their identity and, when the symbolic meaning is shared in a social group, to communicate their identity to others. For teenagers, consumption plays a role in distinguishing the child self from the adult. Researchers have found that the fashion choices of teenagers are used for self-expression and also to recognize other teens who wear similar clothes. The symbolic association of clothing items can link individuals' personality and interests, with music as a prominent factor influencing fashion decisions.[49]

Political influences
 Ivanka Trump (right) along with Japanese PM Shinzō Abe wearing Western-style business suits, 2017
Political figures have played a central role in the development of fashion, at least since the time of French king Louis XIV. For example, First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was a fashion icon of the early 1960s. Wearing Chanel suits, structural Givenchy shift dresses, and soft color Cassini coats with large buttons, she inspired trends of both elegant formal dressing and classic feminine style.[50]
Cultural upheavals have also had an impact on fashion trends. For example, during the 1960s, the U.S. economy was robust, the divorce rate was increasing, and the government approved the birth control pill. These factors inspired the younger generation to rebel against entrenched social norms. The civil rights movement, a struggle for social justice and equal opportunity for Blacks, and the women's liberation movement, seeking equal rights and opportunities and greater personal freedom for women, were in full bloom. In 1964, the leg-baring mini-skirt was introduced and became a white-hot trend. Fashion designers then began to experiment with the shapes of garments: loose sleeveless dresses, micro-minis, flared skirts, and trumpet sleeves. Fluorescent colors, print patterns, bell-bottom jeans, fringed vests, and skirts became de rigueur outfits of the 1960s.[51]
Concern and protest over U.S involvement in the failing Vietnam War also influenced fashion . Camouflage patterns in military clothing, developed to help military personnel be less visible to enemy forces, seeped into streetwear designs in the 1960s. Camouflage trends have disappeared and resurfaced several times since then, appearing in high fashion iterations in the 1990s.[52] Designers such as Valentino, Dior, and Dolce & Gabbana combined camouflage into their runway and ready-to-wear collections. Today, variations of camouflage, including pastel shades, in every article of clothing or accessory, continue to enjoy popularity.

Technology influences
Today, technology plays a sizable role in society, and technological influences are correspondingly increasing within the realm of fashion. Wearable technology has become incorporated; for example, clothing constructed with solar panels that charge devices and smart fabrics that enhance wearer comfort by changing color or texture based on environmental changes.[53] 3D printing technology has influenced designers such as Iris van Herpen and Kimberly Ovitz. As the technology evolves, 3D printers will become more accessible to designers and eventually, consumers — these could potentially reshape design and production in the fashion industry entirely.
Internet technology, enabling the far reaches of online retailers and social media platforms, has created previously unimaginable ways for trends to be identified, marketed, and sold immediately.[54] Trend-setting styles are easily displayed and communicated online to attract customers. Posts on Instagram or Facebook can quickly increase awareness about new trends in fashion, which subsequently may create high demand for specific items or brands,[55] new "buy now button" technology can link these styles with direct sales.
Machine vision technology has been developed to track how fashions spread through society. The industry can now see the direct correlation on how fashion shows influence street-chic outfits. Effects such as these can now be quantified and provide valuable feedback to fashion houses, designers, and consumers regarding trends.[56]

Media
 Latin dancers in their costumes. The woman is wearing backless dress with deep slits on its lower portion, while the man is wearing a shirt with top buttons open.
The media plays a significant role when it comes to fashion. For instance, an important part of fashion is fashion journalism. Editorial critique, guidelines, and commentary can be found on television and in magazines, newspapers, fashion websites, social networks, and fashion blogs. In recent years, fashion blogging and YouTube videos have become a major outlet for spreading trends and fashion tips, creating an online culture of sharing one's style on a website or social media accounts (i.e. Instagram, TikTok, or Twitter). Through these media outlets, readers and viewers all over the world can learn about fashion, making it very accessible.[57] In addition to fashion journalism, another media platform that is important in fashion industry is advertisement. Advertisements provide information to audiences and promote the sales of products and services. The fashion industry utilizes advertisements to attract consumers and promote its products to generate sales. A few decades ago when technology was still underdeveloped, advertisements heavily relied on radio, magazines, billboards, and newspapers.[58] These days, there are more various ways in advertisements such as television ads, online-based ads using internet websites, and posts, videos, and live streaming in social media platforms.

Fashion in printed media
 This 1921 clipping from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, with story and drawings by Marguerite Martyn, represents the saturation newspaper coverage given to society women at a fashionable dance.
There are two subsets of print styling: editorial and lifestyle. Editorial styling is the high - fashion styling seen in fashion magazines, and this tends to be more artistic and fashion-forward. Lifestyle styling focuses on a more overtly commercial goal, like a department store advertisement, a website, or an advertisement where fashion is not what's being sold but the models hired to promote the product in the photo.[59]
The dressing practices of the powerful have traditionally been mediated through art and the practices of the courts. The looks of the French court were disseminated through prints from the 16th century on, but gained cohesive design with the development of a centralized court under King Louis XIV, which produced an identifiable style that took his name.[60] At the beginning of the 20th century, fashion magazines began to include photographs of various fashion designs and became even more influential than in the past.[61] In cities throughout the world these magazines were greatly sought after and had a profound effect on public taste in clothing. Talented illustrators drew exquisite fashion plates for the publications which covered the most recent developments in fashion and beauty. Perhaps the most famous of these magazines was La Gazette du Bon Ton, which was founded in 1912 by Lucien Vogel and regularly published until 1925 (with the exception of the war years).[62]

 A see-through top worn along with pasties by a model at a fashion show in USA, 2017. Such fashion trends get popularised through media.
Vogue, founded in the United States in 1892, has been the longest-lasting and most successful of the hundreds of fashion magazines that have come and gone. Increasing affluence after World War II and, most importantly, the advent of cheap color printing in the 1960s, led to a huge boost in its sales and heavy coverage of fashion in mainstream women's magazines, followed by men's magazines in the 1990s. One such example of Vogue's popularity is the younger version, Teen Vogue, which covers clothing and trends that are targeted more toward the "fashionista on a budget". Haute couture designers followed the trend by starting ready-to-wear and perfume lines which are heavily advertised in the magazines and now dwarf their original couture businesses. A recent development within fashion print media is the rise of text-based and critical magazines which aim to prove that fashion is not superficial, by creating a dialogue between fashion academia and the industry. Examples of this development are: Fashion Theory (1997), Fashion Practice: The Journal of Design, Creative Process & the Fashion Industry (2008), and Vestoj (2009).

Fashion in television
Television coverage began in the 1950s with small fashion features. In the 1960s and 1970s, fashion segments on various entertainment shows became more frequent, and by the 1980s, dedicated fashion shows such as Fashion Television started to appear. FashionTV was the pioneer in this undertaking and has since grown to become the leader in both Fashion Television and new media channels. The Fashion Industry is beginning to promote their styles through Bloggers on social media's. Vogue specified Chiara Ferragni as "blogger of the moment" due to the rises of followers through her Fashion Blog, that became popular.[63]
A few days after the 2010 Fall Fashion Week in New York City came to a close, The New Islander's Fashion Editor, Genevieve Tax, criticized the fashion industry for running on a seasonal schedule of its own, largely at the expense of real-world consumers. "Because designers release their fall collections in the spring and their spring collections in the fall, fashion magazines such as Vogue always and only look forward to the upcoming season, promoting parkas come September while issuing reviews on shorts in January", she writes. "Savvy shoppers, consequently, have been conditioned to be extremely, perhaps impractically, farsighted with their buying."[64]
The fashion industry has been the subject of numerous films and television shows, including the reality show Project Runway and the drama series Ugly Betty. Specific fashion brands have been featured in film, not only as product placement opportunities, but as bespoke items that have subsequently led to trends in fashion.[65]
Videos in general have been very useful in promoting the fashion industry. This is evident not only from television shows directly spotlighting the fashion industry, but also movies, events and music videos which showcase fashion statements as well as promote specific brands through product placements.

Controversial advertisements in fashion industry
Racism in fashion advertisements
Some fashion advertisements have been accused of racism and led to boycotts from customers. Globally known Swedish fashion brand H&M faced this issue with one of its children's wear advertisements in 2018. A Black child wearing a hoodie with the slogan "coolest monkey in the jungle" was featured in the ad. This immediately led to controversy, as "monkey" is commonly used as slur against Black people, and caused many customers to boycott the brand. Many people, including celebrities, posted on social media about their resentments towards H&M and refusal to work with and buy its products. H&M issued a statement saying "we apologise to anyone this may have offended", though this too received some criticism for appearing insincere.[66]
Another fashion advertisement seen as racist was from GAP, an American worldwide clothing brand. GAP collaborated with Ellen DeGeneres in 2016 for the advertisement. It features four playful young girls, with a tall White girl leaning with her arm on a shorter Black girl's head. Upon release, some viewers harshly criticized it, claiming it shows an underlying passive racism. A representative from The Root commented that the ad portrays the message that Black people are undervalued and seen as props for White people to look better.[67] Others saw little issue with the ad, and that the controversy was the result of people being oversensitive. GAP replaced the image in the ad and apologized to critics.[68]

Sexism in fashion advertisements
Many fashion brands have published ads that were provocative and sexy to attract customers’ attention. British high fashion brand, Jimmy Choo, was blamed for having sexism in its ad which featured a female British model wearing the brand's boots. In this two-minute ad, men whistle at a model, walking on the street with red, sleeveless mini dress. This ad gained much backlash and criticism by the viewers, as it was seen as promoting sexual harassment and other misconduct. Many people showed their dismay through social media posts, leading Jimmy Choo to pull down the ad from social media platforms.[69]
French luxury fashion brand Yves Saint Laurent also faced this issue with its print ad shown in Paris in 2017. The ad depicted a female model wearing fishnet tights with roller-skate stilettos reclining with her legs opened in front of the camera. This advertisement brought harsh comments from both viewers and French advertising organization directors for going against the advertising codes related to "respect for decency, dignity and those prohibiting submission, violence or dependence, as well as the use of stereotypes." and additionally said that this ad was causing "mental harm to adolescents."[70] Due to the negative public reaction, the poster was removed from the city.

Public relations and social media
 A Mexican sports reporter wearing little black dress and knee-high boots
Fashion public relations involves being in touch with a company's audiences and creating strong relationships with them, reaching out to media, and initiating messages that project positive images of the company.[71] Social media plays an important role in modern-day fashion public relations; enabling practitioners to reach a wide range of consumers through various platforms.[72]
Building brand awareness and credibility is a key implication of good public relations. In some cases, the hype is built about new designers' collections before they are released into the market, due to the immense exposure generated by practitioners.[73] Social media, such as blogs, microblogs, podcasts, photo and video sharing sites have all become increasingly important to fashion public relations.[74] The interactive nature of these platforms allows practitioners to engage and communicate with the public in real-time, and tailor their clients' brand or campaign messages to the target audience. With blogging platforms such as Instagram, Tumblr, WordPress, Squarespace, and other sharing sites, bloggers have emerged as expert fashion commentators, shaping brands and having a great impact on what is ‘on trend’.[75] Women in the fashion public relations industry such as Sweaty Betty PR founder Roxy Jacenko and Oscar de la Renta's PR girl Erika Bearman, have acquired copious followers on their social media sites, by providing a brand identity and a behind the scenes look into the companies they work for.
Social media is changing the way practitioners deliver messages,[28] as they are concerned with the media, and also customer relationship building.[76] PR practitioners must provide effective communication among all platforms, in order to engage the fashion public in an industry socially connected via online shopping.[77] Consumers have the ability to share their purchases on their personal social media pages (such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, etc.), and if practitioners deliver the brand message effectively and meet the needs of its public, word-of-mouth publicity will be generated and potentially provide a wide reach for the designer and their products.

Fashion and political activism
As fashion concerns people, and signifies social hierarchies, fashion intersects with politics and the social organization of societies. Whereas haute couture and business suits are associated by people in power, also groups aiming to challenge the political order also use clothes to signal their position. The explicit use of fashion as a form of activism, is usually referred to as "fashion activism."
There is a complex relationship between fashion and feminism. Some feminists have argued that by participating in feminine fashions women are contributing to maintaining the gender differences which are part of women's oppression.[78] Brownmiller felt that women should reject traditionally feminine dress, focusing on comfort and practicality rather than fashion.[78] Others believe that it is the fashion system itself that is repressive in requiring women to seasonally change their clothes to keep up with trends.[79] Greer has advocated this argument that seasonal changes in dress should be ignored; she argues that women can be liberated by replacing the compulsiveness of fashion with enjoyment of rejecting the norm to create their own personal styling.[80]
This rejection of seasonal fashion led to many protests in the 1960s alongside rejection of fashion on socialist, racial and environmental grounds.[81] However, Mosmann has pointed out that the relationship between protesting fashion and creating fashion is dynamic because
the language and style used in these protests has then become part of fashion itself.[81]
Fashion designers and brands have traditionally kept themselves out of political conflicts, there has been a movement in the industry towards taking more explicit positions across the political spectrum. From maintaining a rather apolitical stance, designers and brands today engage more explicitly in current debates.[82]
For example, considering the U.S.'s political climate in the surrounding months of the 2016 presidential election, during 2017 fashion weeks in London, Milan, New York, Paris and São Paulo amongst others, many designers took the opportunity to take political stances leveraging their platforms and influence to reach their customers.[83][84] This has also led to some controversy over democratic values, as fashion is not always the most inclusive platform for political debate, but a one-way broadcast of top-down messages.
When taking an explicit political stance, designers generally favor issues that can be identified in clear language with virtuous undertones. For example, aiming to "amplify a greater message of unity, inclusion, diversity, and feminism in a fashion space", designer Mara Hoffman invited the founders of the Women's March on Washington to open her show which featured modern silhouettes of utilitarian wear, described by critics as "Made for a modern warrior" and "Clothing for those who still have work to do".[85] Prabal Gurung debuted his collection of T-shirts featuring slogans such as "The Future is Female", "We Will Not Be Silenced", and "Nevertheless She Persisted", with proceeds going to the ACLU, Planned Parenthood, and Gurung's own charity, "Shikshya Foundation Nepal".[82] Similarly, The Business of Fashion launched the #TiedTogether movement on Social Media, encouraging member of the industry from editors to models, to wear a white bandana advocating for "unity, solidarity, and inclusiveness during fashion week".[86]
Fashion may be used to promote a cause, such as to promote healthy behavior,[87] to raise money for a cancer cure,[88] or to raise money for local charities[89] such as the Juvenile Protective Association[90] or a children's hospice.[91]
One fashion cause is trashion, which is using trash to make clothes, jewelry, and other fashion items in order to promote awareness of pollution. There are a number of modern trashion artists such as Marina DeBris, Ann Wizer,[92] and Nancy Judd.[93] Other designers have used DIY fashions, in the tradition of the punk movement, to address elitism in the industry to promote more inclusion and diversity.[94]

Anthropological perspective
This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (November 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
From an academic lens, the sporting of various fashions has been seen as a form of fashion language, a mode of communication that produced various fashion statements, using a grammar of fashion.[95] This is a perspective promoted in the work of influential French philosopher and semiotician Roland Barthes.
Anthropology, the study of culture and of human societies, examines fashion by asking why certain styles are deemed socially appropriate and others are not. From the theory of interactionism, a certain practice or expression is chosen by those in power in a community, and that becomes "the fashion" as defined at a certain time by the people under influence of those in power. If a particular style has a meaning in an already occurring set of beliefs, then that style may have a greater chance of become fashion.[96]
According to cultural theorists Ted Polhemus and Lynn Procter, one can describe fashion as adornment, of which there are two types: fashion and anti-fashion. Through the capitalization and commoditization of clothing, accessories, and shoes, etc., what once constituted anti-fashion becomes part of fashion as the lines between fashion and anti-fashion are blurred, as expressions that were once outside the changes of fashion are swept along with trends to signify new meanings.[97] Examples range from how elements from ethnic dress becomes part of a trend and appear on catwalks or street cultures, for example how tattoos travel from sailors, laborers and criminals to popular culture.
To cultural theorist Malcolm Bernard, fashion and anti-fashion differ as polar opposites. Anti-fashion is fixed and changes little over time,[98] varying depending on the cultural or social group one is associated with or where one lives, but within that group or locality the style changes little. Fashion, in contrast, can change (evolve) very quickly[99] and is not affiliated with one group or area of the world but spreads throughout the world wherever people can communicate easily with each other. An example of anti-fashion would be ceremonial or otherwise traditional clothing where specific garments and their designs are both reproduced faithfully and with the intent of maintaining a status quo of tradition. This can be seen in the clothing of some kabuki plays, where some character outfits are kept intact from designs of several centuries ago, in some cases retaining the crests of the actors considered to have 'perfected' that role.
Anti-fashion is concerned with maintaining the status quo, while fashion is concerned with social mobility. Time is expressed in terms of continuity in anti-fashion, and in terms of change in fashion; fashion has changing modes of adornment, while anti-fashion has fixed modes of adornment.
From this theoretical lens, change in fashion is part of the larger industrial system and is structured by the powerful actors in this system to be a deliberate change in style, promoted through the channels influenced by the industry (such as paid advertisements).[100]

Intellectual property
 Gross sales of goods vs IP laws (USA 2007)
In the fashion industry, intellectual property is not enforced as it is within the film industry and music industry. Robert Glariston, an intellectual property expert, mentioned in a fashion seminar held in LA[which?] that "Copyright law regarding clothing is a current hot-button issue in the industry. We often have to draw the line between designers being inspired by a design and those outright stealing it in different places."[101] To take inspiration from others' designs contributes to the fashion industry's ability to establish clothing trends. For the past few years, WGSN has been a dominant source of fashion news and forecasts in encouraging fashion brands worldwide to be inspired by one another. Enticing consumers to buy clothing by establishing new trends is, some have argued, a key component of the industry's success. Intellectual property rules that interfere with this process of trend-making would, in this view, be counter-productive. On the other hand, it is often argued that the blatant theft of new ideas, unique designs, and design details by larger companies is what often contributes to the failure of many smaller or independent design companies.
Since fakes are distinguishable by their poorer quality, there is still a demand for luxury goods, and as only a trademark or logo can be copyrighted, many fashion brands make this one of the most visible aspects of the garment or accessory. In handbags, especially, the designer's brand may be woven into the fabric (or the lining fabric) from which the bag is made, making the brand an intrinsic element of the bag.
In 2005, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) held a conference calling for stricter intellectual property enforcement within the fashion industry to better protect small and medium businesses and promote competitiveness within the textile and clothing industries.[102][103]

See also


Fashion portal

Digital fashion
Designer clothing
Dress code
Fashion faux pas
Fashion law
Fetish fashion
Fitness fashion
History of Western fashion
Human physical appearance
Index of fashion articles
Latex clothing
Lolita fashion
Modest fashion
Punk fashion
Red carpet fashion
Suit (clothing)
Sustainable fashion
Western dress codes
Women's beachwear fashion
References


^ a b KAISER, SUSAN B. (2019). FASHION AND CULTURAL STUDIES. BLOOMSBURY VISUAL ARTS. ISBN 978-1350109605. OCLC 1057778310.

^ "Fixing fashion: clothing consumption and sustainability". UK Parliament. 2019.

^ Fletcher, Kate (2012). Fashion & sustainability: design for change. Laurence King Pub. ISBN 978-1-78067-196-3. OCLC 866622248.

^ Grace Heller, Sarah (2007). Fashion in Medieval France. United Kingdom: D.S. Brewer. p. 97.

^ Kaiser, Susan (2012). Fashion and Cultural Studies. London: Berg.

^ a b Kawamura, Yuniija. (2005). Fashion-ology : an introduction to fashion studies. Berg. ISBN 978-1859738146. OCLC 796077256.

^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1993). 'Haute couture and haute culture,' in Sociology in Question. Sage.

^ Agamben, Georgio (2009). 'What is an apparatus?' and other essays. Stanford University Press.

^ "Fédération de la Haute Couture et de la Mode". Fédération de la Haute Couture et de la Mode. Retrieved 2020-09-19.

^ a b Benton, Angelique (March 2012). "Angelique Benton Fashion as Art/ Art as Fashion: Is Fashion, Art?" (PDF). The Ohio State University Journal – via Ohio.

^ Dear, Alice (September 2020). "Gucci is selling 'grass-stained' jeans for £600, and people have a lot to say". Heart.

^ a b c Gronow, Jukka (1993). "Taste and Fashion: The Social Function of Fashion and Style". Acta Sociologica. 36 (2): 89–90. doi:10.1177/000169939303600201. JSTOR 4200841. S2CID 56514246. Retrieved 10 April 2021.

^ "Georg Simmel | German sociologist | Britannica".

^ al-Hassani, Woodcok and Saoud (2004), Muslim Heritage in Our World, FSTC publishing, pp. 38–39

^ Terrasse, H. (1958) 'Islam d'Espagne' une rencontre de l'Orient et de l'Occident", Librairie Plon, Paris, pp.52–53.

^ Josef W. Meri & Jere L. Bacharach (2006). Medieval Islamic Civilization: A–K. Taylor & Francis. p. 162. ISBN 978-0415966917.

^ a b c d e f Braudel, Fernand Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Centuries, Vol 1: The Structures of Everyday Life, William Collins & Sons, London 1981 ISBN 0-520-08114-5

^ Timothy Brook: "The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China" (University of California Press 1999); this has a whole section on fashion.

^ a b Feng, Ge (2015). Traditional Chinese rites and rituals. Zhengming Du. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4438-8783-0. OCLC 935642485.

^ Rey Chow (2000). Modern Chinese literary and cultural studies in the age of theory: reimagining a field. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-8016-1. OCLC 51948712.

^ Finnane, Antonia (2008). Changing clothes in China : fashion, history, nation. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-14350-9. OCLC 84903948.

^ a b c Finnane, Antonia (2008). Changing clothes in China : fashion, history, nation. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-14350-9. OCLC 84903948.

^ Chaudhuri, K. N. (1990). Asia before Europe : economy and civilisation of the Indian Ocean from the rise of Islam to 1750. Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-30400-8. OCLC 20014228.

^ a b c d Green, Toby (2019). A fistful of shells : West Africa from the rise of the slave trade to the age of revolution. Chicago. ISBN 9780226644578. OCLC 1051687994.

^ a b Laver, James: The Concise History of Costume and Fashion, Abrams, 1979.

^ Heller, Sarah-Grace (2007). Fashion in Medieval France. Cambridge; Rochester, NY: Boydell and Brewer. pp. 49–50. ISBN 9781843841104.

^ Boitani, Piero (1986-07-31). English Medieval Narrative in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521311496.

^ a b "Jeans Calças Modelos Ideais". Conceito M. 19 November 2014. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015.

^ Ribeiro, Aileen (2003). Dress and Morality. Berg. pp. 116–117. ISBN 9781859737828.

^ Thornton, Peter. Baroque and Rococo Silks.

^ Claire B. Shaeffer (2001). Couture sewing techniques "Originating in mid- 19th-century Paris with the designs of an Englishman named Charles Frederick Worth, haute couture represents an archaic tradition of creating garments by hand with painstaking care and precision". Taunton Press, 2001

^ Parkins, Ilya (2013). "Introduction: Reputation, Celebrity and the "Professional" Designer". Poiret, Dior and Schiaparelli: Fashion, Femininity and Modernity (English ed.). London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 10. ISBN 9780857853288.

^ Stella Bruzzi (2012). Undressing Cinema: Clothing and identity in the movies. p. 196.

^ "GVRL In Artemis – Document – Unisex Clothing". go.gale.com.

^ "GVRL In Artemis – Document – Clothing for Men". go.gale.com.

^ Lemire, B., & Riello, G (2008). "East & West: Textiles and Fashion in Early Modern Europe". Journal of Social History, 41(4), 887–916.

^ a b c "fashion industry | Design, Fashion Shows, Marketing, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica.

^ "How Bargain Fashion Chains Will Keep Themselves Cut-Rate – New York Magazine". NYMag.com. Retrieved 26 April 2015.

^ "Does pop culture influence fashion?". www.sundaynews.co.zw. Retrieved 2016-03-07.

^ Carlos, Marjon (6 February 2016). "The Fashion in Beyoncé's New Video Is as Powerful as Its Politics". Vogue. Retrieved 2016-03-07.

^ a b Dazed (8 April 2015). "Vivienne Westwood's top ten political moments". Dazed. Retrieved 2016-03-07.

^ Wetzler, Tiahn (2020). "Social media influencer marketing". Adjust.

^ Tyler McCall (September 15, 2022). "Drag Queens Are the New VIPs of Fashion Week". The CUT, New York magazine. Retrieved September 19, 2022.

^ Vaughn/Berelowitz, Jessica/Marian (2015). "The circular economy". Warc.

^ "Consumer Needs & Marketing". smallbusiness.chron.com. Retrieved 2016-05-30.

^ "Strategyn". Strategyn. Retrieved 2016-05-30.

^ a b "Consumer Research Methods". www.consumerpsychologist.com. Retrieved 2016-05-30.

^ Parker, Christopher J.; Wenyu, Lu (2019-05-13). "What influences Chinese fashion retail? Shopping motivations, demographics and spending". Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. 23 (2): 158–175. doi:10.1108/JFMM-09-2017-0093. ISSN 1361-2026. S2CID 170031856.

^ Piacentini, Maria (2004). "Symbolic consumption in teenagers' clothing choices". Journal of Consumer Behaviour. 3 (3): 251–262. doi:10.1002/cb.138.

^ Rissman, Rebecca (2016-08-15). Women in Fashion. ABDO. ISBN 9781680774856.

^ "Political & Economic Factors That Influenced Fashion in the 1960s | The Classroom | Synonym". classroom.synonym.com. Retrieved 2016-05-30.

^ "Home : Berg Fashion Library". www.bergfashionlibrary.com. Retrieved 2016-03-10.

^ Communications, Edgell. "Top 6 Tech Trends in the Fashion Industry". apparel.edgl.com. Retrieved 2016-03-10.

^ Parker, Christopher J.; Wang, Huchen (2016). "Examining hedonic and utilitarian motivations for m-commerce fashion retail app engagement". Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. 20 (4): 487–506. doi:10.1108/JFMM-02-2016-0015.

^ "The Impact of Technology on Fashion Today". Site Name. Archived from the original on 2016-03-10. Retrieved 2016-03-10.

^ "How Machine Vision Is About to Change the Fashion World". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 2016-03-10.

^ "Fashion". WWD.

^ Lauren, Lynn. "Examples of Traditional Advertising".

^ Tran, Shannon (2018). Style Wise. Bloomsbury. p. 6. ISBN 9781501323836.

^ Burke, Peter (1992). The fabrication of Louis XIV. New Haven: Yale University Press.

^ "Fashion Advertising, Sales Promotion, and Public Relations", Marketing Fashion, Fairchild Publications, 2012, pp. 427–458, doi:10.5040/9781501303869.ch-014, ISBN 9781501303869

^ "Gazette du Bon Ton: A Journal of Good Taste". www.abebooks.com. Archived from the original on 2019-06-17. Retrieved 2018-07-04.

^ "How social media is changing fashion?". HuffPost. January 18, 2017.

^ "Tax, Genevieve. (2010-02-24) Fashion's Own Sense of Season. The New Islander. Retrieved on 2011-06-29".

^ Thompson, S.B.N., Hussein, Y., Jones, N. Designing for the famous – psychology of building a brand in haute couture shoe design and fashion. Design Principles & Practices: An International Journal 2011;5(5):1–25.

^ "People are boycotting H&M over 'racist' hoodie". The Independent. 2018-01-09. Retrieved 2019-10-29.

^ "Is this Gap advert racist?". 2016-04-06. Retrieved 2019-10-29.

^ Kell, John (2016-04-05). "Gap Apologizes for 'Racist' Ad". Entrepreneur. Retrieved 2019-10-29.

^ Gallucci, Nicole (22 December 2017). "Jimmy Choo pulls Cara Delevingne ad after online backlash". Mashable. Retrieved 2019-10-29.

^ "'Misogynist' YSL Ads Shock Parisians Ahead of International Women's Day". adage.com. 2017-03-07. Retrieved 2019-10-29.

^ Sherman, G., & Perlman, S. (2010). Fashion public relations. New York: Fairchild Books. In Cassidy, L. & Fitch, K. (2013) Beyond the Catwalk: Fashion Public Relations and Social Media in Australia, Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, vol. 14, No. 1 & 2, Murdoch University.

^ "How Social Media Contributed to the Rise of Fast Fashion". Retrieved 2018-10-02.

^ Westfield, A. M. (2002) The Role of Public Relations in Redefining Brands in the Fashion Industry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.

^ Experian. (2012). Getting the most from social: An integrated marketing approach. Retrieved from www.experian.com.au/assets/social/getting-the-most-from-social.pdf in Cassidy, L. & Fitch, K. (2013) Beyond the Catwalk: Fashion Public Relations and Social Media in Australia, Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, vol. 14, No. 1 & 2, Murdoch University.

^ Dalto, A. (2010, September). Brands tempt female bloggers with ‘swag’. O’Dwyer's Communications and New Media: The Fashion Issue, 24(9), 12–13. in Cassidy, L. & Fitch, K. (2013) Beyond the Catwalk: Fashion Public Relations and Social Media in Australia, Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, vol. 14, No. 1 & 2, Murdoch University.

^ Noricks, C. (2006). Social media sites are often the first experience a consumer has with a fashion brand. From style to strategy: An exploratory investigation of public relations practice in the fashion industry. Unpublished master's thesis, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA. in Cassidy, L. & Fitch, K. (2013) Beyond the Catwalk: Fashion Public Relations and Social Media in Australia, Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, vol. 14, No. 1 & 2, Murdoch University.

^ Wright, M. (2011). How premium fashion brands are maximizing their social media ROI. Mashable. Retrieved from www.mashable.com/2011/02/11/fashion-brands-social-media-roi/ in Cassidy, L. & Fitch, K. (2013) Beyond the Catwalk: Fashion Public Relations and Social Media in Australia, Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, vol. 14, No. 1 & 2, Murdoch University.

^ a b Brownmiller, Susan (1984). Femininity. New York: Lindon Press.

^ Mosmann, Petra (2016). "A feminist fashion icon: Germaine Greer's paisley coat". Australian Feminist Studies. 31 (87): 87. doi:10.1080/08164649.2016.1174928. S2CID 148120100.

^ Greer, Germaine (1971). The Female Eunuch. London: Paladin.

^ a b Mosmann, Petra (2016). "A feminist fashion icon: Germaine Greer's paisley coat". Australian Feminist Studies. 31 (87): 88. doi:10.1080/08164649.2016.1174928. S2CID 148120100.

^ a b "Fashion Week's Anti-Trump Runway Politics". The New Yorker. 21 February 2017.

^ "7 Ways Fashion Joined the Political Conversation in 2017". Fashionista. Retrieved 2018-08-16.

^ "Fashion Gets Political: On and Off the Runway Statements". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2018-08-16.

^ "Are fashion and politics the perfect fit?". BBC News. 15 February 2017.

^ "Here's Why You'll See White Bandanas Everywhere During Fashion Month". InStyle.com.

^ "Fashion for a Cause". The Times of India. 2013-02-04. Archived from the original on 2013-05-01. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ Woodman, Anne (2013-01-26). "Fashion for a cause". Clayton News Star. Archived from the original on 2013-04-11. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ "Fashion for a cause". Chatham Daily News. 2013-02-07. Archived from the original on 2013-05-27. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ luc, karie angell (2013-01-16). "'Fashion for a Cause' aids families and kids". Northbrook Star. Archived from the original on 2013-06-07. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ "Fashion for a cause". Capital Gazette. Archived from the original on 2013-04-07. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ "One man's trash is another man's fashion". NBC News/ AP. 2008-07-02. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ Simon, Stephanie (2009-01-13). "Trashion Trend: Dumpster Couture Gets a Boost at Green Inaugural Ball". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 2013-02-15.

^ Busch, Otto von (2014). "Fashion Hacking". Design as Future-Making. doi:10.5040/9781474293907-0009. ISBN 9781474293907.

^ Barthes, Roland (1983). The Fashion System. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.

^ Molnar, Andrea K (1998). Transformations in the Use of Traditional Textiles of Ngada (Western Flores, Eastern Indonesia): Commercialization, Fashion and Ethnicity. Consuming Fashion: Adorning the Transnational Body: Berg. pp. 39–55 [42].

^ Polhemus and Procter, Ted and Lynn (1978). Fashion and Anti-fashion: An Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment. Thames and Hudson. p. 12.

^ Barnard, Malcolm (1996). Fashion as communication. London: Routledge.

^ 
Hamilton Hill, Margot; Bucknell, Peter A. (1987). The Evolution of Fashion: Pattern and Cut from 1066 to 1930 (5 ed.). London: Batsford. p. vii. ISBN 9780713458183. Retrieved 20 November 2020.

^ Polhemus and Procter, Ted and Lynn (1978). Fashion and Anti-fashion: An Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment. Thames and Hudson. pp. 12–13.

^ "Design details by larger companies is what often | Outspoken". outspoken.wpshower.com. Retrieved 2018-08-16.

^ IPFrontline.com Archived 2007-05-10 at the Wayback Machine: Intellectual Property in Fashion Industry, WIPO press release, December 2, 2005

^ INSME announcement Archived 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine: WIPO-Italy International Symposium, 30 November – 2 December 2005


Further reading
Breward, Christopher, The culture of fashion: a new history of fashionable dress, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2003, ISBN 978-0-7190-4125-9
Cabrera, Ana, and Lesley Miller. "Genio y Figura. La influencia de la cultura española en la moda." Fashion Theory: The Journal of Dress, Body & Culture 13.1 (2009): 103–110
Cumming, Valerie: Understanding Fashion History, Costume & Fashion Press, 2004, ISBN 0-89676-253-X
Davis, F. (1989). Of maids' uniforms and blue jeans: The drama of status ambivalences in clothing and fashion. Qualitative Sociology, 12(4), 337–355.
Hollander, Anne, Seeing through clothes, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993, ISBN 978-0-520-08231-1
Hanifie, Sowaibah (5 August 2020). "Australia's first National Indigenous Fashion Awards winners revealed, signaling hope for a more diverse industry". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Hollander, Anne, Sex and suits: the evolution of modern dress, New York: Knopf, 1994, ISBN 978-0-679-43096-4
Hollander, Anne, Feeding the eye: essays, New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1999, ISBN 978-0-374-28201-1
Hollander, Anne, Fabric of vision: dress and drapery in painting, London: National Gallery, 2002, ISBN 978-0-300-09419-0
Kawamura, Yuniya, Fashion-ology: an introduction to Fashion Studies, Oxford and New York: Berg, 2005, ISBN 1-85973-814-1
Lipovetsky, Gilles (translated by Catherine Porter), The empire of fashion: dressing modern democracy, Woodstock: Princeton University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-691-10262-7
McDermott, Kathleen, Style for all: why fashion, invented by kings, now belongs to all of us (An illustrated history), 2010, ISBN 978-0-557-51917-0 – Many hand-drawn color illustrations, extensive annotated bibliography and reading guide
Perrot, Philippe (translated by Richard Bienvenu), Fashioning the bourgeoisie: a history of clothing in the nineteenth century, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-691-00081-7
Steele, Valerie, Paris fashion: a cultural history, (2. ed., rev. and updated), Oxford: Berg, 1998, ISBN 978-1-85973-973-0
Steele, Valerie, Fifty years of fashion: new look to now, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-300-08738-3
Steele, Valerie, Encyclopedia of clothing and fashion, Detroit: Thomson Gale, 2005
External links
 Media related to Fashion at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of fashion at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Fashion at Wikiquote
vteFashion articlesGeneral
Digital fashion
Fashion accessory
Fashion matrix
Fashion museum
Fashion plate
Fashion tourism
Events
Fashion show
Fashion week
Industry
Awards
Designer clothing
Fashion blog
Fashion capital
Fashion design
Fashion entrepreneur
Fashion editor
Fashion forecasting
Fashion illustration
Fashion influencer
Fashion journalism
Fashion law
Fashion photography
Fashion merchandising
Fast fashion
Red carpet fashion
TypesWestern dress codes
Formal
Morning dress
White tie
Ball gown
Semi-formal
Black lounge suit
Black tie
Evening gown
Informal
Suit
Cocktail dress
Pantsuit
Other traditional
Ceremonial
Court
Diplomatic
Academic
Military
Full
Mess
Service
Sailor
Combat
Religious
Christian
Jewish
Islamic
Modest fashion
Folk
CasualSee also:Western subculturesSmart casual
British country clothing
Chic
Preppy
Ivy League
Mod
Sloane Ranger
Teddy Boy
Young fogey
Street fashion
Streetwear
Hip-hop
Hippie
Hipster
Sportswear
Sportswear fashion
Ghetto fabulous
Bling-bling
Alternative
Rocker
Greaser
Glam
Grunge
Heavy metal
Punk
Skate
Rockabilly
Emo
Gothic
Skinhead
Steampunk
Queer
Lolita
Fetish
By country
American fashion
Filipino fashion
French fashion
German fashion
Italian fashion
Iranian fashion
Israeli fashion
Indian fashion
Japanese fashion
Nigerian fashion
South Korean fashion
Soviet fashion
See also
Dress code
Undress
Fashion activism
Anti-fashion
Sustainable fashion
Slow fashion
Fashion Revolution
Trashion
Zero-waste fashion
Fashion victim
Trickle-up fashion

 Fashion portal

vteHistorical clothingClothing generally not worn today, except in historical settingsBody-length
Abolla
Banyan
Brunswick
Chinese
Court dress (Empire of Japan)
Chiton
Frock
Frock coat
Justacorps
Paenula
Peplos
Stola
Toga
Tunic
Xout lao
Tops
Basque
Bedgown
Bodice
Doublet
Peascod belly
Poet shirt
Sbai
Suea pat
Trousers
Braccae
Breeches
Sompot Chong Kben
Culottes
Harem
Knickerbockers
Pedal pushers
Skirts
Hobble
Poodle
Sompot
Sinh
Train
Dresses
Bliaut
Close-bodied gown
Debutante
Gown
Kirtle
Mantua
Polonaise
Sack-back gown
Sailor
Tea gown
Swallow-tailed
Outerwear
Car coat
Caraco
Cardinal cloak
Chamail
Chlamys
Cloak
Kinsale cloak
Dolman
Doublet
Duster
Exomis
Greatcoat
Himation
Houppelande
Inverness cape
Jerkin
Kandys
Mackinaw jacket
Norfolk jacket
Overfrock
Pañuelo
Palla
Pallium
Pelisse
Poncho
Shadbelly
Shawl
Galway shawl
Kullu
Smock-frock
Spencer
Surcoat
Surtout
Ulster coat
Visite
Witzchoura
Underwear
Basque
Bustle
Chausses
Chemise
Codpiece
Corselet
Corset
Waist cincher
Dickey
Garter
Hoop skirt
Crinoline
Farthingale
Pannier
Hose
Liberty bodice
Loincloth
Open drawers
Pantalettes
Petticoat
Peignoir
Pettipants
Union suit
Yếm
Headwear
Anthony Eden
Apex
Arakhchin
Attifet
Aviator
Bergère
Blessed hat
Bonnet
Capotain
Caubeen
Cavalier
Coif
Coonskin
Cornette
Chengziguan
Dunce
Fillet
French hood
Fontange
Futou
Gable hood
Hennin
Jewish
Kausia
Kokoshnik
Llawt'u
Matron's badge
Miner's
Mob
Modius
Monmouth
Mooskappe
Motoring hood
Mounteere
Nemes
Nightcap
Nón quai thao
Ochipok
Pahlavi
Petasos
Phrygian
Pileus
Printer's
Pudding
Qeleshe
Qing
Salakot
Snood
Smoking
Tainia
Taranga
Welsh Wig
Wimple
Footwear
Buskins
Caligae
Chopines
Crakow
Episcopal sandals
Hessian
Pampooties
Sabatons
Accessories
Ascot tie
Belt hook
Cointoise
Cravat (early)
Hairpin
Hatpin
Jabot
Lavallière
Muff
Oes
Partlet
Ruff
Shoe buckle
 Clothing portal
vteClothingHeadwear
Beret
Cap
Baseball
Flat
Knit
Hat
Boater
Bowler
Fedora
Homburg
Top
Helmet
Hood
Kerchief
Turban
Veil
Neckwear
Bands
Choker
Clerical collar
Neckerchief
Necktie
Ascot
Bolo
Bow
School
Stock
Scarf
Tippet
Tops
Blouse
Cache-cœur
Crop top
Halterneck
Tube top
Shirt
Dress
Henley
Polo
Sleeveless
T
Sweater
Cardigan
Guernsey
Hoodie
Jersey
Polo neck
Shrug
Sweater vest
Twinset
Waistcoat
Trousers
Bell-bottoms
Bondage
Capri
Cargo
Chaps
Formal
High water
Lowrise
Jeans
Jodhpurs
Overalls
Palazzo
Parachute
Pedal pushers
Phat
Shorts
Bermuda
Cycling
Dolphin
Gym
Hotpants
Running
Slim-fit
Sweatpants
Windpants
Yoga pants
Suits anduniforms
Ceremonial dress
Academic
Court
Diplomatic
Folk
Jumpsuit
Military
Full
Mess
Service
Sailor
Combat
Pantsuit
Religious
Cassock
Clerical
Vestment
School
Prison
Workwear
Boilersuit
Cleanroom
Hazmat
Space
Scrubs
Dressesand gownsFormal, semi-formal, informal
Backless
Bouffant gown
Coatdress
Cocktail
Little black
Evening
Ball gown
Debutante
Princess line
Strapless
Wedding
Wrap
Casual
House
Jumper
Romper suit
Sheath
Shirtdress
Slip
Sundress
Skirts
A-line
Ballerina
Denim
Men's
Miniskirt
Pencil
Prairie
Rah-rah
Sarong
Skort
Tutu
Wrap
Underwear and lingerieTop
Bra
Camisole
Undershirt
Bottom
Diaper
Training pants
Leggings
Panties
Plastic pants
Slip
Thong
Underpants
Boxer briefs
Boxer shorts
Briefs
Full
Bodysuit, adult
Bodysuit, infant
Long underwear
See-through
Teddy
CoatsandouterwearOvercoats
Car
Chesterfield
Covert
Duffel
Duster
Greatcoat
British Warm
Guards Coat
Greca
Over-frock
Riding
Shadbelly
Trench
Ulster
Cloak
Opera
Paletot
Pea
Polo
Raincoat
Mackintosh
Suit coats
Frock coat
Bekishe
Rekel
Mess jacket
Suit jacket
Blazer
Smoking
Sports
Teba
Tailcoat
Dress
Morning
Other
Apron
Pinafore
Blouson
Cagoule
Cape
Ferraiolo
Inverness
Mantle, Monastic
Mantle, Royal
Mozzetta
Pellegrina
Coatee
Cut-off
Gilet
Jacket
Down
Flight
Goggle
Harrington
Leather
Mackinaw
Norfolk
Safari
Jerkin
Lab coat
Parka
Poncho
Robe
Bathrobe
Dressing gown
Shawl
Ski suit
Sleeved blanket
Windbreaker
Nightwear
Babydoll
Babygrow
Blanket sleeper
Negligee
Nightgown
Nightshirt
Pajamas
Swimwear
Bikini
Burkini
Boardshorts
Dry suit
Monokini
One-piece
Rash guard
Sling
Square leg suit
Swim briefs
Swim diaper
Trunks
Wetsuit
Footwear
Boot
Court shoe
Dress boot
Dress shoe
Flip-flops
Sandal
Shoe
Slipper
Sneakers
Legwear
Sock
Hold-ups
Garter
Pantyhose
Stocking
Tights
Accessories
Belt
Boutonnière
Coin purse
Cufflink
Cummerbund
Gaiters
Glasses
Gloves
Headband
Handbag
Jewellery
Livery
Muff
Pocket protector
Pocket watch
Sash
Spats
Sunglasses
Suspenders
Umbrella
Wallet
Watch
Dress codesWestern
Formal
Morning dress
White tie
Semi-formal
Black lounge suit
Black tie
Informal
Casual
Related
Clothing fetish
Cross-dressing
Fashion
Haute couture
Made-to-measure
Ready-to-wear
Laws
Terminology
 Clothing portal
vteAesthetics topicsPhilosophers
Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
Edmund Burke
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
Gilles Deleuze
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
G. W. F. Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Louis Lavelle
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...
Theories
Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
Theory of painting
Theory of art
more...
Concepts
Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Appropriation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Fashion
Fun
Gaze
Harmony
Humour
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Recreation
Reverence
Style
Sthayibhava
Sublime
Taste
Tragedy
Work of art
Related
Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Artistic merit
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
Japanese aesthetics
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Medieval aesthetics
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Visual arts
Painting
History of painting
Sculpture

Index
Outline
Category
 Philosophy portal

vteMedia cultureMedia
Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
News broadcasting
News media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Viral phenomenon
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Review bomb
Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Social influence
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle

vteMajor industriesNatural sectorBioticAgriculture
Arable farming
Cereals
Legumes
Vegetables
Fiber crops
Oilseeds
Sugar
Tobacco
Permanent crops
Apples et al.
Berries
Citrus
Stone fruits
Tropical fruit
Viticulture
Cocoa
Coffee
Tea
Nuts
Olives
Medicinal plants
Spices
Horticulture
Flowers
Seeds
Animal husbandry
Beef cattle
Dairy farming
Fur farming
Horses
Other livestock
Pig
Wool
Poultry
Beekeeping
Cochineal
Lac
Silk
Hunting
Fur trapping
Forestry
Silviculture
Bamboo
Logging
Firewood
Rattan
Tree tapping
Frankincense
Gum arabic
Gutta-percha
Maple syrup
Mastic
Natural rubber
Palm sugar, syrup, & wine
Pine resin
Wild mushrooms
Fungiculture
Truffles
Aquatic
Fishing
Anchovies
Herring
Sardines
Cod
Haddock
Pollock
Mackerel
Shark
Swordfish
Tuna
Crabs
Lobsters
Sea urchins
Squid
Whaling
Aquaculture
Carp
Catfish
Tilapia
Abalone
Mussels
Oysters
Pearls
Microalgae
Seaweed
Both
Clams
Sea cucumbers
Scallops
Salmon
Shrimp
Geological
Fossil fuels
Coal
Peat
Natural gas
Oil shale
Petroleum
Tar sands
Mining of ores
Aluminum
Copper
Iron
Gold
Silver
Palladium
Platinum
Lithium
Rare-earth metals
Uranium
Other minerals
Gemstones
Phosphorus
Potash
Salt
Sulfur
Quarrying
Gravel
Sand
Chalk
Clay
Gypsum
Limestone
Dimension stone
Granite
Marble
Industrial sectorManufacturingLight industry
Food
Animal feed
Baking
Canning
Dairy products
Flour
Meat
Prepared
Preserved
Sweets
Vegetable oils
Beverages
Beer
Bottled water
Liquor
Soft drinks
Wine
Textiles
Carding
Dyeing
Prints
Spinning
Weaving
Carpets
Lace
Linens
Rope
Clothing
Accessories
Dressmaking
Furs
Hatmaking
Sewing
Shoemaking
Tailoring
Printing
Bookbinding
Embossing
Engraving
Secure
Typesetting
Media reproduction
Cassette tapes
Phonographs
Optical discs
Metal fabrication
Boilermaking
Builders' & household hardware
Cutlery
Gunsmithing
Locksmithing
Machining
Other smithing
Powder metallurgy
Prefabrication
Surface finishing
Other fabrication
3D printing
Blow molding
Drawing
Extrusion
Glassblowing
Injection moulding
Pottery
Sintering
Stonemasonry
Woodworking
Furniture
Other goods
Baggage
Bicycles
Jewellery
Medical supplies
Musical instruments
Office supplies
Outdoors & sports equipment
Personal protective equipment
Toys
Electrical  & optical
Electronics
Components
Circuit boards
Semiconductors
Computers
Computer systems
Parts & peripherals
Blank storage media
Communications equipment
Mobile phones
Network infrastructure
Consumer electronics
Televisions
Video game consoles
Instrumentation
Clocks & watches
GPS devices
Scientific instruments
Medical imaging systems
Optical instruments
Cameras
Gun & spotting scopes
Laser construction
Lens grinding
Microscopes
Telescopes
Electrical equipment
Batteries
Electrical & fiber optic cables
Electric lighting
Electric motors
Home appliances
Transformers
Chemicals
Coal & oil refining
Coke
Diesel fuel
Fuel oil
Gasoline
Jet fuel
Kerosene
Propane
Mineral oil
Paraffin wax
Petrochemicals
Petroleum jelly
Synthetic oil
Asphalt
Tar
Commodity chemicals
Fertilizers
Industrial gases
Pigments
Pure elements
Speciality chemicals
Adhesives
Agrochemicals
Aroma compounds
Cleaning products
Cosmetics
Explosives
Fireworks
Paints & inks
Perfumes
Soap
Toiletries
Fine chemicals
Pharmaceuticals
Antibiotics
Blood products
Chemical & hormonal contraceptives
Generic drugs
Illegal drugs
Supplements
Vaccines
Materials
Leather
Liming & deliming
Tanning
Currying & oiling
Wood
Drying
Sawmilling
Engineered
Lumber
Composite
Paper
Sizing
Cardboard
Pulp
Tissue
Rubber
Tires
Vulcanized rubber
Plastics
Commodity
Engineered
Specialty
Pellets
Synthetic fibers
Thermoplastics & thermosets
Glass
Borosilicate
Fused quartz
Soda-lime
Float glass
Glass fiber
Glass wool & fiberglass
Safety glass
Ceramics
Brick
Earthenware
Porcelain
Refractory
Tile
Cement
Mortar
Plaster
Ready-mix concrete
Other mineral
Abrasives
Carbon fibers & advanced materials
Mineral wool
Synthetic gems
Metal refining
Iron
Aluminum
Copper
Alloys
Steel
Formed metal
Rolled
Forged
Cast metal
Heavy industry
Machinery
Conveyors
Heavy
Hydraulic
Machine tools
Power & wind turbines
Automobiles
Other heavy vehicles
Aerospace & space
Rail vehicles
Ships & offshore platforms
Weapons
Utilities
Power
Electric
Gas distribution
Renewable
Water
Sewage
Waste management
Collection
Dumping
Hazardous
Recycling
Remediation
Telecom networks
Cable TV
Internet
Mobile
Satellite
Telephone
Construction
Buildings
Commercial
Industrial
Residential
Civil engineering
Bridges
Railways
Roads
Tunnels
Canals
Dams
Dredging
Harbors
Specialty trades
Cabinetry
Demolition
Electrical wiring
Elevators
HVAC
Painting and decorating
Plumbing
Site preparation
Service sectorSales
Retail
Car dealership
Consumer goods
General store
Grocery store
Department store
Mail order
Online shopping
Specialty store
Wholesale
Auction
Brokerage
Distribution
Transport  & Storage
Cargo
Air cargo
Intermodal
Mail
Moving company
Rail
Trucking
Passenger transport
Airlines
Car rentals
Passenger rail
Ridesharing
Taxis
Warehousing
Self storage
Hospitality
Foodservice
Drink service
Cafés
Catering
Fast food
Food delivery
Restaurants
Teahouses
Hotels
Asset management
Financial services
Banking
Credit
Financial advice
Holding company
Money transfer
Payment cards
Risk management
Securities
Insurance
Health
Life
Pension funding
Property
Reinsurance
Real estate
Brokerage
Property management
Professional
Accounting
Assurance
Audit
Bookkeeping
Tax advice
Architecture & engineering
Inspection
Surveying
Physical, product, & system testing
Design
Fashion
Interior
Product
Legal services
Management
Consulting
Public relations
Marketing
Advertising
Healthcare
Medicine
Dentist offices
Hospitals
Nursing
Residential care
Veterinary medicine
Entertainment            & leisure
Gambling
Online
Sport
Venues
Arcades
Amusement parks
Fairgrounds
Nightclubs
Other
Administrative
Customer service
Leasing
Renting
Staffing
Private investigation & security
Maintenance
Janitors
Landscaping
Repairs
Personal services
Beauty
Dry cleaning
Funeral
Maid service
Pet care
Sex
Poverty
Travel
Business travel
Cruise lines
Tourism
Information sectorPublishing  & Mass media
Written
Books
Periodicals
Software
Audio-visual
Film
Music
Video games
Broadcasting
News
Radio
Television
Internet
Hosting
Social networks
Streaming
Websites
Education
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Vocational school
University
Testing
Tutoring
Other
Creative
Language
Research and development
Basic research
RelatedClassification  standards
Production-based
ANZSIC
ISIC
NACE
NAICS
SIC
UKSIC
Market-based
GICS
ICB
TRBC
Inputs  & outputs
Externalities
Community
Crime
Culture
Pollution
Well-being
Funding
Goods
Commodities
Final
Intermediate
Raw material
Innovation
Primary inputs
Labor
Natural resources
Physical capital
Services
Technology
Organization
Centralization
Cartel
Conglomerate
Horizontal integration
Mergers and acquisitions
Monopoly
Monopsony
Vertical integration
Decentralization
Enforced breakup
Freelancing
Homesteading
Outsourcing
Putting-out system
Spinning-off
Temporary work
Ownership
Cooperative
Joint-stock company
Nationalization
Nonprofit organization
Partnership
Privatization
Sole proprietorship
State-owned enterprise

 Category
 Commons
 Outline

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fashion&oldid=1112075571"
Categories: FashionAestheticsFashion aestheticsConcepts in aestheticsCultural trendsHistory of clothingHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia semi-protected pagesArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language textAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from March 2014All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2021Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with style issues from November 2021All articles with style issuesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2014Commons category link from WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésArpetanAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàCebuanoČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisGaeilgeGaelgGalegoગુજરાતી한국어HawaiʻiՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenКыргызчаລາວLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംMaltiमराठीمصرىمازِرونیBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपाल भाषा日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийSetswanaShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 24 September 2022, at 14:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










