



Human history - Wikipedia











































Human history

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search


This article is about the history of humanity. For the entire history of Earth, see History of Earth. For the field of historical study, see World history. For humanity's evolutionary history, see Human evolution.
"History of the world" redirects here. For other uses, see History of the world (disambiguation).


Narrative of humanity's past
 World population, from 10000 BCE to 2000 CE, with projection to 2100 CE[1]
Part of a series onHuman historyHuman Era
↑ Prehistory   (Pleistocene epoch)
Holocene
TimelinesNeolithic – Contemporary(10,000 BCE – Present)



Age of the human race
Recorded history

Earliest records
Protohistory
Proto-writing
History by period


Ancient
Bronze age
Iron age

Axial Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity



Africa
North America
South America

Oceania
East Asia
South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe


Postclassical
Timeline



Africa
Americas

Oceania
East Asia

South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe
Renaissance


Modern

Early modern (Renaissance)
Late modern (Industrial Revolution)
Contemporary



Africa
North America
South America

Oceania
East Asia
South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe



See also

Age of Discovery
Modernity
Postmodernity
Futurology
Political history



↓ Future   vte

Human history, also called world history, is the narrative of humanity's past. It is understood and studied through archaeology, anthropology, genetics, and linguistics. Since the invention of writing, human history has been studied through primary and secondary source documents.
Humanity's written history was preceded by its prehistory, beginning with the Paleolithic ("Old Stone Age") era. This was followed by the Neolithic ("New Stone Age") era, which saw the Agricultural Revolution begin in the Middle East's Fertile Crescent between 10,000 and 5,000 BCE. During this period, humans began the systematic husbandry of plants and animals. As agriculture advanced, most humans transitioned from a nomadic to a settled lifestyle as farmers in permanent settlements. The relative security and increased productivity provided by farming allowed communities to expand into increasingly larger units, fostered by advances in transportation.
The earliest complex societies appeared in fertile river valleys. As farming developed, grain agriculture became more sophisticated and prompted a division of labour to store food between growing seasons. Labor divisions led to the rise of a leisured upper class and the development of cities, which provided the foundation for civilization. The growing complexity of human societies necessitated systems of accounting and writing. Hinduism developed in the late Bronze Age on the Indian subcontinent, while the Axial Age witnessed the introduction of religions such as Buddhism, Jainism, Taoism, and Zoroastrianism.
With civilizations flourishing, ancient history saw the rise and fall of empires. Post-classical history (the "Middle Ages" from about 500 to 1500 CE) witnessed the rise of Christianity, the Islamic Golden Age, and the Renaissance (from around 1300 CE). The 15th-century introduction of movable type printing in Europe revolutionized communication and facilitated widespread dissemination of information, hastening the end of the Middle Ages and ushering in the Scientific Revolution. The early modern period lasted from about 1500 to 1800 CE. Events during this period included the Age of Discovery and the Age of Enlightenment. By the 18th century, the accumulation of knowledge and technology had reached a critical mass that brought about the Industrial Revolution and began the late modern period, which started around 1800 CE and continues.
The above scheme of historical periodization (dividing history into antiquity, post-classical, early modern, and late modern periods) was developed for, and applies best to, the history of the Old World, particularly Europe and the Mediterranean. Outside this region, including Chinese and Indian civilizations, historical timelines unfolded differently up to the 18th century. By that century, due to extensive international trade and colonization, the histories of most civilizations had become substantially intertwined. Over the last quarter-millennium, the rates of growth of population, agriculture, industry, commerce, scientific knowledge, technology, communications, weapons destructiveness, and environmental degradation have greatly accelerated.

Contents

1 Prehistory (2.5 million years ago–600 BC)

1.1 Human evolution
1.2 Early humans
1.3 Rise of agriculture
1.4 Cradles of civilization


2 Classical antiquity (600 BC–AD 476)

2.1 Axial Age
2.2 Regional empires
2.3 Declines, falls, and resurgence


3 Post-classical history (476–1450)

3.1 Greater Middle East
3.2 Europe
3.3 Sub-Saharan Africa
3.4 South Asia
3.5 Northeast Asia
3.6 Southeast Asia
3.7 Oceania
3.8 Americas


4 Early modern period (1450–1750)

4.1 Renaissance
4.2 European expansion
4.3 Regional developments

4.3.1 Greater Middle East
4.3.2 Europe
4.3.3 Sub-Saharan Africa
4.3.4 South Asia
4.3.5 Northeast Asia
4.3.6 Southeast Asia
4.3.7 Oceania
4.3.8 Americas




5 Late modern period (1750–present)

5.1 18th and 19th centuries
5.2 20th century
5.3 21st century


6 See also
7 Explanatory notes
8 References
9 Bibliography

9.1 Articles
9.2 Books
9.3 Websites


10 Further reading


Prehistory (2.5 million years ago–600 BC)
Main articles: Prehistory and Timeline of prehistory
Human evolution
Main article: Human evolution
 Reconstruction of Lucy, the first Australopithecus afarensis skeleton found
Humans evolved in Africa from other primates.[2] Genetic measurements indicate that the ape lineage which would lead to Homo sapiens diverged from the lineage that would lead to chimpanzees and bonobos, the closest living relatives of modern humans, somewhere between 13 million and 5 million years ago.[3][4][5] The term hominin denotes human ancestors that lived after the split with chimpanzees and bonobos,[6] including many species and at least two distinct genera: Australopithecus and Homo.[7] Other fossil specimens such as Paranthropus, Kenyanthropus, and Orrorin may represent additional genera, but palaeontologists debate their taxonomic satus.[7] The early hominins such as Australopithecus had the same brain size as apes but were distinguished from apes by walking on two legs, an adaptation perhaps associated with a shift from forest to savanna habitats.[8] Hominins began to use rudimentary stone tools c. 3.3 million years ago,[a] marking the advent of the Paleolithic era.[12][13]
The genus Homo evolved from Australopithecus.[14] The earliest members of Homo share key traits with Australopithecus, but tend to have larger brains and smaller teeth.[15][16] The earliest record of Homo is the 2.8 million-year-old specimen LD 350-1 from Ethiopia,[16] and the earliest named species is Homo habilis which evolved by 2.3 million years ago.[17] H. erectus (the African variant is sometimes called H. ergaster) evolved by 2 million years ago[18][b] and was the first hominin species to leave Africa and disperse across Eurasia.[20] Perhaps as early as 1.5 million years ago, but certainly by 250,000 years ago, humans began to use fire for heat and cooking.[21][22]
Beginning about 500,000 years ago, Homo diversified into many new species of archaic humans such as the Neanderthals in Europe, the Denisovans in Siberia, and the diminutive H. floresiensis in Indonesia.[23][24] Human evolution was not a simple linear or branched progression but involved interbreeding between related species.[25][26] Genomic research has shown that hybridization between substantially diverged lineages was common in human evolution.[27] DNA evidence suggests that several genes of Neanderthal origin are present among all non-African populations, and Neanderthals and other hominins, such as Denisovans, may have contributed up to 6% of their genome to present-day humans.[28][29]

Early humans
Main articles: Early modern human and Early human migrations
 Cave painting, Lascaux, France, c. 15,000 BCE
Homo sapiens emerged in Africa around 300,000 years ago from a species commonly designated as either H. heidelbergensis or H. rhodesiensis.[30] Humans in this era were anatomically modern, but full behavioural modernity did not appear until between 70,000 and 50,000 years ago.[31] By that point humans exhibited many characteristic behaviours such as burial of the dead, use of jewellery and projectile weapons, and seafaring.[32] One of the most important changes (the date of which is unknown) was the development of syntactic language, which dramatically improved humans' ability to communicate.[33] Signs of early artistic expression can be found in the form of cave paintings and sculptures made from ivory, stone, and bone, implying a form of spirituality generally interpreted as animism[34] or shamanism.[35] Paleolithic humans lived as hunter-gatherers and were generally nomadic.[36] They inhabited grasslands or sparsely wooded areas and avoided dense forest cover.[37]

 Overview map of the peopling of the world by early humans during the Upper Paleolithic, following the Southern Dispersal paradigm. Labels are in thousands of years ago.
The migration of anatomically modern humans out of Africa took place in multiple waves beginning 194,000–177,000 years ago.[38][c] The dominant view among scholars (Southern Dispersal) is that the early waves of migration died out and all modern non-Africans are descended from a single group that left Africa 70,000–50,000 years ago.[42][43][44] H. sapiens proceeded to colonize all the continents and larger islands, arriving in Australia 65,000 years ago,[45] Europe 45,000 years ago,[42] and the Americas by 21,000 years ago.[46] These migrations occurred during the most recent Ice Age, when temperate regions of today were extremely inhospitable.[47] Nevertheless, by the end of the Ice Age some 12,000 years ago, humans had colonized nearly all ice-free parts of the globe.[48] Human expansion coincided with both the Quaternary extinction event and the extinction of the Neanderthals.[49] These extinctions were probably caused by climate change, human activity, or a combination of the two.[50][51]

Rise of agriculture
Main article: Neolithic
Beginning around 10,000 BCE, the Neolithic Revolution marked the development of agriculture, which fundamentally changed the human lifestyle.[52] Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe,[53] and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centers of origin.[54] Cereal crop cultivation and animal domestication had occurred in the Middle East by at least 8500 BCE in the form of wheat, barley, sheep, and goats.[55] The Yangtze valley in China domesticated rice around 8000 BCE; the Yellow River valley may have cultivated millet by 7000 BCE.[56] Pigs were the most important domesticated animal in early China.[57] People in Africa's Sahara cultivated sorghum and several other crops between 8000 and 5000 BCE,[d] while other agricultural centers arose in the Ethiopian highlands and the West African rain forests.[59] In the Indus Valley, crops were cultivated by 7000 BCE and cattle were domesticated by 6500 BCE.[60] In the Americas, squash was cultivated by at least 8500 BCE in South America, and domesticated arrowroot appeared in Central America by 7800 BCE.[61] Potatoes were first cultivated in the Andes Mountains of South America, where the llama was also domesticated.[62]

 A pillar from Göbekli Tepe
There is no scholarly consensus on why the Neolithic Revolution occurred.[63] For example, in some theories agriculture was the result of an increase in population which led people to seek out new food sources, while in others agriculture was the cause of population growth as the food supply improved.[64] Other proposed factors include climate change, resource scarcity, and ideology.[65] The effects of the transition to agriculture are better understood: it created food surpluses that could support people not directly engaged in food production,[66] permitting far denser populations and the creation of the first cities and states.[52]
Cities were centres of trade, manufacturing, and political power.[67] Cities established a symbiosis with their surrounding countrysides, absorbing agricultural products and providing, in return, manufactured goods and varying degrees of political control.[68][69] Early proto-cities appeared at Jericho and Çatalhöyük around 6000 BCE.[70] Pastoral societies based on nomadic animal herding also developed, mostly in dry areas unsuited for plant cultivation such as the Central Asian steppes or the African Sahel.[71] Conflict between nomadic herders and sedentary agriculturalists occurred frequently and became a recurring theme in world history.[72]
Metalworking was first used in the creation of copper tools and ornaments around 6400 BCE.[59] Gold and silver soon followed, primarily for use in ornaments.[59] The need for metal ores stimulated trade, as many areas of early human settlement lacked the necessary ores.[73] The first signs of bronze, an alloy of copper and tin, date to around 2500 BCE, but the alloy did not become widely used until much later.[74]
Neolithic societies usually worshiped ancestors, sacred places, or anthropomorphic deities.[75] Entities such as the Sun, Moon, Earth, sky, and sea were often deified.[76] The vast complex of Göbekli Tepe in Turkey, dated 9500–8000 BCE,[77] is a spectacular example of a Neolithic religious or civic site.[78] It may have been built by hunter-gatherers rather than a sedentary population.[78] Elaborate mortuary practices developed in the Levant during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B, in which certain high-status individuals were buried under the floors of houses and the graves were later re-opened for the skulls to be removed.[79] Some of the skulls were then covered in plaster, painted, and displayed in public.[80][81]

Cradles of civilization
Main articles: Cradle of civilization, Bronze Age, and Iron Age
 Great Pyramids of Giza, Egypt
The Bronze Age saw the development of cities, which was synonymous with the rise of civilization. Early civilizations arose in close proximity to rivers, first in Lower Mesopotamia (3000 BCE) with the Tigris and Euphrates,[82][83][84] followed by Egyptian civilization along the Nile River (3000 BCE),[85][86] the Indus Valley Civilisation in Pakistan (2500 BCE),[87][88] and Chinese civilization along the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers (2200 BCE).[89][90]
These societies developed a number of unifying characteristics, including a central government, a complex economy and social structure, sophisticated language and writing systems, and distinct cultures and religions. These cultures variously invented the wheel,[91] mathematics,[92] bronze-working, sailing boats, the potter's wheel, woven cloth, construction of monumental buildings,[93] and writing.[94] Shrines developed, which evolved into temple establishments, complete with a complex hierarchy of priests and priestesses.
Writing facilitated the administration of cities, the expression of ideas, and the preservation of information.[95] Scholars recognize that writing may have independently developed in at least four ancient civilizations: Mesopotamia (3300 BCE),[96] Egypt (around 3250 BCE),[97][98] China (1200 BCE),[99] and lowland Mesoamerica (by 650 BCE).[100] Among the earliest surviving written religious scriptures are the Egyptian Pyramid Texts, the oldest of which date to between 2400 and 2300 BCE.[101]

 Monumental Cuneiform inscription, Sumer, Mesopotamia, 26th century BCE
Sumer, located in Mesopotamia, is the first known complex civilization, having developed the first city-states in the 4th millennium BCE.[83] It was these cities that produced the earliest known form of writing, cuneiform script.[102] Cuneiform writing began as a system of pictographs, whose pictorial representations eventually became simplified and more abstract.[102] Cuneiform texts were written by using a blunt reed as a stylus to draw symbols upon clay tablets.[103]
Transport was facilitated by waterways—by rivers and seas. The Mediterranean Sea, at the juncture of three continents, fostered the projection of military power and the exchange of goods, ideas, and inventions. This era also saw new land technologies, such as horse-based cavalry and chariots, that allowed armies to move faster.[104]
These developments led to the rise of territorial states and empires. In Mesopotamia there prevailed a pattern of independent warring city-states and of a loose hegemony shifting from one city to another.[105] In Egypt, by contrast, the initial division into Upper and Lower Egypt was followed by unification of all the valley around 3100 BCE.[106] In Crete the Minoan civilization had entered the Bronze Age by 2700 BCE and is regarded as the first civilization in Europe.[107] Around 2600 BCE the Indus Valley Civilization built major cities at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro and developed a writing system of over 400 symbols, which remains undeciphered.[108][109] China entered the Bronze Age by 2000 BCE.[110] The Shang dynasty (1766–1045 BCE) was the first to use writing, inscribing the results of divination ceremonies on oracle bones – ox shoulder blades and turtle shells.[110][111]
In the 25th–21st centuries BCE, the empires of Akkad and Sumer arose in Mesopotamia.[112]
Over the following millennia, civilizations developed across the world. By 1600 BCE, Mycenaean Greece began to develop,[113] and ended with the Late Bronze Age collapse that started to affect many Mediterranean civilizations between 1200 and 1150 BCE. In India, this era was the Vedic period (1750–600 BCE), which laid the foundations of Hinduism and other cultural aspects of early Indian society, and ended in the 6th century BCE.[114] From around 550 BCE, many independent kingdoms and republics known as the Mahajanapadas were established across the subcontinent.[115] Trade increasingly became a source of power as states with access to important resources or controlling important trade routes rose to dominance.[116]
As complex civilizations arose in the Eastern Hemisphere, the indigenous societies in the Americas remained relatively simple and fragmented into diverse regional cultures. They had developed agriculture by about 5000 BCE, growing maize, beans, squash, peppers, tomatoes, and potatoes.[117] During the formative stage in Mesoamerica (about 1200 BCE to 250 CE),[118] more complex and centralized civilizations began to develop, mostly in what is now Mexico, Central America, and Peru. They included civilizations such as the Olmecs,[119] Maya,[120] Chavín,[121] and Moche.[122]

Classical antiquity (600 BC–AD 476)
Main article: Classical antiquity
See also: Ancient history and Timeline of ancient history
Axial Age
Main articles: Axial Age, History of philosophy, Timeline of religion, and History of religion
 The Buddha
Beginning in the 8th century BCE, the "Axial Age" saw the development of a set of transformative philosophical and religious ideas, mostly independently, in many different places.[123] Chinese Confucianism,[124] Indian Buddhism and Jainism, and Jewish monotheism are all claimed by some scholars to have developed in the 6th century BCE. (Karl Jaspers' Axial-Age theory also includes Persian Zoroastrianism, but other scholars dispute his timeline for Zoroastrianism.) In the 5th century BCE, Plato and Aristotle made substantial advances in the development of ancient Greek philosophy.[125]
In the East, three schools of thought would dominate Chinese thinking well into the 20th century. These were Taoism, Legalism, and Confucianism. The Confucian tradition, which would become particularly dominant, looked for political morality not to the force of law but to the power and example of tradition. Confucianism would later spread to Korea and Japan.[126]
In the West, the Greek philosophical tradition, represented by Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and other philosophers,[127] along with accumulated science, technology, and culture, diffused throughout Europe, Egypt, the Middle East, and Northwest India, starting in the 4th century BCE after the conquests of Alexander the Great of Macedon.[128]

Regional empires
Main articles: Civilization and Empire
The millennium from 500 BCE to 500 CE saw a series of empires of unprecedented size develop. Well-trained professional armies, unifying ideologies, and advanced bureaucracies created the possibility for emperors to rule over large domains whose populations could attain numbers upwards of tens of millions of subjects.
The great empires depended on military annexation of territory and on the formation of defended settlements to become agricultural centres. The relative peace that the empires brought encouraged international trade, most notably the massive trade routes in the Mediterranean, the maritime trade web in the Indian Ocean,[129] and the Silk Road.[130] In southern Europe, the Greeks (and later the Romans), in an era known as "classical antiquity," established cultures whose practices, laws, and customs are considered the foundation of contemporary Western culture.

 Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, 6th century BCE
 Pillar erected by India's Maurya Emperor Ashoka
 Obelisk of Axum, Ethiopia
There were a number of regional empires during this period. The kingdom of the Medes helped to destroy the Assyrian Empire in tandem with the nomadic Scythians and the Babylonians. Nineveh, the capital of Assyria, was sacked by the Medes in 612 BCE.[131] The Median Empire gave way to successive Iranian empires, including the Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BCE), the Parthian Empire (247 BCE–224 CE), and the Sasanian Empire (224–651 CE).
Several empires began in modern-day Greece. The Delian League, founded in 477 BCE,[132] and the Athenian Empire (454–404 BCE) were two such examples. Later, Alexander the Great (356–323 BCE), of Macedon, founded an empire extending from present-day Greece to present-day India.[133][134] The empire divided shortly after his death, but resulted in the spread of Greek culture throughout conquered regions, a process referred to as Hellenization. The Hellenistic period lasted from 323 to 31 BCE.[135]
In Asia, the Maurya Empire (322–185 BCE) existed in present-day India;[136] in the 3rd century BCE, most of South Asia was united to the Maurya Empire by Chandragupta Maurya and flourished under Ashoka the Great. From the 3rd century CE, the Gupta dynasty oversaw the period referred to as ancient India's Golden Age. From the 4th to 6th centuries, northern India was ruled by the Gupta Empire. In southern India, three prominent Dravidian kingdoms emerged: the Cheras,[137] Cholas,[138] and Pandyas. The ensuing stability contributed to heralding in the golden age of Hindu culture in the 4th and 5th centuries.
In Europe, the Roman Empire, centered in present-day Italy, began in the 7th century BCE.[139] In the 3rd century BCE the Roman Republic began expanding its territory through conquest and alliances.[140] By the time of Augustus (63 BCE–14 CE), the first Roman Emperor, Rome had already established dominion over most of the Mediterranean. The empire would continue to grow, controlling much of the land from England to Mesopotamia, reaching its greatest extent under the emperor Trajan (died 117 CE). In the 3rd century CE, the empire split into western and eastern regions, with (usually) separate emperors. The Western empire would fall, in 476 CE, to German influence under Odoacer. The eastern empire, now known as the Byzantine Empire, with its capital at Constantinople, would continue for another thousand years, until Constantinople was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1453. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe.[141] And Constantinople is generally considered to be the center of "Eastern Orthodox civilization".[142][143] Although the Roman state continued and its traditions were maintained, modern historians distinguish Byzantium from its earlier incarnation because it was centred on Constantinople, oriented towards Greek rather than Latin culture, and characterized by Eastern Orthodox Christianity.
In China, the Qin dynasty (221–206 BCE), the first imperial dynasty of China, was followed by the Han Empire (202 BCE–220 CE).[144] The Han dynasty was comparable in power and influence to the Roman Empire that lay at the other end of the Silk Road.[145] Han China developed advanced cartography, shipbuilding, and navigation. The Chinese invented blast furnaces, and created finely tuned copper instruments. As with other empires during the Classical Period, Han China advanced significantly in the areas of government, education, mathematics, astronomy, technology, and many others.[146]

 Maya observatory, Chichen Itza, Mexico
In Africa, the Kingdom of Aksum, centred in present-day Ethiopia, established itself by the 1st century CE as a major trading empire, dominating its neighbours in South Arabia and Kush and controlling the Red Sea trade. It minted its own currency and carved enormous monolithic stelae to mark its emperors' graves.[147]
Successful regional empires were also established in the Americas, arising from cultures established as early as 2500 BCE.[148] In Mesoamerica, vast pre-Columbian societies were built, the most notable being the Zapotec Empire (700 BCE–1521 CE),[149] and the Maya civilization, which reached its highest state of development during the Mesoamerican Classic period (c. 250–900 CE),[150] but continued throughout the Post-Classic period until the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century CE. Maya civilization arose as the Olmec mother culture gradually declined. The great Mayan city-states slowly rose in number and prominence, and Maya culture spread throughout the Yucatán and surrounding areas. The later empire of the Aztecs was built on neighbouring cultures and was influenced by conquered peoples such as the Toltecs.
Some areas experienced slow but steady technological advances, with important developments such as the stirrup and moldboard plough arriving every few centuries. There were, however, in some regions, periods of rapid technological progress. Most important, perhaps, was the Hellenistic period in the region of the Mediterranean, during which hundreds of technologies were invented.[151] Such periods were followed by periods of technological decay, as during the Roman Empire's decline and fall and the ensuing early medieval period.

Declines, falls, and resurgence
The ancient empires faced common problems associated with maintaining huge armies and supporting a central bureaucracy. These costs fell most heavily on the peasantry, while land-owning magnates increasingly evaded centralized control and its costs. Barbarian pressure on the frontiers hastened internal dissolution. China's Han dynasty fell into civil war in 220 CE, beginning the Three Kingdoms period, while its Roman counterpart became increasingly decentralized and divided about the same time in what is known as the Crisis of the Third Century.[152] The great empires of Eurasia were all located on temperate and subtropical coastal plains. From the Central Asian steppes, horse-based nomads, mainly Mongols and Turks, dominated a large part of the continent. The development of the stirrup and the breeding of horses strong enough to carry a fully armed archer made the nomads a constant threat to the more settled civilizations.

 The Pantheon in Rome, Italy, originally a Roman temple, now a Catholic church
The gradual break-up of the Roman Empire, spanning several centuries after the 2nd century CE, coincided with the spread of Christianity outward from the Middle East.[153] The Western Roman Empire fell under the domination of Germanic tribes in the 5th century,[154] and these polities gradually developed into a number of warring states, all associated in one way or another with the Catholic Church.[155] The remaining part of the Roman Empire, in the eastern Mediterranean, continued as what came to be called the Byzantine Empire.[156] Centuries later, a limited unity would be restored to western Europe through the establishment in 962 of a revived "Roman Empire",[157] later called the Holy Roman Empire,[158] comprising a number of states in what is now Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Belgium, Italy, and parts of France.[159][160]
In China, dynasties would rise and fall, but, by sharp contrast to the Mediterranean-European world, dynastic unity would be restored. After the fall of the Eastern Han dynasty[161] and the demise of the Three Kingdoms, nomadic tribes from the north began to invade in the 4th century, eventually conquering areas of northern China and setting up many small kingdoms.[162] The Sui dynasty successfully reunified the whole of China[163] in 581,[164] and laid the foundations for a Chinese golden age under the Tang dynasty (618–907).

Post-classical history (476–1450)
Main article: Post-classical history
 University of Timbuktu, Mali
The term "post-classical era", though derived from the name of the era of "classical antiquity", takes in a broader geographic sweep.[165] The era is commonly dated from the 5th century fall of the Western Roman Empire, which fragmented into many separate kingdoms, some of which would later be confederated under the Holy Roman Empire. The Byzantine Empire survived until late in the post-classical or medieval period.

 Hagia Sophia, in Istanbul, is among the most recognizable symbols of the Byzantine civilization.[166]
The post-classical period also encompasses the Early Muslim conquests, the subsequent Islamic Golden Age, and the commencement and expansion of the Arab slave trade, followed by the Mongol invasions of the Middle East, Central Asia, and Eastern Europe and the founding around 1280 of the Ottoman Empire.[167] South Asia saw a series of middle kingdoms of India, followed by the establishment of Islamic empires in India.
In West Africa, the Mali Empire and the Songhai Empire rose.[168] On the southeast coast of Africa, Arabic ports were established where gold, spices, and other commodities were traded. This allowed Africa to join the Southeast Asia trading system, bringing it contact with Asia; this, along with Muslim culture, resulted in the Swahili culture.
China experienced the successive Sui, Tang, Song, Yuan, and early Ming dynasties.[169] Middle Eastern trade routes along the Indian Ocean, and the Silk Road through the Gobi Desert, provided limited economic and cultural contact between Asian and European civilizations.
During the same period, civilizations in the Americas, such as the Mississippians,[170] Puebloans, Aztecs,[171] Maya,[172] Muisca, and Inca,[173] reached their zenith. All would be compromised by, then conquered after, contact with European colonists at the beginning of the modern period.

Greater Middle East
Main articles: History of the Middle East, History of North Africa, History of Central Asia, History of the Caucasus, and Islamic Golden Age
Prior to the advent of Islam in the 7th century, the Middle East was dominated by the Byzantine Empire and the Sasanian Empire that frequently fought each other for control of several disputed regions.[174] This was also a cultural battle, with Byzantine Christian culture competing against Persian Zoroastrian traditions.[175] The birth of Islam created a new contender that quickly surpassed both of these empires. The new religion greatly affected the political, economic, and military history of the Old World, especially the Middle East.

 Great Mosque of Kairouan, Tunisia, founded 670 CE
From their center on the Arabian Peninsula, Muslims began their expansion during the early post-classical era. By 750 CE, they came to conquer most of the Near East, North Africa, and parts of Europe,[176] ushering in an era of learning, science, and invention known as the Islamic Golden Age. The knowledge and skills of the ancient Near East, Greece, and Persia were preserved in the post-classical era by Muslims, who also added new and important innovations from outside, such as the manufacture of paper from China and decimal positional numbering from India.
Much of this learning and development can be linked to geography. Even prior to Islam's presence, the city of Mecca had served as a center of trade in Arabia, and the Islamic prophet Muhammad himself was a merchant.[177] With the new Islamic tradition of the Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, the city became even more a center for exchanging goods and ideas. The influence held by Muslim merchants over African-Arabian and Arabian-Asian trade routes was tremendous. As a result, Islamic civilization grew and expanded on the basis of its merchant economy, in contrast to the Europeans, Indians, and Chinese, who based their societies on an agricultural landholding nobility. Merchants brought goods and their Islamic faith to China, India, Southeast Asia, and Africa, and returned with new discoveries and inventions.

 Crusader Krak des Chevaliers, Syria
The Crusading movement was a religiously motivated European effort to roll back Muslim territory and regain control of the Holy Land.[178] It was ultimately unsuccessful and served more to weaken the Byzantine Empire, especially with the 1204 Sack of Constantinople. Arab domination of the region ended in the mid-11th century with the arrival of the Seljuk Turks, migrating south from the Turkic homelands. In the early 13th century, a new wave of invaders, the Mongol Empire, swept through the region but were eventually eclipsed by the Turks and the founding of the Ottoman Empire in modern-day Turkey around 1280.[167]
North Africa saw the rise of polities established by the Berbers, such as the Marinid dynasty in Morocco, the Zayyanid dynasty in Algeria, and the Hafsid dynasty in Tunisia. The coastal region was known as the Barbary Coast. Pirates based in North African ports conducted operations that included capturing merchant ships and raiding coastal settlements. Many European captives were sold in North African markets as part of the Barbary slave trade.
Starting with the Sui dynasty (581–618), the Chinese began expanding to the west. They were confronted by Turkic nomads, who were becoming the most dominant ethnic group in Central Asia.[179][180] Originally the relationship was largely cooperative but in 630, the Tang dynasty began an offensive against the Turks by capturing areas of the Ordos Desert.[181] In the 8th century, Islam began to penetrate the region and soon became the sole faith of most of the population, though Buddhism remained strong in the east.[182] The desert nomads of Arabia could militarily match the nomads of the steppe, and the Umayyad Caliphate gained control over parts of Central Asia.[179] The Hephthalites were the most powerful of the nomad groups in the 6th and 7th centuries, and controlled much of the region. From the 9th to 13th centuries, the region was divided among several powerful states, including the Samanid Empire,[183] the Seljuk Empire,[184] and the Khwarazmian Empire. The largest empire to rise out of Central Asia developed when Genghis Khan united the tribes of Mongolia.[185] The Mongol Empire spread to comprise all of Central Asia and China as well as large parts of Russia and the Middle East.[186] After Genghis Khan died in 1227,[187] most of Central Asia continued to be dominated by a successor state, the Chagatai Khanate. In 1369, Timur, a Turkic leader in the Mongol military tradition, conquered most of the region and founded the Timurid Empire. However, Timur's large empire collapsed soon after his death as much of Central Asia was overrun by the Uzbeks.
In the aftermath of the Byzantine–Sasanian wars, the Caucasus and its diverse group of peoples gained freedom from foreign suzerainty. As the Byzantines and Sasanians became exhausted due to continuous wars, the Rashidun Caliphate had the opportunity to expand into the Caucasus during the early Muslim conquests. By the 13th century, the arrival of the Mongols saw the region invaded once again.

Europe
Main articles: History of Europe, Christendom, Middle Ages, and Timeline of the Middle Ages
 St. Peter's Basilica, Vatican City.
Since at least the 4th century, Christianity, primarily Catholicism,[188][189][190][191] and later Protestantism,[192][193] has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization.[194][195][196][197] Europe during the Early Middle Ages was characterized by depopulation, deurbanization, and barbarian invasion, all of which had begun in late antiquity. The barbarian invaders formed their own new kingdoms in the remains of the Western Roman Empire. In the 7th century, North Africa and the Middle East, once part of the Eastern Roman Empire, became part of the Caliphate after conquest by Muhammad's successors. Although there were substantial changes in society and political structures, most of the new kingdoms incorporated as many of the existing Roman institutions as they could. Christianity expanded in western Europe, and monasteries were founded. In the 7th and 8th centuries, the Franks under the Carolingian dynasty established an empire covering much of Western Europe;[198] it lasted until the 9th century, when it succumbed to pressure from new invaders—the Vikings,[199] Magyars, and Saracens.
During the High Middle Ages, which began after 1000, the population of Europe increased greatly as technological and agricultural innovations allowed trade to flourish and crop yields to increase. Manorialism, the organization of peasants into villages that owed rents and labor service to nobles, and feudalism, a political structure whereby knights and lower-status nobles owed military service to their overlords in return for the right to rents from lands and manors, were two of the ways of organizing medieval society that developed during the High Middle Ages. Kingdoms became more centralized after the decentralizing effects of the break-up of the Carolingian Empire. In 1054, the Great Schism between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church led to the prominent cultural differences between Western and Eastern Europe.[200] The Crusading movement attempted to gain Christian control of the Holy Land from the Muslims and succeeded for long enough to establish some Crusader states in the Levant. Italian merchants imported slaves to work in households or in sugar processing.[201] Intellectual life was marked by scholasticism and the founding of universities, while the building of Gothic cathedrals and churches was one of the outstanding artistic achievements of the age.[202]

 Notre-Dame de Paris in Paris, France: is among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of Christendom.
The Late Middle Ages were marked by difficulties and calamities. Famine, plague, and war devastated the population of Western Europe.[203] The Black Death alone killed approximately 75 to 200 million people between 1347 and 1350.[204][205] It was one of the deadliest pandemics in human history. Starting in Asia, the disease reached the Mediterranean and Western Europe during the late 1340s,[206] and killed tens of millions of Europeans in six years; between a quarter and a third of the population perished.[185]
The Middle Ages witnessed the first sustained urbanization of northern and western Europe and it lasted until the beginning of the early modern period in the 16th century,[207] marked by the rise of nation states,[208] the division of Western Christianity in the Reformation,[209] the rise of humanism in the Italian Renaissance,[210] and the beginnings of European overseas expansion which allowed for the Columbian exchange.
In Central and Eastern Europe, in 1386, the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (the latter including territories of modern Belarus and Ukraine), facing depredations by the Teutonic Order and later also threats from Muscovy, the Crimean Khanate, and the Ottoman Empire, formed a personal union through the marriage of Poland's Queen Jadwiga to Lithuanian Grand Duke Jogaila, who became King Władysław II Jagiełło of Poland. For the next four centuries, until the 18th-century partitions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth by Prussia, Russia, and Austria, the two polities conducted a federated condominium, long Europe's largest state, which welcomed diverse ethnicities and religions, including most of the world's Jews, furthered scientific thought (e.g. Nicolaus Copernicus's heliocentric theory).

Sub-Saharan Africa
Main article: History of Africa
 A brass "Benin Bronze" from Nigeria
Medieval sub-Saharan Africa was home to many different civilizations. In the Horn of Africa, the Kingdom of Aksum declined in the 7th century. The Zagwe dynasty that later emerged was famed for its rock cut architecture at Lalibela. The Zagwe would then fall to the Solomonic dynasty who claimed descent from the Aksumite emperors[211] and would rule the country well into the 20th century. In the West African Sahel region, many Islamic empires rose, such as the Mali Empire, Songhai Empire, and Kanem–Bornu Empire.[212] They controlled the trans-Saharan trade in gold, ivory, salt, and slaves.
South of the Sahel, civilizations rose in the coastal forests. These include the Yoruba city of Ifẹ, noted for its art,[213] and the Oyo Empire, the Kingdom of Benin of the Edo people centered in Benin City, the Igbo Kingdom of Nri which produced advanced bronze art at Igbo-Ukwu, and the Akan who are noted for their intricate architecture.[214][215]
Central Africa saw the formation of several states, including the Kingdom of Kongo.[216] In what is now modern Southern Africa, native Africans created various kingdoms such as the Kingdom of Mutapa. They flourished through trade with the Swahili people on the East African coast. They built large defensive stone structures without mortar such as Great Zimbabwe, capital of the Kingdom of Zimbabwe, Khami, capital of Kingdom of Butua,[217] and Danangombe (Dhlo-Dhlo), capital of the Rozvi Empire. The Swahili people themselves were the inhabitants of the East African coast from Kenya to Mozambique who traded extensively with Asians and Arabs, who introduced them to Islam. They built many port cities such as Mombasa, Zanzibar, and Kilwa, which were known to Chinese sailors under Zheng He and Islamic geographers.
Seafarers from Southeast Asia colonized Madagascar sometime between the 4th and 9th century,[218] creating what geographer Jared Diamond called "the single most astonishing fact of human geography".[219] To reach Madagascar, the settlers crossed 6,000 miles of ocean in sailing canoes,[220] probably without maps or compasses.[219] A wave of Bantu-speaking migrants from southeastern Africa also arrived in Madagascar around 1000 CE.[221]

South Asia
Main article: History of India
 Chennakesava Temple, Belur, India
In northern India, after the fall (550 CE) of the Gupta Empire, the region was divided into a complex and fluid network of smaller kingly states.[222]
Early Muslim incursions began in the west in 712 CE, when the Arab Umayyad Caliphate annexed much of present-day Pakistan. Arab military advance was largely halted at that point, but Islam still spread in India, largely due to the influence of Arab merchants along the western coast.
The ninth century saw a Tripartite Struggle for control of northern India, among the Pratihara Empire, Pala Empire, and Rashtrakuta Empire. Some of the important states that emerged in India during this time included the Bahmani Sultanate and Vijayanagara Empire.
Post-classical dynasties in South India included those of the Chalukyas, Hoysalas, Cholas, Mughals, Marathas, and Mysores. Science, engineering, art, literature, astronomy, and philosophy flourished under the patronage of these kings.[223]

Northeast Asia
Main articles: History of East Asia and History of Siberia
After a period of relative disunity, China was reunified by the Sui dynasty in 589[224] and under the succeeding Tang dynasty (618–907) China entered a Golden Age.[225] The Tang Empire competed with the Tibetan Empire (618–842) for control of areas in Inner and Central Asia.[226] The Tang dynasty eventually splintered, however, and after half a century of turmoil the Song dynasty reunified much of China,[227] when it was, according to William McNeill, the "richest, most skilled, and most populous country on earth".[228] Pressure from nomadic empires to the north became increasingly urgent. By 1142, North China had been lost to the Jurchens in the Jin–Song Wars, and the Mongol Empire[229] conquered all of China in 1279, along with almost half of Eurasia's landmass. After about a century of Mongol Yuan dynasty rule, the ethnic Chinese reasserted control with the founding of the Ming dynasty in 1368.

 Battle during 1281 Mongol invasion of Japan
In Japan, the imperial lineage had been established by this time, and during the Asuka period (538–710) the Yamato Province developed into a clearly centralized state.[230] Buddhism was introduced, and there was an emphasis on the adoption of elements of Chinese culture and Confucianism. The Nara period of the 8th century was characterized by the appearance of a nascent literary culture, as well as the development of Buddhist-inspired artwork and architecture.[231][232] The Heian period (794 to 1185) saw the peak of imperial power, followed by the rise of militarized clans, and the beginning of Japanese feudalism. The feudal period of Japanese history, dominated by powerful regional lords (daimyos) and the military rule of warlords (shoguns) such as the Ashikaga shogunate and Tokugawa shogunate, stretched from 1185 to 1868. The emperor remained, but mostly as a figurehead, and the power of merchants was weak.
Postclassical Korea saw the end of the Three Kingdoms era, the three kingdoms being Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla. Silla conquered Baekje in 660, and Goguryeo in 668,[233] marking the beginning of the Northern and Southern States period (남북국시대), with Unified Silla in the south and Balhae, a successor state to Goguryeo, in the north.[234] In 892 CE, this arrangement reverted to the Later Three Kingdoms, with Goguryeo (then called Taebong and eventually named Goryeo) emerging as dominant, unifying the entire peninsula by 936.[235] The founding Goryeo dynasty ruled until 1392, succeeded by the Joseon dynasty, which ruled for approximately 500 years.

Southeast Asia
 Angkor Wat temple, Cambodia, early 12th century
Main article: History of Southeast Asia
The beginning of the Middle Ages in Southeast Asia saw the fall (550 CE) of the Kingdom of Funan to the Chenla Empire, which was then replaced by the Khmer Empire (802 CE). The Khmer people's capital city, Angkor, was the largest city in the world prior to the industrial age[236] and contained over a thousand temples, the most famous being Angkor Wat. The Sukhothai (1238 CE) and Ayutthaya (1351 CE) kingdoms were major powers of the Thai people, who were influenced by the Khmer.
Starting in the 9th century, the Pagan Kingdom rose to prominence in modern Myanmar.[237] Its collapse brought about political fragmention that ended with the rise of the Toungoo Empire in the 16th century.[238] Other notable kingdoms of the period include the Srivijayan Empire and Lavo Kingdom (both coming into prominence in the 7th century), Champa and Hariphunchai (both about 750), Đại Việt (968), Lan Na (13th century), Majapahit (1293), Lan Xang (1354), and Ava Kingdom (1364).
This period saw the spread of Islam to present-day Indonesia (beginning in the 13th century) and the emergence of the Malay states, including Brunei and Malacca. In the Philippines, several polities were formed such as Tondo, Cebu, and Butuan.

Oceania
 Moai, Rapa Nui (Easter Island)
Main article: History of Oceania
In Oceania, the Tuʻi Tonga Empire was founded in the 10th century CE and expanded between 1200 and 1500. Tongan culture, language, and hegemony spread widely throughout eastern Melanesia, Micronesia, and central Polynesia during this period,[239] influencing east 'Uvea, Rotuma, Futuna, Samoa, and Niue, as well as specific islands and parts of Micronesia (Kiribati, Pohnpei, and miscellaneous outliers), Vanuatu, and New Caledonia (specifically, the Loyalty Islands, with the main island being predominantly populated by the Melanesian Kanak people and their cultures).[240]
In northern Australia, there is evidence that some aboriginal groups regularly traded with Makassarese fishermen from Indonesia before the arrival of Europeans.[241][242]
At around the same time, a powerful thalassocracy appeared in eastern Polynesia, centered around the Society Islands, specifically on the sacred Taputapuatea marae, which drew in eastern Polynesian colonists from places as far away as Hawaii, New Zealand (Aotearoa), and the Tuamotu Islands for political, spiritual, and economic reasons, until the unexplained collapse of regular long-distance voyaging in the eastern Pacific a few centuries before Europeans began exploring the area.
Indigenous written records from this period are virtually nonexistent, as it seems that all Pacific Islanders, with the possible exception of the Rapa Nui and their currently undeciphered Rongorongo script, had no writing systems of any kind until after their introduction by European colonists. However, some indigenous prehistories can be estimated and academically reconstructed through careful, judicious analysis of native oral traditions, colonial ethnography, archaeology, physical anthropology, and linguistics research.

Americas
 Machu Picchu, Inca Empire, Peru
Main articles: History of the Americas, History of North America, History of Central America, History of the Caribbean, and History of South America
In North America, this period saw the rise of the Mississippian culture in the modern-day United States c. 800 CE, marked by the extensive 12th-century urban complex at Cahokia. The Ancestral Puebloans and their predecessors (9th – 13th centuries) built extensive permanent settlements, including stone structures that would remain the largest buildings in North America until the 19th century.[243]
In Mesoamerica, the Teotihuacan civilization fell and the classic Maya collapse occurred.[244] The Aztec Empire came to dominate much of Mesoamerica in the 14th and 15th centuries.
In South America, the 15th century saw the rise of the Inca.[173] The Inca Empire or Tawantinsuyu, with its capital at Cusco, spanned the entire Andes, making it the most extensive pre-Columbian civilization. The Inca were prosperous and advanced, known for an excellent road system and unrivaled masonry.

Early modern period (1450–1750)
Main article: Early modern period
 Gutenberg Bible, ca. 1450, produced using movable typeMartin Luther initiated the Reformation in 1517 with his Ninety-five Theses
The "early modern period"[e] was the period between the Middle Ages and the Industrial Revolution—roughly 1500 to 1800.[207] The early Modern period was characterized by the rise of science, and by increasingly rapid technological progress, secularized civic politics, and the nation state. Capitalist economies began their rise, initially in the northern Italian republics. The early modern period saw the rise and dominance of mercantilist economic theory, and the decline and eventual disappearance, in much of the European sphere, of feudalism, serfdom, and the power of the Catholic Church. The period included the Reformation, the disastrous Thirty Years' War, the Age of Discovery, European colonial expansion, the peak of European witch-hunting, the Scientific Revolution, and the Age of Enlightenment.[f] During the early modern period, Protestantism eventually became the majority faith throughout Northwestern Europe and in England and English-speaking America,[245] and have developed their own culture, with major contributions in education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy and the arts and many other fields.[246]

Renaissance
 Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man (c. 1490), Renaissance Italy
Main article: Renaissance
Europe's Renaissance – the "rebirth" of classical culture, beginning in the 14th century and extending into the 16th – comprised the rediscovery of the classical world's cultural, scientific, and technological achievements, and the economic and social rise of Europe.
The Renaissance engendered a culture of inquisitiveness which ultimately led to Humanism[247] and the Scientific Revolution.[248]
This period, which saw social and political upheavals, and revolutions in many intellectual pursuits, is also celebrated for its artistic developments and the attainments of such polymaths as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, who inspired the term "Renaissance man".

European expansion
Further information: Age of Discovery, Colonialism, 16th century, and 17th century
During this period, European powers came to dominate most of the world. Although the most developed regions of European classical civilization were more urbanized than any other region of the world, European civilization had undergone a lengthy period of gradual decline and collapse. During the early modern period, Europe was able to regain its dominance; historians still debate the causes.
This era was characterized by the rise of maritime European empires in the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries, first the Portuguese and Spanish Empires, and later the French, English, and Dutch Empires. In the 17th century, globalization became also a private business phenomenon when chartered companies such as the English East India Company (founded in 1600), often described as the first multinational corporation, as well as the Dutch East India Company (founded in 1602) were established.

 1570 world map, showing Europeans' discoveries
The Age of Discovery brought a broad change in globalization, being the first period in which Eurasia and Africa engaged in substantial cultural, material and biologic exchange with the New World. It began in the late 15th century, when the two kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula – Portugal and Castile – sent the first exploratory voyages around the Cape of Good Hope and to the Americas, "discovered" in 1492 by Christopher Columbus. Shortly before the turn of the 16th century, Portuguese started establishing factories from Africa to Asia and Brazil, to deal with the trade of local products like slaves, gold, spices, and lumber, introducing an international business center under a royal monopoly, the House of India.[249]
Global integration continued with the European colonization of the Americas initiating the Columbian exchange,[250] the enormous widespread exchange of plants, animals, foods, human populations (including slaves), communicable diseases, and culture between the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. It was one of the most significant global events concerning ecology, agriculture, and culture in history. New crops that had come from the Americas via the European seafarers in the 16th century significantly contributed to the world's population growth.[251]

Regional developments
Greater Middle East
 Hagia Sophia, Istanbul (formerly Constantinople), Turkey
The Ottoman Empire, after conquering Constantinople in 1453, quickly came to dominate the Middle East.[252] Persia came under the rule of the Safavid Empire in 1501, succeeded by the Afsharid Empire in 1736, the Zand Empire in 1751, and the Qajar Empire in 1794. In North Africa, the Wattasid Sultanate, Zayyanid Sultanate, and Hafsid Sultanate remained as independent Berber states until the 16th century. Areas to the north and east in Central Asia were held by the Uzbeks and Pashtuns. At the start of the 19th century, the Russian Empire began its conquest of the Caucasus.

Europe
In Russia, Ivan the Terrible was crowned in 1547 as the first Tsar of Russia, and by annexing the Turkic khanates in the east, transformed Russia into a regional power. The countries of Western Europe, while expanding prodigiously through technological advancement and colonial conquest, competed with each other economically and militarily in a state of almost constant war. Often the wars had a religious dimension, either Catholic versus Protestant, or (primarily in Eastern Europe) Christian versus Muslim. Wars of particular note include the Thirty Years' War, the War of the Spanish Succession, the Seven Years' War, and the French Revolutionary Wars.[253] Napoleon came to power in France in 1799, an event foreshadowing the Napoleonic Wars of the early 19th century.[254]

Sub-Saharan Africa
In Africa, this period saw a decline in many civilizations and an advancement in others. The Swahili coast declined after coming under the Portuguese Empire and later the Omani Empire. In West Africa, the Songhai Empire fell to the Moroccans in 1591 when they invaded with firearms. The Bono state gave birth to numerous Akan states in its wake in search of gold such as Akwamu, Akyem, Fante, Adansi etc.[255] The South African Kingdom of Zimbabwe gave way to smaller kingdoms such as Mutapa, Butua, and Rozvi. The Ethiopian Empire suffered from the 1531 invasion by the neighboring Muslim Adal Sultanate, and in 1769 entered the Zemene Mesafint (Age of Princes) during which the Emperor became a figurehead and the country was ruled by warlords, though the royal line later would recover under Emperor Tewodros II. The Ajuran Sultanate, in the Horn of Africa, began to decline in the 17th century, succeeded by the Geledi Sultanate. Other civilizations in Africa advanced during this period. The Oyo Empire experienced its golden age, as did the Kingdom of Benin. The Ashanti Empire rose to power in what is modern day Ghana in 1670. The Kingdom of Kongo also thrived during this period.

South Asia
 Taj Mahal, Mughal Empire, India
In the Indian subcontinent, the Mughal Empire began in 1526 and lasted for two centuries.[256] Starting in the northwest, the Mughal Empire would by the late 17th century come to rule the entire subcontinent,[257] except for the southernmost Indian provinces, which would remain independent. Against the Muslim Mughal Empire, the Hindu Maratha Empire was founded on the west coast in 1674, gradually gaining territory—a majority of present-day India—from the Mughals over several decades, particularly in the Mughal–Maratha Wars (1681–1701). The Maratha Empire would in 1818 fall under the control of the British East India Company, with all former Maratha and Mughal authority devolving in 1858 to the British Raj.

Northeast Asia
 Ming dynasty section, Great Wall of China
In China, the Ming gave way in 1644 to the Qing,[258] the last Chinese imperial dynasty, which would rule until 1912.[259] Japan experienced its Azuchi–Momoyama period (1568–1603), followed by the Edo period (1603–1868). The Korean Joseon dynasty (1392–1910) ruled throughout this period, successfully repelling 16th and 17th century invasions from Japan and China. Expanded maritime trade with Europe significantly affected China and Japan during this period, particularly by the Portuguese who had a presence in Macau and Nagasaki. However, China and Japan would later pursue isolationist policies designed to eliminate foreign influences.

Southeast Asia
In 1511, the Portuguese overthrew the Malacca Sultanate in present-day Malaysia and Indonesian Sumatra. The Portuguese held this important trading territory (and the valuable associated navigational strait) until overthrown by the Dutch in 1641. The Johor Sultanate, centred on the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, became the dominant trading power in the region. European colonization expanded with the Dutch in Indonesia, the Portuguese in East Timor, and the Spanish in the Philippines. Into the 19th century, European expansion would affect the whole of Southeast Asia, with the British in Myanmar and Malaysia, and the French in Indochina.[260] Only Thailand would successfully resist colonization.[260]

Oceania
The Pacific islands of Oceania would also be affected by European contact, starting with the circumnavigational voyage of Ferdinand Magellan, who landed on the Marianas and other islands in 1521. Also notable were the voyages (1642–1644) of Abel Tasman to present-day Australia, New Zealand and nearby islands, and the voyages (1768–1779) of Captain James Cook, who made the first recorded European contact with Hawaii. Britain would found its first colony on Australia in 1788.[261]

Americas
In the Americas, several European powers vigorously colonized the newly discovered continents, largely displacing the indigenous populations, and destroying the advanced civilizations of the Aztecs and the Incas. Spain, Portugal, Britain, and France all made extensive territorial claims, and undertook large-scale settlement, including the importation of large numbers of African slaves. Portugal claimed Brazil. Spain claimed the rest of South America, Mesoamerica, and southern North America. Britain colonized the east coast of North America, and France colonized the central region of North America. Russia made incursions onto the northwest coast of North America, with a first colony in present-day Alaska in 1784, and the outpost of Fort Ross in present-day California in 1812.[262] In 1762, in the midst of the Seven Years' War, France secretly ceded most of its North American claims to Spain in the Treaty of Fontainebleau. Thirteen of the British colonies declared independence as the United States of America in 1776, ratified by the Treaty of Paris in 1783, ending the American Revolutionary War.[263] Napoleon Bonaparte won France's claims back from Spain in the Napoleonic Wars in 1800, but sold them to the United States in 1803 as the Louisiana Purchase.[264]

Late modern period (1750–present)
Main article: Late modern period
18th and 19th centuries
Main articles: 18th century, 19th century, and Long nineteenth century
See also: Age of Imperialism, Age of Revolution, Diplomatic Revolution, and Industrial Revolution
 James Watt's steam engine powered the Industrial Revolution.
The Scientific Revolution changed humanity's understanding of the world and was followed by the Industrial Revolution, a major transformation of the world's economies.[265] The Scientific Revolution in the 17th century had had little immediate effect on industrial technology;[265] only in the second half of the 19th century did scientific advances begin to be applied substantially to practical invention.[266] The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain and used new modes of production—the factory, mass production, and mechanization—to manufacture a wide array of goods faster and using less labour than previously required.[267] The Age of Enlightenment also led to the beginnings of modern democracy in the late-18th century American and French revolutions.[265] Democracy and republicanism would grow to have a profound effect on world events and on quality of life.

 Empires of the world in 1898
 The first aeroplane, the Wright Flyer, flew on 17 December 1903.
After Europeans had achieved influence and control over the Americas, imperial activities turned to the lands of Asia and Oceania. Britain gained control of the Indian subcontinent, Burma and the Malay Peninsula; the French took Indochina; while the Dutch cemented their control over the Dutch East Indies.[260] China was devastated by the Taiping Rebellion, history's bloodiest civil war, which killed 20–30 million people between 1850 and 1864.[268][269] The British also colonized Australia, New Zealand and South Africa with large numbers of British colonists emigrating to these colonies. Russia colonized large pre-agricultural areas of Siberia. In the late-19th century, the European powers divided the remaining areas of Africa.[270] Within Europe, economic and military challenges created a system of nation states, and ethno-cultural groupings began to identify themselves as distinctive nations with aspirations for cultural and political autonomy.[271] This nationalism would become important to peoples across the world in the 20th century.[272]
The advantages that Europe had developed by the mid-18th century were two: an entrepreneurial culture,[273] and the wealth generated by the Atlantic trade (including the African slave trade). The profits of the slave trade and of West Indian plantations amounted to 5% of the British economy at the time of the Industrial Revolution.[274] Some historians conclude that, in 1750, labour productivity in the most developed regions of China was still on a par with that of Europe's Atlantic economy;[275][276] other historians such as Angus Maddison hold that the per-capita productivity of western Europe had by the late Middle Ages surpassed that of all other regions.[277]
During the Second Industrial Revolution, a new set of technological advances including electrical power, the internal combustion engine, and assembly line manufacturing increased productivity once again.[278] Meanwhile, industrial pollution and environmental damage, present since the discovery of fire and the beginning of civilization, accelerated drastically.[279]

20th century
Main article: 20th century
Further information: Contemporary history
See also: Interwar period, Roaring Twenties, Great Depression, Cold War, Green Revolution, Space exploration, and Digital Revolution
 World War I trench warfare
The 20th century opened with Europe at an apex of wealth and power, and with much of the world under its direct colonial control or its indirect domination.[280] Much of the rest of the world was influenced by heavily Europeanized nations: the United States and Japan.[280] As the century unfolded, however, the global system dominated by rival powers was subjected to severe strains, and ultimately yielded to a more fluid structure of independent nation states.[281]
This transformation was catalyzed by wars of unparalleled scope and devastation. World War I led to the collapse of four empires – Austria-Hungary, the German Empire, the Ottoman Empire, and the Russian Empire – and weakened the United Kingdom and France. The Armenian, Assyrian, and Greek genocides were the systematic destruction, mass murder, and expulsion during World War I of the Armenians, Assyrians, and Greeks in the Ottoman Empire, spearheaded by the ruling Committee of Union and Progress (CUP).[282][283]
In the war's aftermath, powerful ideologies rose to prominence. The Russian Revolution of 1917 created the first communist state,[284] while the 1920s and 1930s saw militaristic fascist dictatorships gain control in Italy,[285] Germany,[285] Spain, and elsewhere. From 1918 to 1920, the Spanish flu caused the deaths of at least 25 million people.[286]

 Atomic bombings: Hiroshima, Nagasaki, 1945
Ongoing national rivalries, exacerbated by the economic turmoil of the Great Depression, helped precipitate World War II. The militaristic dictatorships of Europe and Japan pursued an ultimately doomed course of imperialist expansionism, in the course of which Nazi Germany, under Adolf Hitler, orchestrated the genocide of six million Jews in the Holocaust,[287] while Imperial Japan murdered millions of Chinese.[288]
The World War II defeat of the Axis powers by the Allied powers opened the way for the advance of communism into Eastern Europe, China, North Korea, North Vietnam, and Cuba.[289]

 Civilians (here, Mỹ Lai, Vietnam, 1968) suffered greatly in 20th-century wars.
When World War II ended in 1945, the United Nations was founded in the hope of preventing future wars,[290] as the League of Nations had been formed following World War I.[291] World War II had left two countries, the United States and the Soviet Union, with principal power to influence international affairs.[292] Each was suspicious of the other and feared a global spread of the other's, respectively capitalist and communist, political-economic model. This led to the Cold War, a 45-year stand-off and arms race between the United States and its allies, on one hand, and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other.[293]
With the development of nuclear weapons during World War II, and with their subsequent proliferation, all of humanity were put at risk of nuclear war between the two superpowers, as demonstrated by many incidents, most prominently the October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis.[294] Such war being viewed as impractical, the superpowers instead waged proxy wars in non-nuclear-armed Third World countries.[295][296] Between 1969 and 1972, as part of the Cold War Space Race, twelve American astronauts landed on the Moon and safely returned to Earth.[297]
In China, Mao Zedong implemented industrialization and collectivization reforms as part of the Great Leap Forward (1958–1962), leading to the starvation deaths (1959–1961) of 30–40 million people.[298] After Mao's death, China entered a period of economic liberalization and rapid growth, with the economy expanding by 6.6% per year from 1978 to 2003.[299]
The Cold War ended peacefully in 1991 after the Pan-European Picnic, the subsequent fall of the Iron Curtain and the Berlin Wall, and the collapse of the Eastern Bloc and the Warsaw Pact. The Soviet Union collapsed, partly due to its inability to compete economically with the United States and Western Europe. The United States likewise began to show signs of slippage in its geopolitical influence,[300][301] and its economic inequality increased.[302][303]
In the early postwar decades, the colonies in Asia and Africa of the Belgian, British, Dutch, French, and other west European empires won their formal independence.[304] Most Western European and Central European countries gradually formed a political and economic community, the European Union, which expanded eastward to include former Soviet satellite states.[305]

 Last Moon landing: Apollo 17 (1972)
Cold War preparations to deter or to fight a third world war accelerated advances in technologies that, though conceptualized before World War II, had been implemented for that war's exigencies, such as jet aircraft,[306] rocketry,[307] and computers.[308] In the decades after World War II, these advances led to jet travel;[306] artificial satellites with innumerable applications,[309] including GPS;	
[310] and the Internet,[309] which in the 1990s began to gain traction as a form of communication.[311] These inventions have revolutionized the movement of people, ideas, and information.[312]
However, not all scientific and technological advances in the second half of the 20th century required an initial military impetus. That period also saw ground-breaking developments such as the discovery of the structure of DNA[313] and DNA sequencing,[314] the worldwide eradication of smallpox,[315] the Green Revolution in agriculture,[316] the introduction of the portable cellular phone,[317] the discovery of plate tectonics,[318] crewed and uncrewed exploration of space,[319] and foundational discoveries in physics phenomena ranging from the smallest entities (particle physics) to the greatest entity (physical cosmology).[318]

21st century
Main article: 21st century
 China urbanized rapidly in the 21st century (pictured: Shanghai).The 21st century has been marked by growing economic globalization and integration,[320] with consequent increased risk to interlinked economies, as exemplified by the Great Recession of the late 2000s and early 2010s.[321] This period has also seen the expansion of communications with smartphones and the Internet, which have caused fundamental societal changes in business, politics, and individuals' personal lives.[322]
Humanity's impact on the Earth has risen due to growing populations and industrialization.[323] The increased demands are contributing to environmental degradation and climate change.[324][325]
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic substantially disrupted global trading and caused recessions in the global economy.[326] As of 2022, more than six million people have died from COVID-19.[327]

See also

Cultural history
Economic history of the world
Historic recurrence
Historiography
History of science
History of technology
List of archaeological periods
List of decades, centuries, and millennia
List of time periods
Political history of the world
Timeline of geopolitical changes
Timeline of national independence
 Modern history portal  World portal
Explanatory notes


^ This date comes from the 2015 discovery of stone tools at the Lomekwi site in Kenya.[9] Some palaeontologists propose an earlier date of 3.39 million years ago based on bones found with butchery marks on them in Dikika, Ethiopia,[10] while others dispute both the Dikika and Lomekwi findings.[11]

^ Or perhaps earlier; the 2018 discovery of stone tools from 2.1 million years ago in Shangchen, China predates the earliest known H. erectus fossils.[19]

^ These dates come from a 2018 study of an upper jawbone from Misliya cave, Israel.[39] Researchers studying a fossil skull from Apidima Cave, Greece in 2019 proposed an earlier date of 210,000 years ago.[40] The Apidima Cave study has been challenged by other scholars.[41]

^ This occurred during the African humid period, when the Sahara was much wetter than it is today.[58]

^ "Early Modern," historically speaking, refers to Western European history from 1501 (after the widely accepted end of the Late Middle Ages; the transition period was the 15th century) to either 1750 or c. 1790–1800, by whichever epoch is favoured by a school of scholars defining the period—which, in many cases of periodization, differs as well within a discipline such as art, philosophy or history.

^ The Age of Enlightenment has also been referred to as the Age of Reason. Historians also include the late 17th century, which is typically known as the Age of Reason or Age of Rationalism, as part of the Enlightenment; however, contemporary historians have considered the Age of Reason distinct to the ideas developed in the Enlightenment. The use of the term here includes both Ages under a single all-inclusive time-frame.


References


^ United States Census Bureau 2012.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 1.

^ Arnason U, Gullberg A, Janke A (December 1998). "Molecular timing of primate divergences as estimated by two nonprimate calibration points". Journal of Molecular Evolution. 47 (6): 718–27. Bibcode:1998JMolE..47..718A. doi:10.1007/PL00006431. PMID 9847414. S2CID 22217997. Consistent with the marked shift in the dating of the Cercopithecoidea/Hominoidea split, all hominoid divergences receive a much earlier dating. Thus the estimated date of the divergence between Pan (chimpanzee) and Homo is 10–13 MYBP and that between Gorilla and the Pan/Homo linage ≈17 MYBP.

^ Moorjani, Priya; Amorim, Carlos Eduardo G.; Arndt, Peter F.; Przeworski, Molly (2016). "Variation in the molecular clock of primates". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 113 (38): 10607–10612. Bibcode:2016PNAS..11310607M. doi:10.1073/pnas.1600374113. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 5035889. PMID 27601674. Taking this approach, we estimate the human and chimpanzee divergence time is 12.1 million years, and the human and gorilla divergence time is 15.1 million years.

^ Patterson N, Richter DJ, Gnerre S, Lander ES, Reich D (June 2006). "Genetic evidence for complex speciation of humans and chimpanzees". Nature. 441 (7097): 1106. Bibcode:2006Natur.441.1103P. doi:10.1038/nature04789. PMID 16710306. S2CID 2325560. On the basis of the relative genetic divergence of human and chimpanzee (Supplementary Tables 7 and 8; Supplementary Note 9), we infer tgenome < 7.6 Myr ago and, from the bound tspecies < 0.835tgenome, we can infer that tspecies < 6.3 Myr ago. Using a more realistic estimate of human–orangutan genome divergence of less than 17 Myr ago, we obtain a younger bound of tspecies < 5.4 Myr ago.

^ Dunbar 2016, p. 8. "Conventionally, taxonomists now refer to the great ape family (including humans) as hominids, while all members of the lineage leading to modern humans that arose after the split with the [Homo-Pan] LCA are referred to as hominins. The older literature used the terms hominoids and hominids respectively."

^ a b Cela-Conde, C. J.; Ayala, F. J. (2003). "Genera of the human lineage". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 100 (13): 7684–7689. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100.7684C. doi:10.1073/pnas.0832372100. PMC 164648. PMID 12794185. Only two or three hominid genera, Australopithecus, Paranthropus, and Homo, had been previously accepted, with Paranthropus considered a subgenus of Australopithecus by some authors.

^ Dunbar 2016, pp. 8, 10.

^ Harmand, Sonia;  et al. (2015). "3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya". Nature. 521 (7552): 310–315. Bibcode:2015Natur.521..310H. doi:10.1038/nature14464. PMID 25993961. S2CID 1207285. Archived from the original on 9 October 2021. Retrieved 27 July 2022.

^ McPherron, Shannon P.; Alemseged, Zeresenay; Marean, Curtis W.; Wynn, Jonathan G.; Reed, Denné; Geraads, Denis; Bobe, René; Béarat, Hamdallah A. (August 2010). "Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia". Nature. 466 (7308): 857–860. Bibcode:2010Natur.466..857M. doi:10.1038/nature09248. PMID 20703305. S2CID 4356816.

^ Domínguez-Rodrigo, M.; Alcalá, L. (2016). "3.3-Million-Year-Old Stone Tools and Butchery Traces? More Evidence Needed". PaleoAnthropology: 46–53.

^ de la Torre, I. (2019). "Searching for the emergence of stone tool making in eastern Africa". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (24): 11567–11569. Bibcode:2019PNAS..11611567D. doi:10.1073/pnas.1906926116. PMC 6575166. PMID 31164417.

^ Stutz, Aaron Jonas (2018). "Paleolithic".  In Trevathan, Wenda; Cartmill, Matt; Dufour, Darna; Larsen, Clark (eds.). The International Encyclopedia of Biological Anthropology. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp. 1–9. doi:10.1002/9781118584538.ieba0363. ISBN 978-1-118-58442-2. S2CID 240083827. Retrieved 1 August 2022.

^ Strait DS (September 2010). "The Evolutionary History of the Australopiths". Evolution: Education and Outreach. 3 (3): 341–352. doi:10.1007/s12052-010-0249-6. ISSN 1936-6434. S2CID 31979188. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022.

^ Kimbel WH, Villmoare B (July 2016). "From Australopithecus to Homo: the transition that wasn't". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences. 371 (1698): 20150248. doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0248. PMC 4920303. PMID 27298460. S2CID 20267830.

^ a b Villmoare B, Kimbel WH, Seyoum C, Campisano CJ, DiMaggio EN, Rowan J,  et al. (March 2015). "Paleoanthropology. Early Homo at 2.8 Ma from Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia". Science. 347 (6228): 1352–1355. Bibcode:2015Sci...347.1352V. doi:10.1126/science.aaa1343. PMID 25739410.

^ F. Spoor; P. Gunz; S. Neubauer; S. Stelzer; N. Scott; A. Kwekason; M. C. Dean (2015). "Reconstructed Homo habilis type OH 7 suggests deep-rooted species diversity in early Homo". Nature. 519 (7541): 83–86. Bibcode:2015Natur.519...83S. doi:10.1038/nature14224. PMID 25739632. S2CID 4470282.

^ Herries AI, Martin JM, Leece AB, Adams JW, Boschian G, Joannes-Boyau R,  et al. (April 2020). "Contemporaneity of Australopithecus, Paranthropus, and early Homo erectus in South Africa". Science. 368 (6486): eaaw7293. doi:10.1126/science.aaw7293. PMID 32241925.

^ Zhu Z, Dennell R, Huang W, Wu Y, Qiu S, Yang S,  et al. (July 2018). "Hominin occupation of the Chinese Loess Plateau since about 2.1 million years ago". Nature. 559 (7715): 608–612. Bibcode:2018Natur.559..608Z. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0299-4. PMID 29995848. S2CID 49670311. Fourth, and most importantly, the oldest artefact age of approximately 2.12 Ma at Shangchen implies that hominins had left Africa before the date suggested by the earliest evidence from Dmanisi (about 1.85 Ma). This makes it necessary to reconsider the timing of initial dispersal of early hominins in the Old World.

^ Dunbar 2016, p. 10.

^ Gowlett, J. A. J. (23 May 2016). "The discovery of fire by humans: a long and convoluted process". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 371 (1696): 20150164. doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0164. PMC 4874402. PMID 27216521. We know that burning evidence occurs on numbers of archaeological sites from about 1.5 Ma onwards (there is evidence of actual hearths from around 0.7 to 0.4 Ma); that more elaborate technologies existed from around half a million years ago, and that these came to employ adhesives that require preparation by fire.

^ Christian 2015, p. 11.

^ Christian 2015, p. 400.

^ Dunbar 2016, p. 11.

^ Hammer MF (May 2013). "Human Hybrids" (PDF). Scientific American. 308 (5): 66–71. Bibcode:2013SciAm.308e..66H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0513-66. PMID 23627222. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2018.

^ Yong E (July 2011). "Mosaic humans, the hybrid species". New Scientist. 211 (2823): 34–38. Bibcode:2011NewSc.211...34Y. doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(11)61839-3.

^ Ackermann RR, Mackay A, Arnold ML (October 2015). "The Hybrid Origin of "Modern" Humans". Evolutionary Biology. 43 (1): 1–11. doi:10.1007/s11692-015-9348-1. S2CID 14329491.

^ Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, Krause J, Patterson N, Durand EY,  et al. (December 2010). "Genetic history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia". Nature. 468 (7327): 1053–60. Bibcode:2010Natur.468.1053R. doi:10.1038/nature09710. hdl:10230/25596. PMC 4306417. PMID 21179161.

^ Abi-Rached L, Jobin MJ, Kulkarni S, McWhinnie A, Dalva K, Gragert L,  et al. (October 2011). "The shaping of modern human immune systems by multiregional admixture with archaic humans". Science. 334 (6052): 89–94. Bibcode:2011Sci...334...89A. doi:10.1126/science.1209202. PMC 3677943. PMID 21868630.

^ Hublin JJ, Ben-Ncer A, Bailey SE, Freidline SE, Neubauer S, Skinner MM,  et al. (June 2017). "New fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and the pan-African origin of Homo sapiens" (PDF). Nature. 546 (7657): 289–292. Bibcode:2017Natur.546..289H. doi:10.1038/nature22336. PMID 28593953. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 27 July 2022.

^ Christian 2015, pp. 343–4. "Although the archaic human populations in most parts of Africa before around 70,000 BCE, in many aspects of their anatomies, appear almost modern, their cultural behaviors and their responses, for example to climatic challenge, reveal that they did not yet possess the full range of modern human capacities...The contrast with the capacities displayed by our fully modern human ancestors from 48,000 BCE onward could hardly be sharper."

^ Christian 2015, pp. 319–20, 330, 354.

^ Christian 2015, pp. 344–6.

^ McNeill & McNeill 2003, pp. 17–18.

^ Christian 2015, pp. 357–8, 409.

^ Christian 2015, p. 22.

^ Gavashelishvili, Alexander; Tarkhnishvili, David (2016). "Biomes and human distribution during the last ice age". Global Ecology and Biogeography. 25 (5): 563–574. doi:10.1111/geb.12437.

^ Weber, Gerhard W.; Hershkovitz, Israel; Gunz, Philipp; Neubauer, Simon; Ayalon, Avner; Latimer, Bruce; Bar-Matthews, Miryam; Yasur, Gal; Barzilai, Omry; May, Hila (20 June 2020). "Before the massive modern human dispersal into Eurasia: A 55,000-year-old partial cranium from Manot Cave, Israel". Quaternary International. 551: 29–39. Bibcode:2020QuInt.551...29W. doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2019.10.009. ISSN 1040-6182. S2CID 210628420.

^ Herschkovitz, Israel;  et al. (26 January 2018). "The earliest modern humans outside Africa". Science. 359 (6374): 456–459. Bibcode:2018Sci...359..456H. doi:10.1126/science.aap8369. PMID 29371468.

^ Harvati, Katerina; Röding, Carolin; Bosman, Abel M.; Karakostis, Fotios A.; Grün, Rainer; Stringer, Chris; Karkanas, Panagiotis; Thompson, Nicholas C.; Koutoulidis, Vassilis; Moulopoulos, Lia A.; Gorgoulis, Vassilis G. (10 July 2019). "Apidima Cave fossils provide earliest evidence of Homo sapiens in Eurasia". Nature. 571 (7766): 500–504. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1376-z. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 31292546. S2CID 195873640. Archived from the original on 10 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2022.

^ Rosas, Antionio; Bastir, Markus (1 January 2020). "An assessment of the late Middle Pleistocene occipital from Apidima 1 skull (Greece)". L'Anthropologie. 124 (1): 102745. doi:10.1016/j.anthro.2020.102745. ISSN 0003-5521. S2CID 216223477.

^ a b Christian 2015, p. 283.

^ O'Connell, J. F.; Allen, J.; Williams, M. A. J.; Williams, A. N.; Turney, C. S. M.; Spooner, N. A.; Kamminga, J.; Brown, G.; Cooper, A. (2018). "When did Homo sapiens first reach Southeast Asia and Sahul?". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 115 (34): 8482–8490. Bibcode:2018PNAS..115.8482O. doi:10.1073/pnas.1808385115. PMC 6112744. PMID 30082377.

^ Posth C, Renaud G, Mittnik A, Drucker DG, Rougier H, Cupillard C,  et al. (March 2016). "Pleistocene Mitochondrial Genomes Suggest a Single Major Dispersal of Non-Africans and a Late Glacial Population Turnover in Europe". Current Biology. 26 (6): 827–33. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.01.037. hdl:2440/114930. PMID 26853362. S2CID 140098861.

^ Clarkson C, Jacobs Z, Marwick B, Fullagar R, Wallis L, Smith M,  et al. (July 2017). "Human occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years ago". Nature. 547 (7663): 306–310. Bibcode:2017Natur.547..306C. doi:10.1038/nature22968. hdl:2440/107043. PMID 28726833. S2CID 205257212.

^ Matthew Bennett;  et al. (23 September 2021). "Evidence of humans in North America during the Last Glacial Maximum". Science. 373 (6562): 1528–1531. Bibcode:2021Sci...373.1528B. doi:10.1126/science.abg7586. PMID 34554787. S2CID 237616125. Retrieved 24 September 2021.

^ Christian 2015, p. 316. "Dispersal over an unprecedented swath of the globe...coincided with an Ice Age that...spread ice in the northern hemisphere as far south as the present lower courses of the Missouri and Ohio rivers in North America and deep into what are now the British Isles. Ice covered what is today Scandinavia. Most of the rest of what is now Europe was tundra or taiga. In central Eurasia, tundra reached almost to the present latitudes of the Black Sea. Steppe licked the shores of the Mediterranean. In the New World, tundra and taiga extended to where Virginia is today."

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 24–29.

^ Christian 2015, pp. 321, 406, 440–441.

^ Koch, Paul L.; Barnosky, Anthony D. (1 January 2006). "Late Quaternary Extinctions: State of the Debate". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 37 (1): 215–250. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.34.011802.132415. S2CID 16590668.

^ Christian 2015, p. 406.

^ a b Lewin, Roger (2009) [1984]. Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction (5 ed.). Malden, Massachusetts: John Wiley & Sons. p. 247. ISBN 978-1-4051-5614-1. The date of 12,000 years before present (BP) is usually given as the beginning of what has been called the Agricultural (or Neolithic) Revolution...The tremendous changes wrought during the Neolithic can be seen as a prelude to the emergence of cities and city states and, of course, to a further rise in population.

^ Stephens, Lucas; Fuller, Dorian; Boivin, Nicole; Rick, Torben; Gauthier, Nicolas; Kay, Andrea; Marwick, Ben; Armstrong, Chelsey Geralda; Barton, C. Michael (30 August 2019). "Archaeological assessment reveals Earth's early transformation through land use". Science. 365 (6456): 897–902. Bibcode:2019Sci...365..897S. doi:10.1126/science.aax1192. hdl:10150/634688. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 31467217. S2CID 201674203.

^ Larson, G.; Piperno, D. R.; Allaby, R. G.; Purugganan, M. D.; Andersson, L.; Arroyo-Kalin, M.; Barton, L.; Climer Vigueira, C.; Denham, T.; Dobney, K.; Doust, A. N.; Gepts, P.; Gilbert, M. T. P.; Gremillion, K. J.; Lucas, L.; Lukens, L.; Marshall, F. B.; Olsen, K. M.; Pires, J.C.; Richerson, P. J.; Rubio De Casas, R.; Sanjur, O.I.; Thomas, M. G.; Fuller, D.Q. (2014). "Current perspectives and the future of domestication studies". PNAS. 111 (17): 6139–6146. Bibcode:2014PNAS..111.6139L. doi:10.1073/pnas.1323964111. PMC 4035915. PMID 24757054.

^ McNeill 1999, p. 11.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, pp. 325, 336. "More recent improvements in archaeobotanical recovery have indicated that rice domestication was underway durin...the Hemudu cultural phase in the lower Yangtze valley...This points to a start of cultivation in this region of c. 10,000-9,000 years ago; in the middle Yangtze valley it could have begun someone earlier but may represent a parallel process to the lower Yangtze...it has been suggested on the basis of phytolith and starch residue evidence that broomcorn and foxtail millet were already in use in northern China prior to 7000 BCE. Nonetheless, the most abundant macrofossil evidence of broomcorn and foxtail millet is found in association with the early Neolithic sites post-7000 BCE."

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 323.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 59.

^ a b c Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 21.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 265.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 518. "Arrowroot was the earliest domesticate [in Panama], dating to 7800 BC at the Cueva de los Vampiros site and 5800 BCE at Aguadulce...Plant domestication began before 8500 BCE in southwest coastal Ecuador. Squash phytoliths were recovered from terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene strata at Vegas sites. Phytoliths recovered from the earliest levels are from wild squash, with domesticated size squash phytoliths directly dated to 9840–8555 BCE."

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 36–37.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 218.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 95.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, pp. 216–218.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, pp. 34–35.

^ Yoffee 2015, pp. 313, 391.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 193.

^ Yoffee 2015, pp. 313–316.

^ McNeill 1999, p. 13.

^ Barker & Goucher, pp. 161–2, 172–3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBarkerGoucher (help)

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 99.

^ Barker & Goucher 2015, p. 574.

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 42–43.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 19.

^ Mercer 1949, p. 259.

^ Kinzel, Moritz; Clare, Lee (2020). "Monumental – compared to what? A perspective from Göbekli Tepe".  In Gebauer, Anne Birgitte; Sørensen, Lasse; Teather, Anne; Valera, António Carlos (eds.). Monumentalising Life in the Neolithic: Narratives of Change and Continuity. Oxford: Oxbow. pp. 32–33. ISBN 978-1-78925-495-2.

^ a b Barker & Goucher, p. 224. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBarkerGoucher (help)

^ Barker & Goucher, pp. 135, 253–5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBarkerGoucher (help)

^ Barker & Goucher, p. 135. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBarkerGoucher (help)

^ Croucher, Karina (2012). Death and Dying in the Neolithic Near East. Oxford University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-19-969395-5.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, p. 21.

^ a b Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 54–55.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, p. 53.

^ Bard 2000, p. 63.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, p. 70.

^ Chakrabarti 2004, pp. 10–13.

^ Allchin & Allchin 1997, pp. 153–168.

^ Lee 2002, pp. 15–42.

^ Teeple 2006, pp. 14–20.

^ Hart-Davis 2012, p. 44.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, p. 59.

^ McNeill 1999, p. 16.

^ McNeill 1999, p. 18.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, pp. 43–46.

^ Yoffee 2015, p. 118.

^ Regulski, Ilona (2 May 2016). "The Origins and Early Development of Writing in Egypt". Oxford Handbooks Online. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935413.013.61. ISBN 978-0-19-993541-3. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020.

^ Wengrow, David (2011). "The Invention of Writing in Egypt". Before the Pyramids: Origin of Egyptian Civilization. Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. pp. 99–103.

^ Boltz, William G. (1996). "Early Chinese Writing".  In Bright, Peter; Daniels, William (eds.). The World's Writing Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 191. ISBN 0-19-507993-0.

^ Brian M. Fagan, Charlotte Beck, ed. (1996). The Oxford Companion to Archaeology. Oxford University Press. p. 762. ISBN 978-0-19-507618-9. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020.

^ Allen 2007, p. 1.

^ a b Roberts & Westad 2013, pp. 53–54.

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 62–63.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 35.

^ Yoffee 2015, p. 257.

^ Bard 2000, pp. 57–64.

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 76–77.

^ Yoffee 2015, p. 320.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 46.

^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 80.

^ Yoffee 2015, p. 136.

^ McNeill 1999, pp. 36–37.

^ Price & Thonemann 2010, p. 22.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, pp. 116–122.

^ Singh 2008, pp. 260–264.

^ Whipps, Heather (18 February 2008). "How Ancient Trade Changed the World". livescience.com. Live Science. Archived from the original on 19 September 2021. Retrieved 16 September 2021.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 16.

^ Nichols & Pool 2012, pp. 118, 121.

^ Nichols & Pool 2012, p. 118.

^ Nichols & Pool 2012, p. 120.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 199.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 216.

^ Baumard, Nicolas; Hyafil, Alexandre; Boyer, Pascal (25 September 2015). "What changed during the axial age: Cognitive styles or reward systems?". Communicative & Integrative Biology. United States National Library of Medicine. 8 (5): e1046657. doi:10.1080/19420889.2015.1046657. PMC 4802742. PMID 27066164.

^ McNeill & McNeill 2003, p. 67.

^ McNeill & McNeill 2003, pp. 73–74.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 314.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, p. 63.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, pp. 70–71.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 233.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 229.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, p. 110.

^ Martin 2000, pp. 106–107.

^ Golden 2011, p. 25.

^ "Alexander the Great". Historic Figures. BBC. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016.

^ Hemingway, Colette; Hemingway, Seán (April 2007). "Art of the Hellenistic Age and the Hellenistic Tradition". Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2016.

^ Kulke, Hermann; Rothermund, Dietmar (2004). A History of India (4th ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0.

^ Pletcher, Kenneth (8 November 2016). "Cera Dynasty". britannica.com. Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Nilakanta Sastri, K. A. A History of South India. p. 157.

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 106–107.

^ Kelly 2007, pp. 4–6.

^ Laiou & Morisson 2007, pp. 130–131 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLaiouMorisson2007 (help); Pounds 1979, p. 124.

^ Parry, Ken (2009). Christianity: Religions of the World. Infobase Publishing. p. 139. ISBN 9781438106397.

^ Parry, Ken (2010). The Blackwell Companion to Eastern Christianity. John Wiley & Sons. p. 368. ISBN 9781444333619.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 160.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 143.

^ Zhou, Jinghao (2003). Remaking China's Public Philosophy for the Twenty-First Century. Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-97882-2.

^ Iliffe 2007, p. 41.

^ Fagan 2005, pp. 390, 396.

^ Zapotec civilization has its beginnings in 700 BCE: see Flannery, Kent V.; Marcus, Joyce (1996). Zapotec Civilization: How Urban Society Evolved in Mexico's Oaxaca Valley. New York: Thames & Hudson. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-500-05078-1. Zapotec civilization ended in 1521 according to the five archaeological stages presented in Whitecotton, Joseph W. (1977). The Zapotecs: Princes, Priests, and Peasants. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 26, LI.1–3.

^ Coe 2011, p. 91.

^ Camp, John McK.; Dinsmoor, William B. (1984). Ancient Athenian building methods. Excavations of the Athenian Agora. Vol. 21. Princeton, NJ: American School of Classical Studies at Athens. ISBN 978-0-87661-626-0.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 158, 170.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, pp. 95, 99.

^ Collins 1999, pp. 80–99.

^ Collins 1999, pp. 100–115.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, pp. 97, 103.

^ Collins 1999, p. 404.

^ Loyn 1991, pp. 122–123.

^ Whaley, Joachim (2012). Germany and the Holy Roman Empire. Vol. 1. pp. 17–20.

^ Johnson 1996, p. 23.

^ "Dynasties of Early Imperial China: Han Dynasty". Minnesota State University. Archived from the original on 10 July 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2009.

^ Montgomery McGovern, William (1884). "The Early Empires of Central Asia" (PDF). ia601601.us.archive.org. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Gascoigne 2003, pp. 90–92.

^ Gernet 1996, pp. 237–238.

^ Stearns 2017, p. 96.

^ Fazio, Michael; Moffett, Marian; Wodehouse, Lawrence (2009). Buildings Across Time (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill Higher Education. ISBN 978-0-07-305304-2.

^ a b Shaw 1976, p. 13.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 379, 393.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 297, 336, 339.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 214.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 395.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 205.

^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 397.

^ Hourani 1991, pp. 5, 11. "In the early seventh century a religious movement appeared on the margins of the great empires, those of the Byzantines and Sasanians, which dominated the western half of the world....The Byzantine and Sasanian empires were engaged in long wars, which lasted with intervals from 540 to 629."

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 249–50.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 255.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 251.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 292–93.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006, p. 113.

^ Xue 1992, pp. 149–152, 257–264.

^ Xue 1992, pp. 226–227.

^ Pillalamarri, Akhilesh (29 October 2017). "Buddhism and Islam in Asia: A Long and Complicated History". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Tor, Deborah (2009). "The Islamization of Central Asia in the Sāmānid Era and the Reshaping of the Muslim World". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. Cambridge University Press. 72 (2): 279–299. doi:10.1017/S0041977X09000524. JSTOR 40379005. S2CID 153554938. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Ṭabīb et al. 2001, p. 9.

^ a b McNeill & McNeill 2003, p. 120.

^ "The Mongol Empire - Boundless World History". courses.lumenlearning.com. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, p. 153.

^ Roman Catholicism Archived 6 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, "Roman Catholicism, Christian church that has been the decisive spiritual force in the history of Western civilization". Encyclopædia Britannica

^ Spielvogel, Jackson J. (2016). Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 (Cengage Learning ed.). p. 156. ISBN 978-1-305-63347-6.

^ Neill, Thomas Patrick (1957). Readings in the History of Western Civilization, Volume 2 (Newman Press ed.). p. 224.

^ O'Collins, Gerald; Farrugia, Maria (2003). Catholicism: The Story of Catholic Christianity. Oxford University Press. p. v (preface). ISBN 978-0-19-925995-3.

^ McNeill, William H. (2010). History of Western Civilization: A Handbook (University of Chicago Press ed.). p. 204. ISBN 978-0-226-56162-2.

^ Faltin, Lucia; Melanie J. Wright (2007). The Religious Roots of Contemporary European Identity (A&C Black ed.). p. 83. ISBN 978-0-8264-9482-5.

^ Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p. 2: That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and of America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo–Christianity, Catholic and Protestant.

^ Jose Orlandis, 1993, "A Short History of the Catholic Church," 2nd edn. (Michael Adams, Trans.), Dublin:Four Courts Press, ISBN 1851821252, preface, see [1] Archived 26 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine, accessed 8 December 2014. p. (preface)

^ Thomas E. Woods and Antonio Canizares, 2012, "How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization," Reprint edn., Washington, D.C.: Regnery History, ISBN 1596983280, see accessed 8 December 2014. p. 1: "Western civilization owes far more to Catholic Church than most people—Catholic included—often realize. The Church in fact built Western civilization."

^ Marvin Perry (1 January 2012). Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1789. Cengage Learning. pp. 33–. ISBN 978-1-111-83720-4. Archived from the original on 23 May 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2022.

^ Deanesly, Margaret (2019). "The Carolingian Conquests". A History of Early Medieval Europe. taylorfrancis.com. Taylor & Francis. pp. 339–355. doi:10.4324/9780429061530-18. ISBN 9780429061530. S2CID 198789183. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Roesdahl, Else (1998). The Vikings. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-025282-8.

^ Bideleux, Robert; Jeffries, Ian (1998). A history of eastern Europe: crisis and change. Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-16112-1. Archived from the original on 8 February 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2022.

^ Phillips, William (20 December 2017). Critical Readings on Global Slavery. Brill Publishers. p. 665–698. ISBN 9789004346611. Archived from the original on 4 October 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ McNeill & McNeill 2003, p. 146.

^ Aberth, John (1 January 2001). "From the Brink of the Apocalypse: Confronting Famine, War, Plague, and Death in the Later Middle Ages". hamilton.edu. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Dunham, Will (29 January 2008). "Black death 'discriminated' between victims". ABC Science. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 24 November 2016.

^ "De-coding the Black Death". BBC. 3 October 2001. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 24 November 2016.

^ "Plague: The Black Death". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2008.

^ a b Bentley & Ziegler 2008, p. 595.

^ Stearns & Langer 2001, p. 280.

^ McNeill 1999, pp. 319–323.

^ McNeill 1999, pp. 267–268.

^ Heldman, Marylin; Haile, Getatchew (1987). "WHO IS WHO IN ETHIOPIA'S PAST, PART III: Founders of Ethiopia's Solomonic Dynasty". Northeast African Studies. Michigan State University Press. 9 (1): 1–11. JSTOR 43661131. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 258, 379, 382, 393.

^ Blier, Suzanne Preston (2012). "Art in Ancient Ife, Birthplace of the Yoruba" (PDF). African Arts. 45 (4): 70–85. doi:10.1162/afar_a_00029. S2CID 18837520. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 24 November 2016.

^ "Igbo-Ukwu Bronze Statuette". valpo.edu. Valparaiso University. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ "Architecture of Akan Societies". tota.world. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ Iliffe 2007, p. 82.

^ Iliffe 2007, pp. 104–105.

^ Diamond 1997, p. 50.

^ a b Diamond 1997, p. 397.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 234.

^ Pierron, Denis; Heiske, Margit; Razafindrazaka, Harilanto; Rakoto, Ignace; Rabetokotany, Nelly; Ravololomanga, Bodo; Rakotozafy, Lucien M.-A.; Rakotomalala, Mireille Mialy; Razafiarivony, Michel; Rasoarifetra, Bako; Raharijesy, Miakabola Andriamampianina (8 August 2017). "Genomic landscape of human diversity across Madagascar". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 114 (32): E6498–E6506. Bibcode:2017PNAS..114E6498P. doi:10.1073/pnas.1704906114. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 5559028. PMID 28716916.

^ "Decline of the Gupta Empire - World Civilization". courses.lumenlearning.com. Lumean Learning. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021.

^ "India - Southern India". britannica.com. Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021.

^ "The Sui dynasty". depts.washington.edu. University of Washington. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021.

^ Lewis 2009, p. 1.

^ Whitfield 2004, p. 193.

^ Lorge 2015, pp. 4–5.

^ McNeill 1982, p. 50.

^ Buell, Paul D. (2003). Historical dictionary of the Mongol world empire. Lanham (Maryland): Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-4571-8.

^ Mason, R.H.P.; Caiger, J.G. (2011). A History of Japan (Revised ed.). New York: Tuttle Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4629-0097-8.

^ Totman, Conrad (2002). A History of Japan. Blackwell. pp. 64–79. ISBN 978-1-4051-2359-4.

^ Henshall, Kenneth (2012). "Of Courtiers and Warriors: Early and Medieval History (710–1600)". A History of Japan: From Stone Age to Superpower. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 24–52. ISBN 978-0-230-36918-4.

^ Ackerman, Marsha E.;  et al., eds. (2008). "Three Kingdoms, Korea". Encyclopedia of world history. New York: Facts on File. p. 464. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4.

^ "남북국시대 (North-South States Period)". Encyclopedia. Naver. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 24 November 2016.

^ The Association of Korean History Teachers (2005). Korea through the ages; Volume One: Ancient. Seongnam-si: The Center for Information on Korean Culture, The Academy of Korean Studies. p. 113. ISBN 978-89-7105-545-8.

^ Evans et al. 2007, p. 14279. "The 'boundary' of the urban complex of Angkor, as it can be loosely defined from the infrastructural network, encloses ~900–1,000 km² compared with the ~100–150 km² of Tikal, the next largest preindustrial low-density city for which we have an overall survey. Mirador, a Pre-Classic Maya urban complex, and Calakmul, a Classic site near Tikal, may be more extensive, but as yet we do not have comprehensive overall surveys for these sites; it is nonetheless clear that no site in the Maya world approaches Angkor in terms of extent."

^ Lieberman 2003, p. 91.

^ Lieberman 2003, pp. 149–150.

^ Kirch, Patrick Vinton; Green, Roger C. (2001). Hawaiki, ancestral Polynesia: an essay in historical anthropology. Cambridge University press. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-521-78879-3. Archived from the original on 31 March 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021.

^ Geraghty, Paul (1994). "Linguistic evidence for the Tongan empire".  In Dutton, Tom (ed.). Language contact and change in the Austronesian world. Trends in linguistics: Studies and monographs. Vol. 77. Berlin: Gruyter. pp. 236–39. ISBN 978-3-11-012786-7. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2016.

^ MacKnight, C. C. (1986). "Macassans and the Aboriginal past". Archaeology in Oceania. 21: 69–75. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.1986.tb00126.x.

^ Pascoe, Bruce (2015). Dark Emu; Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident. Magaballa Books. ISBN 978-191134478-0.

^ Fagan 2005, p. 35.

^ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 205, 208.

^ Clarke, Peter B.; Beyer, Peter (2009). The World's Religions: Continuities and Transformations. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781135211004. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022 – via Google Books.

^ Heussi, Karl (1956). Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte, 11., Tübingen (Germany), pp. 317–319, 325–326

^ Hart-Davis 2012, pp. 250–253.

^ Roberts & Westad 2013, pp. 683–685.

^ House of India, Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Crosby, Alfred W., "The Columbian exchange: biological and cultural consequences of 1492", Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-275-98073-1

^ "The Columbian Exchange Archived 2011-08-12 at the Wayback Machine". The University of North Carolina.

^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a, p. 417.

^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b, pp. 41, 44, 47, 343.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 529. "The French Revolution ended in the rule of Napoleon in 1799, and his attempts to conquer Europe began in 1803."

^ Meyerowitz, Eva L. R. (1975). The Early History of the Akan States of Ghana. Red Candle Press. ISBN 978-0-608-39035-2.

^ Stein 2010, p. 159.

^ La l, Vinay (2001). "The Mughal Empire". Manas: India and its Neighbors. University of California, Los Angeles. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2015.

^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a, p. 116.

^ McNeill & McNeill 2003, p. 247.

^ a b c McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 336.

^ Matsuda 2012, p. 161.

^ "Fort Ross". Office of Historic Preservation, California State Parks. Retrieved 15 February 2018.

^ Tindall & Shi 2010, pp. 219, 254.

^ Tindall & Shi 2010, p. 352.

^ a b c McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, p. 189.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, pp. 190–91.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 137.

^ Meyer-Fong, Tobie S. (2013). What Remains: Coming to Terms with Civil War in 19th Century China. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8047-5425-5. 

^ Pomeranz & McNeill 2015, p. 623. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPomeranzMcNeill2015 (help)

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 562.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 306, 310–11.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 312.

^ Wood, Neal (1984). John Locke and agrarian capitalism. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05046-4. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2017.

^ Mintz, S.; McNeil, S. "Was slavery the engine of economic growth?". Digital History. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009.

^ see the NBER Publications by Carol H. Shiue and Wolfgang Keller at nber.org Archived 28 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine

^ Pomeranz 2000, pp. 31–32. "But in fact there is little evidence to suggest a quantitative advantage in Western Europe's capital stock before 1800 or a set of durable circumstances – demographic or otherwise – that gave Europe a significant edge in capital accumulation. Nor is it likely that Europeans were significantly healthier (i.e., advantaged in human capital), more productive, or otherwise heirs of many years of slowly accruing advantages over the more developed parts of Asia."

^ "Homepage of Angus Maddison". Ggdc.net. Archived from the original on 28 July 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2009.

^ Landes 1969, p. 235.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 80.

^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 313–14.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 306.

^ Suny 2015, pp. 245, 330.

^ Bozarslan et al. 2015, p. 187.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 450.

^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 452.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 246–7.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 423–4.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 507–8. "Indeed, Japan's China war between 1931 and 1945 exacted the heaviest toll in lives of all colonial wars – between 10 and 30 million Chinese deaths being the best estimates available in the absence of official or authoritative statistics."

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 319, 451.

^ Fasulo 2015, pp. 1–3

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 324.

^ Kennedy 1987, p. 357.

^ Allison 2018, p. 126.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, pp. 321, 330.

^ Allison 2018, pp. 127–128.

^ Stevenson 2020.

^ Gleick 2019.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 459–60.

^ Pomeranz & McNeill 2015, p. 629. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPomeranzMcNeill2015 (help)

^ McCormick 1995, p. 155.

^ Allison 2018, p. 129–131. "As is now clear, the end of the Cold War produced a unipolar moment, not a unipolar era....When measured by the yardstick of purchasing power parity, the U.S. economy, which accounted for half of the world's GDP after World War II, had fallen to less than a quarter of global GDP by the end of the Cold War and stands at just one-seventh today."

^ Browning 2018, p. 16. "In the first three postwar decades, workers and management effectively shared the increased wealth produced by the growth in productivity. Since the 1970s that social contract has collapsed, union membership and influence have declined, wage growth has stagnated, and inequality in wealth has grown sharply."

^ Stiglitz 2018. "By most accounts, the U.S. has the highest level of economic inequality among developed countries....Since the mid-1970s the rules of the economic game have been rewritten, both globally and nationally, in ways that advantage the rich and disadvantage the rest."

^ Abernethy 2000, p. 133.

^ Dinan 2004, pp. xiii, 8–9.

^ a b Scranton, Philip (2006). "Urgency, uncertainty, and innovation: Building jet engines in postwar America". Management & Organizational History. 1 (2): 131. doi:10.1177/1744935906064096. ISSN 1744-9359. S2CID 143813033.

^ Wolfe, Audra J. (2013). Competing with the Soviets: Science, Technology, and the State in Cold War America. JHU Press. p. 90. ISBN 978-1-4214-0901-6.

^ Naughton 2016, p. 7.

^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, p. 195.

^ Easton, Richard D. (2013). GPS Declassified. Potomac Books. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-61234-408-9.

^ Naughton 2016, p. 14.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, pp. 195–6.

^ Pääbo 2003, p. 95.

^ Pettersson et al. 2009.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 258.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 91.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 153.

^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, p. 200.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b, p. 198.

^ Friedman 2007, pp. 137–138, passim.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 609. "But the crisis beginning in 2007, with the eddying effects of the subprime lending-induced financial crash, demonstrated how vital the health of the American economy remained for global growth and stability. Events and processes outside the United States continued to affect the internal politics and economics, and vice versa. The United States and the rest of the world were interconnected, and disengagement was impossible."

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 153–154.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, p. 187.

^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a, pp. 71–77.

^ McKibben 2018.

^ Asare & Barfi 2021.

^ Ritchie et al.


Bibliography

Articles
Allison, Graham (July–August 2018). "The Myth of the Liberal Order: From Historical Accident to Conventional Wisdom". Foreign Affairs. Vol. 97, no. 4. pp. 124–133. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022.
Asare, Prince; Barfi, Richard (2021). "The Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on the Global Economy: Emphasis on Poverty Alleviation and Economic Growth". Economics. 8 (1): 32–43.
Browning, Christopher R. (25 October 2018). "The Suffocation of Democracy". The New York Review of Books. LXV (16): 14, 16–17. Archived from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2022.
Evans, D.;  et al. (2007). "A comprehensive archaeological map of the world's largest pre-industrial settlement complex at Angkor, Cambodia". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104 (36): 14277–14282. Bibcode:2007PNAS..10414277E. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702525104. PMC 1964867. PMID 17717084.
Gleick, James (15 August 2019). "Moon Fever". The New York Review of Books. Vol. LXVI, no. 13. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
Lee, Yun Kuen (2002). "Building the Chronology of Early Chinese History" (PDF). Asian Perspectives. 41 (1): 15–42. doi:10.1353/asi.2002.0006. hdl:10125/17161. ISSN 1535-8283. S2CID 67818363. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2019.
McKibben, Bill (22 November 2018). "A Very Grim Forecast". The New York Review of Books. Vol. LXV, no. 18. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 4 July 2022.
Naughton, John (2016). "The evolution of the Internet: from military experiment to General Purpose Technology". Journal of Cyber Policy. 1 (1): 5–28. doi:10.1080/23738871.2016.1157619. ISSN 2373-8871.
Pettersson E, Lundeberg J, Ahmadian A (February 2009). "Generations of sequencing technologies". Genomics. 93 (2): 105–11. doi:10.1016/j.ygeno.2008.10.003. PMID 18992322.
Stevenson, Tom (22 October 2020). "In the Grey Zone". London Review of Books. Vol. 42, no. 20. pp. 41–43. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2022.
Stiglitz, Joseph (2018). "The American Economy Is Rigged: And What We Can Do About It". Scientific American. Vol. 319, no. 5. pp. 57–61. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022.
Books
Abernethy, David B. (2000). The Dynamics of Global Dominance : European Overseas Empires, 1415–1980. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-09314-8.
Allchin, Bridget; Allchin, Raymond (1997). Origins of a Civilization: The Prehistory and Early Archaeology of South Asia. New Delhi: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-87713-3.
Allen, James P. (2007).  Manuelian, Peter D. (ed.). The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 978-1-58983-678-5.
Baines, John; Malek, Jaromir (2000). The Cultural Atlas of Ancient Egypt (revised ed.). Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-4036-0.
Bard, Kathryn A. (2000). "The Emergence of the Egyptian State (c.3200–2686 BC)".  In Shaw, Ian (ed.). The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp. 57–82. ISBN 978-0-19-280458-7.
Barker, Graeme; Goucher, Candace, eds. (2015). The Cambridge World History: Volume 2, A World with Agriculture, 12,000 BCE–500 CE. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19218-7.
Bentley, Jerry H.; Ziegler, Herbert F. (2008). Traditions & Encounters: A Global Perspective on the Past: Volume II From 1500 to the Present (Fourth ed.). New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-333063-1.
Bentley, Jerry; Subrahmanyam, Sanjay; Wiesner-Hanks, Merry, eds. (2015a). The Cambridge World History: Volume 6, The Construction of a Global World, 1400–1800 CE, Part 1, Foundations. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139194594. ISBN 9780521761628. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022.
Bentley, Jerry; Subrahmanyam, Sanjay; Wiesner-Hanks, Merry, eds. (2015b). The Cambridge World History: Volume 6, The Construction of a Global World, 1400–1800 CE, Part 2, Patterns of Change. The Cambridge World History. Vol. 6. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139022460. ISBN 9780521192460. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022.
Buchanan, Robert Angus (1979). History and industrial civilisation. London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-349-16128-7.
Bozarslan, Hamit; Duclert, Vincent; Kévorkian, Raymond H. (2015). Comprendre le génocide des arméniens—1915 à nos jours [Understanding the Armenian genocide: 1915 to the present day] (in French). Tallandier [fr]. ISBN 979-10-210-0681-2.
Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2015). The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History. Vol. 1 (6th ed.). Cengage Learning. ISBN 9781285445670.
Chakrabarti, Dilip K. (2004). "Introduction".  In Chkrabarti, Dilip K. (ed.). Indus Civilization Sites in India: New Discoveries. Mumbai: Marg Publications. pp. 7–22. ISBN 978-81-85026-63-3.
Christian, David, ed. (2015). The Cambridge World History: Volume 1, Introducing World History, to 10,000 BCE. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139194662. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022.
Coe, Michael D. (2011). The Maya (8th ed.). New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28902-0.
Collins, Roger (1999). Early Medieval Europe: 300–1000 (Second ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-21886-7.
Diamond, Jared (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: W. W. Norton, updated eds., 2003, 2007.
Dinan, Desmond (2004). Europe recast: a history of European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-98734-9.
Dunbar, Robin (2016). Human Evolution: Our Brains and Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-061678-6.
Ebrey; Walthall; Palais (2006). East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Company. ISBN 978-0-618-13384-0.
Fagan, Brian M. (2005). Ancient North America: The Archaeology of a Continent (4th ed.). New York: Thames & Hudson Inc. ISBN 978-0-500-28148-2.
Fasulo, Linda (2015). An Insider's Guide to the UN (3rd ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-20365-3.
Friedman, Thomas (2007). The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century (Further Updated and Expanded ed.). New York: Picador. ISBN 978-0-312-42507-4.
Gascoigne, Bamber (2003). The Dynasties of China: A History. New York: Carroll & Graf. ISBN 978-1-84119-791-3.
Gernet, Jacques (1996). A History of Chinese Civilization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7.
Golden, Peter B. (2011). Central Asia in World History. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-515947-9.
Grant, Edward (2006). The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56762-6.
Hart-Davis, Adam, ed. (2012). History: The Definitive Visual Guide. New York: DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7566-7609-4.
Hourani, Albert (1991). A history of the Arab peoples. Internet Archive. New York, NY : MJF Books. ISBN 978-1-56731-216-4.
Iliffe, John (2007). Africans: The History of a Continent (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-68297-8.
Imber, Colin (2002). The Ottoman Empire, 1300–1650: The Structure of Power. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-61386-3.
Johnson, Lonnie R. (1996). Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, Friends. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510071-6.
Kelly, Christopher (2007). The Roman Empire: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280391-7.
Kennedy, Paul (1987). The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000. New York: Random House. ISBN 9780394546742.
Landes, David S. (1969). The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521072007.
Lieberman, Victor B. (2003). Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830, volume 1, Integration on the Mainland. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80496-7. Archived from the original on 24 June 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2022.
Lewis, Mark Edward (2009). China's Cosmopolitan Empire: The Tang Dynasty. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03306-1.
Lorge, Peter (2015), The Reunification of China: Peace through War under the Song Dynasty, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-107-08475-9, archived from the original on 22 June 2022, retrieved 22 June 2022
Loyn, H. R. (1991). "Empire, Holy Roman".  In Loyn, H. R. (ed.). The Middle Ages: A Concise Encyclopedia. London: Thames and Hudson. pp. 122–123. ISBN 978-0-500-27645-7.
Martin, Thomas (2000) [1996]. Ancient Greece: From Prehistoric to Hellenic Times (Revised ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08493-1.
Matsuda, Matt (2012). Pacific Worlds: A History of Seas, Peoples, and Cultures. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88763-2. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022.
McCormick, Thomas J. (1995). America's Half-Century: United States Foreign policy in the Cold War and After. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-5010-3.
McNeill, J. R.; McNeill, William (2003). The Human Web: A Bird's-eye View of World History. New York: Norton. ISBN 0-393-05179-X.
McNeill, J. R.; Pomeranz, Kenneth, eds. (2015a). The Cambridge World History: Volume 7, Production, Destruction and Connection, 1750-Present, Part 1, Structures, Spaces, and Boundary Making. The Cambridge World History. Vol. 7. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139196079. ISBN 9781108407755. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022.
McNeill, J. R.; Pomeranz, Kenneth, eds. (2015b). The Cambridge World History: Volume 7, Production, Destruction and Connection, 1750-Present, Part 2, Shared Transformations?. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521199643. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
McNeill, William H. (1999) [1967]. A World History (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511616-8.
McNeill, William H. (1982). The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society Since A.D. 1000. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-56157-8.
Mercer, Samuel Alfred Browne (1949). The religion of ancient Egypt. Luzac. p. 259. Archived from the original on 31 March 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2020.
Nichols, Deborah L.; Pool, Christopher A. (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Mesoamerican Archaeology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-999634-6. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022.
Pääbo, Svante (2003). "The mosaic that is our genome".  In Clayton, Julie; Dennis, Carina (eds.). 50 years of DNA. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 95–97. ISBN 978-1-4039-1479-8.
Pomeranz, Kenneth (2000). The Great Divergence: China, Europe and the Making of the Modern World Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-00543-5.
Price, Simon; Thonemann, Peter (2010). The Birth of Classical Europe: A History from Troy to Augustine. New York: Penguin Books.
Roberts, J. M.; Westad, Odd Arne (2013). The Penguin History of the World (Sixth ed.). New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-84614-443-1.
Shaw, Stanford (1976). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey: Volume I: Empire of the Gazis: The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire 1280-1808. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29163-7.
Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century. Delhi: Pearson Education. ISBN 978-81-317-1120-0.
Stearns, Peter N.; Langer, William L., eds. (2001). The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged (Sixth ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 978-0-395-65237-4.
Stearns, Peter N. (2017). "Periodization in World History: Challenges and Opportunities".  In R. Charles Weller (ed.). 21st-Century Narratives of World History: Global and Multidisciplinary Perspectives. Palgrave. ISBN 978-3-319-62077-0. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2022.
Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1, archived from the original on 20 December 2016, retrieved 21 July 2022
Sullivan, Larry E. (2009). The SAGE glossary of the social and behavioural sciences. Editions SAGE. ISBN 978-1-4129-5143-2. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2017.
Suny, Ronald Grigor (2015). "They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else": A History of the Armenian Genocide. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-6558-1.
Ṭabīb, Rashīd al-Dīn; Faḍlallāh, Rašīd-ad-Dīn; Nishapuri, Zahir al-Din; Nīšāpūrī, Ẓahīr-ad-Dīn (2001).  Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (ed.). The History of the Seljuq Turks from the Jāmiʻ Al-tawārīkh: An Ilkhanid Adaptation of the Saljūq-nāma of Ẓahīr Al-Dīn Nīshāpūrī. Translated by Luther, Kenneth Allin. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-7007-1342-4.
Teeple, John B. (2006). Timelines of World History. New York: DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7566-1703-5.
Tindall, George; Shi, David (2010). America: A Narrative History. Vol. 1 (8th ed.). Norton. ISBN 9780393934069.
Laiou, Angeliki E.; Morrisson, Cécile (2007). The Byzantine Economy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84978-4.
Pounds, Norman John Greville (1979). An Historical Geography of Europe, 1500–1840. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22379-9.
Tudge, Colin (1998). Neanderthals, Bandits and Farmers: How Agriculture Really Began. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08024-7.
Whitfield, Susan (2004). The Silk Road: Trade, Travel, War, and Faith. Serendia Publications, Inc. ISBN 978-1-932476-13-2.
Xue, Zongzheng (1992). A History of Turks. Beijing: Chinese Social Sciences Press.
Yoffee, Norman, ed. (2015). Early Cities in Comparative Perspective, 4000 BCE–1200 CE. The Cambridge World History. Vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19008-4.
Websites
"International Programs - Historical Estimates of World Population - U.S. Census Bureau". United States Census Bureau. August 2016. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2016.
Ritchie, Hannah; Mathieu, Edouard; Rodés-Guirao, Lucas; Appel, Cameron; Giattino, Charlie; Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban; Hasell, Joe; Macdonald, Bobbie; Beltekian, Diana; Roser, Max (5 March 2020). "Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19)". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 19 March 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2022.

Further reading
Baten, Joerg, ed. (2016). A History of the Global Economy: 1500 to present. ISBN 978-1-107-50718-0.
Fournet, Louis-Henri (1986). Diagrammatic Chart of World History. Editions Sides. ISBN 978-2-86861-096-6.
Frankopan, Peter (2015). The Silk Roads: A New History of the World. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-101-94632-9.
Landes, David (1999). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-31888-3.
McNeill, William H. (1963). The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Community. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226561424.
Listen to this article (16 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 19 April 2005 (2005-04-19), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help · More spoken articles)


Human history  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity

vteSocial sciences
Outline
History
Index
Primary
Anthropology (archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social
physical/biological)
Economics (microeconomics
macroeconomics
econometrics
mathematical)
Geography (physical
human
integrated
geomatics
regional)
History
cultural
auxiliary sciences
economic
human
military
political
social
Law (jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems
public law
private law)
Political science (international relations
comparative
theory
public policy)
Psychology (abnormal
cognitive
developmental
personality
social)
Sociology (criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban)
Interdisciplinary
Administration (business
public)
Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
Historical sociology
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Linguistics
Media studies
Philosophy of science (economics
history
psychology
social science)
Planning (land use
regional
urban)
Political ecology
Political economy
Political sociology
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies
historical
Quantum social science
Social work
Vegan studies
List
List of social science journals
Other categorizations
Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science

 Category
 Commons
 Society portal
 Wikiversity





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_history&oldid=1115219175"
Categories: World historyHidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errorsWebarchive template wayback linksUse Oxford spelling from September 2022Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from September 2022CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with hAudio microformatsSpoken articlesPages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatchPages using Sister project links with default searchArticles which contain graphical timelines



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooks




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischÆngliscالعربيةঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीབོད་ཡིགBosanskiCatalàČeštinaCymraegDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisGalego贛語गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlingueИронÍslenskaItalianoҚазақшаKernowekKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîລາວLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLingua Franca NovaLa .lojban.MagyarമലയാളംBahasa MelayuMirandésမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپښتوPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRumantschРусскийSarduShqipSimple EnglishSlovenčinaŚlůnskiکوردیСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWinaray吴语Xitsongaייִדיש粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 10:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










