



Ideology - Wikipedia

































Ideology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Set of beliefs and values attributed to a person or group of people
This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (May 2020)
An ideology is a set of beliefs or philosophies attributed to a person or group of persons, especially as held for reasons that are not purely epistemic,[1][2] in which "practical elements are as prominent as theoretical ones."[3] Formerly applied primarily to economic, political, or religious theories and policies, in a tradition going back to Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, more recent use treats the term as mainly condemnatory.[4]
The term was coined by Antoine Destutt de Tracy, a French Enlightenment aristocrat and philosopher, who conceived it in 1796 as the "science of ideas" to develop a rational system of ideas to oppose the irrational impulses of the mob. In political science, the term is used in a descriptive sense to refer to political belief systems.[4]

Contents

1 Etymology and history
2 Definitions and analysis

2.1 Marxist interpretation
2.2 Ideological state apparatuses (Althusser)
2.3 Ideology and the Commodity (Debord)
2.4 Unifying agents (Hoffer)
2.5 Ronald Inglehart


3 Political ideologies

3.1 Ideocracy


4 Epistemological ideologies
5 Ideology and the social sciences

5.1 Psychological research
5.2 Semiotic theory
5.3 Sociology


6 Quotations
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Bibliography


9 External links


Etymology and history[edit]
 Antoine Destutt de Tracy (1754–1836)
The term ideology originates from French idéologie, itself deriving from combining Greek: idéā (ἰδέα, 'notion, pattern'; close to the Lockean sense of idea) and -logíā (-λογῐ́ᾱ, 'the study of').
The term ideology, and the system of ideas associated with it, was coined in 1796 by Antoine Destutt de Tracy while in prison pending trial during the Reign of Terror, where he read the works of Locke and Condillac.[5] Hoping to form a secure foundation for the moral and political sciences, Tracy devised the term for a "science of ideas," basing such upon two things:

the sensations that people experience as they interact with the material world; and
the ideas that form in their minds due to those sensations.
He conceived ideology as a liberal philosophy that would defend individual liberty, property, free markets, and constitutional limits on state power. He argues that, among these aspects, ideology is the most generic term because the 'science of ideas' also contains the study of their expression and deduction.[6] The coup that overthrew Maximilien Robespierre allowed Tracy to pursue his work.[6] Tracy reacted to the terroristic phase of the revolution (during the Napoleonic regime) by trying to work out a rational system of ideas to oppose the irrational mob impulses that had nearly destroyed him.
A subsequent early source for the near-original meaning of ideology is Hippolyte Taine's work on the Ancien Régime, Origins of Contemporary France I. He describes ideology as rather like teaching philosophy via the Socratic method, though without extending the vocabulary beyond what the general reader already possessed, and without the examples from observation that practical science would require. Taine identifies it not just with Destutt De Tracy, but also with his milieu, and includes Condillac as one of its precursors.
Napoleon Bonaparte came to view ideology as a term of abuse, which he often hurled against his liberal foes in Tracy's Institutional. According to Karl Mannheim's historical reconstruction of the shifts in the meaning of ideology, the modern meaning of the word was born when Napoleon used it to describe his opponents as "the ideologues." Tracy's major book, The Elements of Ideology, was soon translated into the major languages of Europe.
In the century following Tracy, the term ideology moved back and forth between positive and negative connotations. During this next generation, when post-Napoleonic governments adopted a reactionary stance, influenced the Italian, Spanish and Russian thinkers who had begun to describe themselves as "liberals" and who attempted to reignite revolutionary activity in the early 1820s, including the Carlist rebels in Spain; the Carbonari societies in France and Italy; and the Decembrists in Russia. Karl Marx adopted Napoleon's negative sense of the term, using it in his writings, in which he once described Tracy as a fischblütige Bourgeoisdoktrinär (a 'fish-blooded bourgeois doctrinaire').[7]
The term has since dropped some of its pejorative sting, and has become a neutral term in the analysis of differing political opinions and views of social groups.[8] While Marx situated the term within class struggle and domination,[9][10] others believed it was a necessary part of institutional functioning and social integration.[11]

Definitions and analysis[edit]
There are many different kinds of ideologies, including political, social, epistemological, and ethical.
Recent analysis tends to posit that ideology is a 'coherent system of ideas' that rely on a few basic assumptions about reality that may or may not have any factual basis. Through this system, ideas become coherent, repeated patterns through the subjective ongoing choices that people make. These ideas serve as the seed around which further thought grows. The belief in an ideology can range from passive acceptance up to fervent advocacy. According to most recent analysis, ideologies are neither necessarily right nor wrong.
Definitions, such as by Manfred Steger and Paul James emphasize both the issue of patterning and contingent claims to truth:[12]

Ideologies are patterned clusters of normatively imbued ideas and concepts, including particular representations of power relations. These conceptual maps help people navigate the complexity of their political universe and carry claims to social truth.
Studies of the concept of ideology itself (rather than specific ideologies) have been carried out under the name of systematic ideology in the works of George Walford and Harold Walsby, who attempt to explore the relationships between ideology and social systems.[example  needed]
David W. Minar describes six different ways the word ideology has been used:[13]

As a collection of certain ideas with certain kinds of content, usually normative;
As the form or internal logical structure that ideas have within a set;
By the role ideas play in human-social interaction;
By the role ideas play in the structure of an organization;
As meaning, whose purpose is persuasion; and
As the locus of social interaction.
For Willard A. Mullins, an ideology should be contrasted with the related (but different) issues of utopia and historical myth. An ideology is composed of four basic characteristics:[14]

it must have power over cognition;
it must be capable of guiding one's evaluations;
it must provide guidance towards action; and
it must be logically coherent.
Terry Eagleton outlines (more or less in no particular order) some definitions of ideology:[15]

The process of production of meanings, signs and values in social life
A body of ideas characteristic of a particular social group or class
Ideas that help legitimate a dominant political power
False ideas that help legitimate a dominant political power
Systematically distorted communication
Ideas that offer a position for a subject
Forms of thought motivated by social interests
Identity thinking
Socially necessary illusion
The conjuncture of discourse and power
The medium in which conscious social actors make sense of their world
Action-oriented sets of beliefs
The confusion of linguistic and phenomenal reality
Semiotic closure[15]: 197 
The indispensable medium in which individuals live out their relations to a social structure
The process that converts social life to a natural reality
German philosopher Christian Duncker called for a "critical reflection of the ideology concept."[16] In his work, he strove to bring the concept of ideology into the foreground, as well as the closely connected concerns of epistemology and history, defining ideology in terms of a system of presentations that explicitly or implicitly claim to absolute truth.

Marxist interpretation[edit]
 Karl Marx posits that a society's dominant ideology is integral to its superstructure.
Marx's analysis sees ideology as a system of falsehoods deliberately promulgated by the ruling class as a means of self-perpetuation.[17]
In the Marxist base and superstructure model of society, base denotes the relations of production and modes of production, and superstructure denotes the dominant ideology (i.e. religious, legal, political systems). The economic base of production determines the political superstructure of a society. Ruling class-interests determine the superstructure and the nature of the justifying ideology—actions feasible because the ruling class control the means of production. For example, in a feudal mode of production, religious ideology is the most prominent aspect of the superstructure, while in capitalist formations, ideologies such as liberalism and social democracy dominate. Hence the great importance of the ideology justifying a society; it politically confuses the alienated groups of society via false consciousness.
Some explanations have been presented. Antonio Gramsci uses cultural hegemony to explain why the working-class have a false ideological conception of what their best interests are. Marx argued that "The class which has the means of material production at its disposal has control at the same time over the means of mental production."[18]
The Marxist formulation of "ideology as an instrument of social reproduction" is conceptually important to the sociology of knowledge,[19] viz. Karl Mannheim, Daniel Bell, and Jürgen Habermas et al. Moreover, Mannheim has developed, and progressed, from the "total" but "special" Marxist conception of ideology to a "general" and "total" ideological conception acknowledging that all ideology (including Marxism) resulted from social life, an idea developed by the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu. Slavoj Žižek and the earlier Frankfurt School added to the "general theory" of ideology a psychoanalytic insight that ideologies do not include only conscious, but also unconscious ideas.

Ideological state apparatuses (Althusser)[edit]
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (February 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)French Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser proposed that ideology is "the imagined existence (or idea) of things as it relates to the real conditions of existence" and makes use of a lacunar discourse. A number of propositions, which are never untrue, suggest a number of other propositions, which are. In this way, the essence of the lacunar discourse is what is not told (but is suggested).
For example, the statement "All are equal before the law," which is a theoretical groundwork of current legal systems, suggests that all people may be of equal worth or have equal opportunities. This is not true, for the concept of private property and power over the means of production results in some people being able to own more (much more) than others. This power disparity contradicts the claim that all share both practical worth and future opportunity equally; for example, the rich can afford better legal representation, which practically privileges them before the law.
Althusser also proffered the concept of the ideological state apparatus to explain his theory of ideology. His first thesis was "ideology has no history": while individual ideologies have histories, interleaved with the general class struggle of society, the general form of ideology is external to history.
For Althusser, beliefs and ideas are the products of social practices, not the reverse. His thesis that "ideas are material" is illustrated by the "scandalous advice" of Pascal toward unbelievers: "Kneel and pray, and then you will believe." What is ultimately ideological for Althusser are not the subjective beliefs held in the conscious "minds" of human individuals, but rather discourses that produce these beliefs, the material institutions and rituals that individuals take part in without submitting it to conscious examination and so much more critical thinking.

Ideology and the Commodity (Debord)[edit]
The French Marxist theorist Guy Debord, founding member of the Situationist International, argued that when the commodity becomes the "essential category" of society, i.e. when the process of commodification has been consummated to its fullest extent, the image of society propagated by the commodity (as it describes all of life as constituted by notions and objects deriving their value only as commodities tradeable in terms of exchange value), colonizes all of life and reduces society to a mere representation, The Society of the Spectacle.[20]

Unifying agents (Hoffer)[edit]
The American philosopher Eric Hoffer identified several elements that unify followers of a particular ideology:[21]

Hatred: "Mass movements can rise and spread without a God, but never without belief in a devil."[21] The "ideal devil" is a foreigner.[21]: 93 
Imitation: "The less satisfaction we derive from being ourselves, the greater is our desire to be like others…the more we mistrust our judgment and luck, the more are we ready to follow the example of others."[21]: 101–2 
Persuasion: The proselytizing zeal of propagandists derives from "a passionate search for something not yet found more than a desire to bestow something we already have."[21]: 110 
Coercion: Hoffer asserts that violence and fanaticism are interdependent. People forcibly converted to Islamic or communist beliefs become as fanatical as those who did the forcing. "It takes fanatical faith to rationalize our cowardice."[21]: 107–8 
Leadership: Without the leader, there is no movement. Often the leader must wait long in the wings until the time is ripe. He calls for sacrifices in the present, to justify his vision of a breathtaking future. The skills required include: audacity, brazenness, iron will, fanatical conviction; passionate hatred, cunning, a delight in symbols; ability to inspire blind faith in the masses; and a group of able lieutenants.[21]: 112–4  Charlatanism is indispensable, and the leader often imitates both friend and foe, "a single-minded fashioning after a model." He will not lead followers towards the "promised land," but only "away from their unwanted selves."[21]: 116–9 
Action: Original thoughts are suppressed, and unity encouraged, if the masses are kept occupied through great projects, marches, exploration and industry.[21]: 120–1 
Suspicion: "There is prying and spying, tense watching and a tense awareness of being watched." This pathological mistrust goes unchallenged and encourages conformity, not dissent.[21]: 124 
Ronald Inglehart[edit]
Ronald Inglehart of the University of Michigan is author of the World Values Survey, which, since 1980, has mapped social attitudes in 100 countries representing 90% of global population. Results indicate that where people live is likely to closely correlate with their ideological beliefs. In much of Africa, South Asia and the Middle East, people prefer traditional beliefs and are less tolerant of liberal values. Protestant Europe, at the other extreme, adheres more to secular beliefs and liberal values. Alone among high-income countries, the United States is exceptional in its adherence to traditional beliefs, in this case Christianity.

Political ideologies[edit]
 Political spectrum
See also: List of political ideologies
In social studies, a political ideology is a certain ethical set of ideals, principles, doctrines, myths, or symbols of a social movement, institution, class, or large group that explains how society should work, offering some political and cultural blueprint for a certain social order. Political ideologies are concerned with many different aspects of a society, including (for example): the economy, education, health care, labor law, criminal law, the justice system, the provision of social security and social welfare, trade, the environment, minors, immigration, race, use of the military, patriotism, and established religion.
Political ideologies have two dimensions:

Goals: how society should work; and
Methods: the most appropriate ways to achieve the ideal arrangement.
There are many proposed methods for the classification of political ideologies, each of these different methods generate a specific political spectrum.[citation needed] Ideologies also identify themselves by their position on the spectrum (e.g. the left, the center or the right), though precision in this respect can often become controversial. Finally, ideologies can be distinguished from political strategies (e.g., populism) and from single issues that a party may be built around (e.g. legalization of marijuana). Philosopher Michael Oakeshott defines such ideology as "the formalized abridgment of the supposed sub-stratum of the rational truth contained in the tradition." Moreover, Charles Blattberg offers an account that distinguishes political ideologies from political philosophies.[22]
A political ideology largely concerns itself with how to allocate power and to what ends power should be used. Some parties follow a certain ideology very closely, while others may take broad inspiration from a group of related ideologies without specifically embracing any one of them. Each political ideology contains certain ideas on what it considers the best form of government (e.g., democracy, demagogy, theocracy, caliphate etc.), scope of government (e.g. authoritarianism, libertarianism, federalism, etc) and the best economic system (e.g. capitalism, socialism, etc.). Sometimes the same word is used to identify both an ideology and one of its main ideas. For instance, socialism may refer to an economic system, or it may refer to an ideology that supports that economic system.
Post 1991, many commentators claim that we are living in a post-ideological age,[23] in which redemptive, all-encompassing ideologies have failed. This view is often associated with Francis Fukuyama's writings on the end of history.[24] Contrastly, Nienhueser (2011) sees research (in the field of human resource management) as ongoingly "generating ideology."[25]
Slavoj Zizek has pointed out how the very notion of post-ideology can enable the deepest, blindest form of ideology. A sort of false consciousness or false cynicism, engaged in for the purpose of lending one's point of view the respect of being objective, pretending neutral cynicism, without truly being so. Rather than help avoiding ideology, this lapse only deepens the commitment to an existing one. Zizek calls this "a post-modernist trap."[26] Peter Sloterdijk advanced the same idea already in 1988.[27]
Studies have shown that political ideology is somewhat genetically heritable.[28][29][30][31][32][33][34]

Ideocracy[edit]
Main article: Ideocracy
When a political ideology becomes a dominantly pervasive component within a government, one can speak of an ideocracy.[35] Different forms of government utilize ideology in various ways, not always restricted to politics and society. Certain ideas and schools of thought become favored, or rejected, over others, depending on their compatibility with or use for the reigning social order.
As John Maynard Keynes expresses, "Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back."[36]
In The Anatomy of Revolution, Crane Brinton said that new ideology spreads when there is discontent with an old regime.[37] The may be repeated during revolutions itself; extremists such as Lenin and Robespierre may thus overcome more moderate revolutionaries.[38] This stage is soon followed by Thermidor, a reining back of revolutionary enthusiasm under pragmatists like Stalin and Napoleon Bonaparte, who bring "normalcy and equilibrium."[39] Brinton's sequence ("men of ideas>fanatics>practical men of action") is reiterated by J. William Fulbright,[40] while a similar form occurs in Eric Hoffer's The True Believer.[41] The revolution thus becomes established as an ideocracy, though its rise is likely to be checked by a 'political midlife crisis.'

Epistemological ideologies[edit]
Even when the challenging of existing beliefs is encouraged, as in scientific theories, the dominant paradigm or mindset can prevent certain challenges, theories, or experiments from being advanced.
A special case of science that has inspired ideology is ecology, which studies the relationships among living things on Earth. Perceptual psychologist James J. Gibson believed that human perception of ecological relationships was the basis of self-awareness and cognition itself.[42] Linguist George Lakoff has proposed a cognitive science of mathematics wherein even the most fundamental ideas of arithmetic would be seen as consequences or products of human perception—which is itself necessarily evolved within an ecology.[43]
Deep ecology and the modern ecology movement (and, to a lesser degree, Green parties) appear to have adopted ecological sciences as a positive ideology.[44]
Some notable economically based ideologies include neoliberalism, monetarism, mercantilism, mixed economy, social Darwinism, communism, laissez-faire economics, and free trade. There are also current theories of safe trade and fair trade that can be seen as ideologies.

Ideology and the social sciences[edit]
Psychological research[edit]
A large amount of research in psychology is concerned with the causes, consequences and content of ideology.[45][46][47] According to system justification theory,[48] ideologies reflect (unconscious) motivational processes, as opposed to the view that political convictions always reflect independent and unbiased thinking. Jost, Ledgerwood and Hardin (2008) propose that ideologies may function as prepackaged units of interpretation that spread because of basic human motives to understand the world, avoid existential threat, and maintain valued interpersonal relationships.[48] The authors conclude that such motives may lead disproportionately to the adoption of system-justifying worldviews. Psychologists generally agree that personality traits, individual difference variables, needs, and ideological beliefs seem to have something in common.[49]

Semiotic theory[edit]
According to semiotician Bob Hodge:[50][Ideology] identifies a unitary object that incorporates complex sets of meanings with the social agents and processes that produced them. No other term captures this object as well as 'ideology'. Foucault's 'episteme' is too narrow and abstract, not social enough. His 'discourse', popular because it covers some of ideology's terrain with less baggage, is too confined to verbal systems. 'Worldview' is too metaphysical, 'propaganda' too loaded. Despite or because of its contradictions, 'ideology' still plays a key role in semiotics oriented to social, political life.Authors such as Michael Freeden have also recently incorporated a semantic analysis to the study of ideologies.
Sociology[edit]
Sociologists define ideology as "cultural beliefs that justify particular social arrangements, including patterns of inequality."[51] Dominant groups use these sets of cultural beliefs and practices to justify the systems of inequality that maintain their group's social power over non-dominant groups. Ideologies use a society's symbol system to organize social relations in a hierarchy, with some social identities being superior to other social identities, which are considered inferior. The dominant ideology in a society is passed along through the society's major social institutions, such as the media, the family, education, and religion.[52] As societies changed throughout history, so did the ideologies that justified systems of inequality.[51]
Sociological examples of ideologies include: racism; sexism; heterosexism; ableism; and ethnocentrism.[53]

Quotations[edit]
"We do not need…to believe in an ideology. All that is necessary is for each of us to develop our good human qualities. The need for a sense of universal responsibility affects every aspect of modern life." — Dalai Lama.[54]
"The function of ideology is to stabilize and perpetuate dominance through masking or illusion." — Sally Haslanger[55]
"[A]n ideology differs from a simple opinion in that it claims to possess either the key to history, or the solution for all the ‘riddles of the universe,’ or the intimate knowledge of the hidden universal laws, which are supposed to rule nature and man." — Hannah Arendt[56]
See also[edit]

The Anatomy of Revolution
List of communist ideologies
Capitalism
Feminism
Hegemony
-ism
List of ideologies named after people
Ideocracy
Noble lie
Politicisation
Social criticism
Socially constructed reality
State collapse
State ideology of the Soviet Union
The True Believer
World Values Survey
World view

References[edit]


^ Honderich, Ted (1995). The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University Press. p. 392. ISBN 978-0-19-866132-0.

^ "ideology". Lexico. Archived from the original on 2020-02-11.

^ Cranston, Maurice. [1999] 2014. "Ideology Archived 2020-06-09 at the Wayback Machine" (revised). Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ a b van Dijk, T. A. (2006). "Politics, Ideology, and Discourse" (PDF). Discourse in Society. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-07-08. Retrieved 2019-01-28.

^ Vincent, Andrew (2009). Modern Political Ideologies. John Wiley & Sons. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-4443-1105-1. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020.

^ a b Kennedy, Emmet (Jul–Sep 1979). ""Ideology" from Destutt De Tracy to Marx". Journal of the History of Ideas. 40 (3): 353–368. doi:10.2307/2709242. JSTOR 2709242.

^ de Tracy, Antoine Destutt. [1801] 1817. Les Éléments d'idéologie, (3rd ed.). p. 4, as cited in Mannheim, Karl. 1929. "The problem of 'false consciousness.'" In Ideologie und Utopie. 2nd footnote.

^ Eagleton, Terry (1991) Ideology. An introduction, Verso, pg. 2

^ Tucker, Robert C (1978). The Marx-Engels Reader, W. W. Norton & Company, pg. 3.

^ Marx, MER, pg. 154

^ Susan Silbey, "Ideology" Archived 2021-06-01 at the Wayback Machine at Cambridge Dictionary of Sociology.

^ James, Paul, and Manfred Steger. 2010. Globalization and Culture, Vol. 4: Ideologies of Globalism Archived 2020-04-29 at the Wayback Machine. London: SAGE Publications.

^ Minar, David W. 1961. "Ideology and Political Behavior." Midwest Journal of Political Science 5(4):317–31. doi:10.2307/2108991. JSTOR 2108991.

^ Mullins, Willard A. 1972. "On the Concept of Ideology in Political Science." American Political Science Review 66(2):498–510. doi:10.2307/1957794.

^ a b Eagleton, Terry. 1991. Ideology: An Introduction Archived 2021-06-01 at the Wayback Machine. Verso. ISBN 0-86091-319-8.

^ "Christian Duncker" (in German). Ideologie Forschung. 2006.

^ Rejai, Mostafa (1991). "Chapter 1: Comparative Analysis of Political Ideologies". Political Ideologies: A Comparative Approach. p. 13. ISBN 0-87332-807-8.

^ Marx, Karl (1978a). "The Civil War in France", The Marx-Engels Reader 2nd ed. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

^ In this discipline, there are lexical disputes over the meaning of the word "ideology" ("false consciousness" as advocated by Marx, or rather "false position" of a statement in itself is correct but irrelevant in the context in which it is produced, as in Max Weber's opinion): Buonomo, Giampiero (2005). "Eleggibilità più ampia senza i paletti del peculato d'uso? Un'occasione (perduta) per affrontare il tema delle leggi ad personam". Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online. Archived from the original on 2016-03-24.[dead link]

^ Guy Debord (1995). The Society of the Spectacle. Zone Books.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Hoffer, Eric. 1951. The True Believer. Harper Perennial. p. 91, et seq.

^ Blattberg, Charles. [2001] 2009. "Political Philosophies and Political Ideologies (PDF) Archived 2021-06-01 at the Wayback Machine." Public Affairs Quarterly 15(3):193–217. SSRN 1755117.

^ Bell, D. 2000. The End of Ideology: On the Exhaustion of Political Ideas in the Fifties (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 393.

^ Fukuyama, Francis. 1992. The End of History and the Last Man. New York: Free Press. p. xi.

^ Nienhueser, Werner (2011). "Empirical Research on Human Resource Management as a Production of Ideology". Management Revue. 22 (4): 367–393. doi:10.5771/0935-9915-2011-4-367. ISSN 0935-9915. [...] current empirical research in HRM is generating ideology.

^ Zizek, Slavoj (2008). The Sublime Object of Ideology (2nd ed.). London: Verso. pp. xxxi, 25–27. ISBN 978-1-84467-300-1.

^ Sloterdijk, Peter (1988). Critique of Cynical Reason. US: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-1586-5.

^ Bouchard, Thomas J., and Matt McGue. 2003. "Genetic and environmental influences on human psychological differences (ePDF) Archived 2020-07-23 at the Wayback Machine." Journal of Neurobiology 54(1):44–45. doi:10.1002/neu.10160. PMID 12486697

^ Cloninger, et al. (1993).

^ Eaves, L. J., and H. J. Eysenck. 1974. "Genetics and the development of social attitudes Archived 2017-03-27 at the Wayback Machine." Nature 249:288–89. doi:10.1038/249288a0.

^ Alford, John, Carolyn Funk, and John R. Hibbing. 2005. "Are Political Orientations Genetically Transmitted? Archived 2017-08-09 at the Wayback Machine." American Political Science Review 99(2):153–67.

^ Hatemi, Peter K., Sarah E. Medland, Katherine I. Morley, Andrew C. Heath, and Nicholas G. Martin. 2007. "The genetics of voting: An Australian twin study Archived 2008-07-20 at the Wayback Machine." Behavior Genetics 37(3):435–48. doi:10.1007/s10519-006-9138-8.

^ Hatemi, Peter K., J. Hibbing, J. Alford, N. Martin, and L. Eaves. 2009. "Is there a 'party' in your genes? Archived 2021-06-01 at the Wayback Machine" Political Research Quarterly 62 (3):584–600. doi:10.1177/1065912908327606. SSRN 1276482.

^ Settle, Jaime E., Christopher T. Dawes, and James H. Fowler. 2009. "The heritability of partisan attachment Archived 2010-06-16 at the Wayback Machine." Political Research Quarterly 62(3):601–13. doi:10.1177/1065912908327607.

^ Piekalkiewicz, Jaroslaw; Penn, Alfred Wayne (1995). Jaroslaw Piekalkiewicz, Alfred Wayne Penn. Politics of Ideocracy. ISBN 978-0-7914-2297-7. Archived from the original on 2021-04-13. Retrieved 2020-08-27.

^ Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. pp. 383–84.

^ Brinton, Crane. 1938. "Chapter 2." The Anatomy of Revolution.

^ Brinton, Crane. 1938. "Chapter 6." The Anatomy of Revolution.

^ Brinton, Crane. 1938. "Chapter 8." The Anatomy of Revolution.

^ Fulbright, J. William. 1967. The Arrogance of Power. ch. 3–7.

^ Hoffer, Eric. 1951. The True Believer. ch. 15–17.

^ Gibson, James J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Taylor & Francis.

^ Lakoff, George (2000). Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics Into Being. Basic Books.

^ Madsen, Peter. "Deep Ecology". Britannica. Archived from the original on 2021-04-13. Retrieved 2021-04-10.

^ Jost, John T.; Federico, Christopher M.; Napier, Jaime L. (January 2009). "Political Ideology: Its Structure, Functions, and Elective Affinities". Annual Review of Psychology. 60 (1): 307–337. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163600. PMID 19035826.

^ Schlenker, Barry R.; Chambers, John R.; Le, Bonnie M. (April 2012). "Conservatives are happier than liberals, but why? Political ideology, personality, and life satisfaction". Journal of Research in Personality. 46 (2): 127–146. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2011.12.009.

^ Saucier, Gerard (2000). "Isms and the structure of social attitudes". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 78 (2): 366–385. doi:10.1037//0022-3514.78.2.366. PMID 10707341.

^ a b Jost, John T., Alison Ledgerwood, and Curtis D. Hardin. 2008. "Shared reality, system justification, and the relational basis of ideological beliefs." Pp. 171–86 in Social and Personality Psychology Compass 2.

^ Lee S. Dimin (2011). Corporatocracy: A Revolution in Progress. p. 140.

^ Hodge, Bob. "Ideology Archived 2008-09-05 at the Wayback Machine." Semiotics Encyclopedia Online. Retrieved 12 June 2020.

^ a b Macionis, John J. (2010). Sociology (13th ed.). Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education. p. 257. ISBN 978-0-205-74989-8. OCLC 468109511.

^ Witt, Jon (2017). SOC 2018 (5TH ed.). [S.l.]: MCGRAW-HILL. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-259-70272-3. OCLC 968304061.

^ Witt, John (2017). SOC 2018 (5TH ed.). [S.l.]: MCGRAW-HILL. ISBN 978-1-259-70272-3. OCLC 968304061.

^ Bunson, Matthew, ed. 1997. The Dalai Lama's Book of Wisdom. Ebury Press. p. 180.

^ Haslanger, Sally (2017). "I—Culture and Critique". Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume. 91: 149–73. doi:10.1093/arisup/akx001.

^ Arendt, Hannah. 1968. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Harcourt. p. 159.


Bibliography[edit]
Althusser, Louis. [1970] 1971. "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses." In Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays. Monthly Review Press ISBN 1-58367-039-4.
Belloni, Claudio. 2013. Per la critica dell’ideologia: Filosofia e storia in Marx. Milan: Mimesis.
Duncker, Christian 2006. Kritische Reflexionen Des Ideologiebegriffes. ISBN 1-903343-88-7.
—, ed. 2008. "Ideologiekritik Aktuell." Ideologies Today 1. London. ISBN 978-1-84790-015-9.
Eagleton, Terry. 1991. Ideology: An Introduction. Verso. ISBN 0-86091-319-8.
Ellul, Jacques. [1965] 1973. Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes, translated by K. Kellen and J. Lerner. New York: Random House.
Freeden, Michael. 1996. Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual Approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-829414-6
Feuer, Lewis S. 2010. Ideology and Ideologists. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Gries, Peter Hays. 2014. The Politics of American Foreign Policy: How Ideology Divides Liberals and Conservatives over Foreign Affairs. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Haas, Mark L. 2005. The Ideological Origins of Great Power Politics, 1789–1989. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-7407-8.
Hawkes, David. 2003. Ideology (2nd ed.). Routledge. ISBN 0-415-29012-0.
James, Paul, and Manfred Steger. 2010. Globalization and Culture, Vol. 4: Ideologies of Globalism. London: SAGE Publications.
Lukács, Georg. [1967] 1919–1923. History and Class Consciousness, translated by R. Livingstone. Merlin Press.
Malesevic, Sinisa, and Iain Mackenzie, eds. Ideology after Poststructuralism. London: Pluto Press.
Mannheim, Karl. 1936. Ideology and Utopia. Routledge.
Marx, Karl. [1845–46] 1932. The German Ideology.
Minogue, Kenneth. 1985. Alien Powers: The Pure Theory of Ideology. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-312-01860-6.
Minar, David W. 1961. "Ideology and Political Behavior." Midwest Journal of Political Science 5(4):317–31. doi:10.2307/2108991. JSTOR 2108991.
Mullins, Willard A. 1972.:)) "On the Concept of Ideology in Political Science." American Political Science Review 66(2):498–510. doi:10.2307/1957794.
Owen, John. 2011. The Clash of Ideas in World Politics: Transnational Networks, States, and Regime Change, 1510-2010. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-14239-4.
Pinker, Steven. 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York: Penguin Group. ISBN 0-670-03151-8.
Sorce Keller, Marcello. 2007. "Why is Music so Ideological, Why Do Totalitarian States Take It So Seriously: A Personal View from History, and the Social Sciences." Journal of Musicological Research 26(2–3):91–122.
Steger, Manfred B., and Paul James. 2013. "Levels of Subjective Globalization: Ideologies, Imaginaries, Ontologies." Perspectives on Global Development and Technology 12(1–2):17–40. doi:10.1163/15691497-12341240
Verschueren, Jef. 2012. Ideology in Language Use: Pragmatic Guidelines for Empirical Research. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-69590-0
Zizek, Slavoj. 1989. The Sublime Object of Ideology. Verso. ISBN 0-86091-971-4.
External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to Ideology.




Look up ideology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Pervert's Guide to Ideology: How Ideology Seduces Us—and How We Can (Try to) Escape It
Ideology Study Guide
Louis Althusser's "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses"
Toll, Mathew (2009),Ideology and Symbolic Power: Between Althusser and Bourdieu
vteList of political ideologies
Anti-establishment
Centrism
Hardline
Left-wing politics
Reactionary
Revolutionary
Right-wing politics
The Establishment

Agrarianism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Capitalism
Centrism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Corporatism
Democracy
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Familialism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Federalism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Interculturalism
Internationalism
Islamism
Leftism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Marxism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism
Nationalism
Nazism
Nihilism
Pacifism
Political radicalism
Populism
Progressive conservatism
Progressivism
Reformism
Regionalism
Republicanism
Rightism
Royalism
Secularism
Separatism
Social anarchism
Social credit
Social democracy
Socialism
Statism
Syncretism
Technocracy
Third Way
Totalitarianism
Utilitarianism
White supremacy
Zionism

vteEthicsNormative ethics
Consequentialism
Utilitarianism
Deontology
Kantian ethics
Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics
Eudaimonia
Applied ethics
Animal ethics
Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Engineering ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Machine ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of artificial intelligence
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology
Ethics of terraforming
Ethics of uncertain sentience
Meta-ethics
Cognitivism
Moral realism
Ethical naturalism
Ethical non-naturalism
Ethical subjectivism
Ideal observer theory
Divine command theory
Error theory
Non-cognitivism
Emotivism
Expressivism
Quasi-realism
Universal prescriptivism
Moral universalism
Value monism – Value pluralism
Moral constructivism
Moral relativism
Moral nihilism
Moral rationalism
Ethical intuitionism
Moral skepticism
Concepts  (index)
Autonomy
Axiology
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Free will
Good and evil
Good
Evil
Happiness
Ideal
Immorality
Justice
Liberty
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
Ethicist philosophers
Laozi
Socrates
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
Related articles
Casuistry
Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Moral psychology
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Population ethics
Social philosophy
Suffering-focused ethics

 Category

vteWorldviewRelated terms
Basic beliefs / Beliefs
Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventional wisdom
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics
Facts and factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes / Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system
AspectsBiases
Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive
list
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observational error
Observer-expectancy
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy
Clever Hans effect
placebo effect
wishful thinking
Status quo
Stereotyping
ethnic
Change andmaintenance
Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Brainwashing
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education
religious
values
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fearmongering
Historical revisionism
negationism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion
forced
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect
Culture
Anthropology
cultural
social
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment / Serfdom / Slavery
Families
Funerals / Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene
ritual
Identity (philosophy)
cultural
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage
secular
Rituals
Social class / Social status / Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship
Groupthink
Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior
animal
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Doublethink
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group cohesiveness
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
In-group and out-group
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism / Mob rule
Mass action
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social actions
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation
animal
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Viral phenomena
Knowledge
Axioms
tacit assumptions
Conceptual framework
Epistemology
outline
Evidence
anecdotal
scientific
Explanations
Faith
fideism
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning
fallacious
logic
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition
folklore
Truth
consensus theory
criteria
World disclosure
Metaphysics
Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness
mind–body problem
Cosmogony
Cosmology
religious
Creation myth
Deities
existence
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything / Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction / Nonfiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology
comparative
National mythoi
Nature
philosophical
Ontology
Origin myths
political
Otherworlds
axes mundi
Physics
natural philosophy
Problem of evil
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables
Value
Æsthetics
Almsgiving / Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy
emotional
religious
Elegance
Emotions
æsthetic
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions
unclean animals
Golden Rule
Guilt / Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Law
jurisprudence
religious
Liberty
political freedom
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality
public
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality
ethics
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues and Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing
ExamplesAttitudes
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz
Economic andpolitical ideologies
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialisation
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Sentientism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Veganism
Religions
Baháʼí
Buddhism
Caodaism
Cheondoism
Chinese folk religion
Christianity
Eastern Orthodox Church
Ethnic religions
Hinduism
Hòa Hảo
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Modern Paganism
Rastafari
Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Traditional African religions
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism
Schools ofphilosophy
Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism / New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Epicureanism
Eretrian school
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism / New historicism
Holism
Humanism / Renaissance humanism
Idealism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Megarian school
Modernism / Postmodernism
Mohism
Monism
Natural law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (Western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism / Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Pre-Socratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism
Sentientism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism / Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism

Authority control: National libraries 
Ukraine
Germany
Japan
Czech Republic
Poland





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ideology&oldid=1111266021"
Categories: Ideologies1790s neologismsCritical theoryPolitical terminologyPhilosophical theoriesSchools of thoughtSociological terminologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2021Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2020All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2020All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textArticles containing German-language textAll articles needing examplesArticles needing examples from February 2019Articles that may contain original research from February 2020All articles that may contain original researchAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles with EMU identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with PLWABN identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésԱրեւմտահայերէնAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaКъарачай-малкъарქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKurdîКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLimburgsLombardMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംMaltiმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuМокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVènetoTiếng Việt文言Winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 20 September 2022, at 03:29 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










