



Liberty - Wikipedia










































Liberty

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Ability of individuals to have agency
For other uses, see Liberty (disambiguation).
 Liberty Enlightening the World (known as the Statue of Liberty) was donated to the US by France in 1886 as an artistic personification of liberty.
Broadly speaking, liberty is the ability to do as one pleases, or a right or immunity enjoyed by prescription or by grant (i.e. privilege).[1] It is a synonym for the word freedom. In modern politics, negative liberty is understood as the state of being free within society from control or oppressive restrictions imposed by authority on one's way of life, behavior, or political views;[2][3][4] whereas positive liberty is understood as the possession of the power and resources to act in an environment that overcomes the inequalities that divide us.[5]
In philosophy, these distinctions between negative liberty and positive liberty require distinctions about the causative links that distinguish free will from determinism.[6][5]
In theology, liberty is freedom from the effects of "sin, spiritual servitude, [or] worldly ties".[7]
Sometimes liberty is differentiated from freedom by using the word "freedom" primarily, if not exclusively, to mean the ability to do as one wills and what one has the power to do; and using the word "liberty" to mean the absence of arbitrary restraints, taking into account the rights of all involved.[citation needed] In this sense, the exercise of liberty is subject to capability and limited by the rights of others.[8]  Thus liberty entails the responsible use of freedom under the rule of law without depriving anyone else of their freedom. Freedom is broader in that it represents a total lack of restraint or the unrestrained ability to fulfill one's desires.[citation needed] For example, a person can have the freedom to murder, but not have the liberty to murder, as the latter example deprives others of their right not to be harmed.[citation needed] Liberty can be taken away as a form of punishment. In many countries, people can be deprived of their liberty if they are convicted of criminal acts.[citation needed]
The word "liberty" is often used in slogans, such as "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness"[9] or "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity".[10]
Liberty originates from the Latin word libertas, derived from the name of the goddess Libertas, who, along with more modern personifications, is often used to portray the concept, and the archaic Roman god Liber.[citation needed]

Contents

1 Philosophy and metaphysics
2 Politics

2.1 History
2.2 Social contract


3 Origins of political freedom

3.1 England and Great Britain
3.2 United States
3.3 France


4 Ideologies

4.1 Liberalism
4.2 Libertarianism
4.3 Republican liberty
4.4 Socialism

4.4.1 Marxism


4.5 Anarchism


5 Cultural prerequisites
6 Historical writings on liberty
7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links


Philosophy and metaphysics[edit]
 John Stuart Mill
Main article: Free will
Philosophers from the earliest times have considered the question of liberty. Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–180 AD) wrote:

a polity in which there is the same law for all, a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed.[11]
According to compatibilist Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679):

a free man is he that in those things which by his strength and wit he is able to do is not hindered to do what he hath the will to do.— Leviathan, Part 2, Ch. XXI.
John Locke (1632–1704) rejected that definition of liberty. While not specifically mentioning Hobbes, he attacks Sir Robert Filmer who had the same definition. According to Locke:

In the state of nature, liberty consists of being free from any superior power on Earth. People are not under the will or lawmaking authority of others but have only the law of nature for their rule. In political society, liberty consists of being under no other lawmaking power except that established by consent in the commonwealth. People are free from the dominion of any will or legal restraint apart from that enacted by their own constituted lawmaking power according to the trust put in it. Thus, freedom is not as Sir Robert Filmer defines it: 'A liberty for everyone to do what he likes, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws.' Freedom is constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political society. Freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature. Freedom of people under government is to be under no restraint apart from standing rules to live by that are common to everyone in the society and made by the lawmaking power established in it. Persons have a right or liberty to (1) follow their own will in all things that the law has not prohibited and (2) not be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, and arbitrary wills of others.[12]
John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), in his work, On Liberty, was the first to recognize the difference between liberty as the freedom to act and liberty as the absence of coercion.[13]
In his book Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin formally framed the differences between two perspectives as the distinction between two opposite concepts of liberty: positive liberty and negative liberty. The latter designates a negative condition in which an individual is protected from tyranny and the arbitrary exercise of authority, while the former refers to the liberty that comes from self-mastery, the freedom from inner compulsions such as weakness and fear.[14]

Politics[edit]
Main article: Political freedom
History[edit]
 Bust of Aristotle
The modern concept of political liberty has its origins in the Greek concepts of freedom and slavery.[15] To be free, to the Greeks, was not to have a master, to be independent from a master (to live as one likes).[16][17] That was the original Greek concept of freedom. It is closely linked with the concept of democracy, as Aristotle put it:

"This, then, is one note of liberty which all democrats affirm to be the principle of their state. Another is that a man should live as he likes. This, they say, is the privilege of a freeman, since, on the other hand, not to live as a man likes is the mark of a slave. This is the second characteristic of democracy, whence has arisen the claim of men to be ruled by none, if possible, or, if this is impossible, to rule and be ruled in turns; and so it contributes to the freedom based upon equality."[18]
This applied only to free men. In Athens, for instance, women could not vote or hold office and were legally and socially dependent on a male relative.[19]
The populations of the Persian Empire enjoyed some degree of freedom. Citizens of all religions and ethnic groups were given the same rights and had the same freedom of religion, women had the same rights as men, and slavery was abolished (550 BC). All the palaces of the kings of Persia were built by paid workers in an era when slaves typically did such work.[20]
In the Maurya Empire of ancient India, citizens of all religions and ethnic groups had some rights to freedom, tolerance, and equality. The need for tolerance on an egalitarian basis can be found in the Edicts of Ashoka the Great, which emphasize the importance of tolerance in public policy by the government. The slaughter or capture of prisoners of war also appears to have been condemned by Ashoka.[21] Slavery also appears to have been non-existent in the Maurya Empire.[22] However, according to Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund, "Ashoka's orders seem to have been resisted right from the beginning."[23]
Roman law also embraced certain limited forms of liberty, even under the rule of the Roman Emperors. However, these liberties were accorded only to Roman citizens.  Many of the liberties enjoyed under Roman law endured through the Middle Ages, but were enjoyed solely by the nobility, rarely by the common man.[citation needed] The idea of inalienable and universal liberties had to wait until the Age of Enlightenment.

Social contract[edit]
 In French Liberty. British Slavery (1792), James Gillray caricatured French "liberty" as the opportunity to starve and British "slavery" as bloated complaints about taxation.
The social contract theory, most influentially formulated by Hobbes, John Locke and Rousseau (though first suggested by Plato in The Republic), was among the first to provide a political classification of rights, in particular through the notion of sovereignty and of natural rights. The thinkers of the Enlightenment reasoned that law governed both heavenly and human affairs, and that law gave the king his power, rather than the king's power giving force to law. This conception of law would find its culmination in the ideas of Montesquieu. The conception of law as a relationship between individuals, rather than families, came to the fore, and with it the increasing focus on individual liberty as a fundamental reality, given by "Nature and Nature's God," which, in the ideal state, would be as universal as possible.
In On Liberty, John Stuart Mill sought to define the "...nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual," and as such, he describes an inherent and continuous antagonism between liberty and authority and thus, the prevailing question becomes "how to make the fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control".[8]

Origins of political freedom[edit]
England and Great Britain[edit]
 The Magna Carta (originally known as the Charter of Liberties) of 1215, written in iron gall ink on parchment in medieval Latin, using standard abbreviations of the period. This document is held at the British Library and is identified as "British Library Cotton MS Augustus II.106".
England (and, following the Act of Union 1707, Great Britain), laid down the cornerstones of the concept of individual liberty.
In 1066 as a condition of his coronation William the Conqueror assented to the London Charter of Liberties which guaranteed the "Saxon" liberties of the City of London.
In 1100 the Charter of Liberties is passed which sets out certain liberties of nobles, church officials and individuals.
In 1166 Henry II of England transformed English law by passing the Assize of Clarendon. The act, a forerunner to trial by jury, started the abolition of trial by combat and trial by ordeal.[24]
1187-1189 sees the publication of Tractatus de legibus et consuetudinibus regni Anglie which contains authoritative definitions of freedom and servitude:

Freedom is the natural faculty of doing what each person pleases to do according to his will, except what is prohibited to him of right or by force.  Servitude on the other hand may be said to be the contrary, as if any person contrary to freedom should be bound upon a covenant to do something, or not to do it.[25]
In 1215 Magna Carta was enacted, arguably becoming the cornerstone of liberty in first England, then Great Britain, and later the world.[26][27]
In 1628 the English Parliament passed the Petition of Right which set out specific liberties of English subjects.
In 1679 the English Parliament passed the Habeas Corpus Act which outlawed unlawful or arbitrary imprisonment.
In 1689 the Bill of Rights granted "freedom of speech in Parliament", and reinforced many existing civil rights in England. The Scots law equivalent the Claim of Right is also passed.[28]
In 1772 the Somerset v Stewart judgement found that slavery was unsupported by common law in England and Wales.
In 1859 an essay by the philosopher John Stuart Mill, entitled On Liberty, argued for toleration and individuality. "If any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own infallibility."[29][30]
In 1958 Two Concepts of Liberty, by Isaiah Berlin, identified "negative liberty" as an obstacle, as distinct from "positive liberty" which promotes self-mastery and the concepts of freedom.[31]
In 1948 British representatives attempted to but were prevented from adding a legal framework to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (It was not until 1976 that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights came into force, giving a legal status to most of the Declaration.)[32]

United States[edit]
 The Liberty Bell is a popular icon of liberty in the US.
According to the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence, all people have a natural right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness". But this declaration of liberty was troubled from the outset by the institutionalization of legalized Black slavery.  Slave owners argued that their liberty was paramount since it involved property, their slaves, and that Blacks had no rights that any White man was obliged to recognize.  The Supreme Court, in the Dred Scott decision, upheld this principle.  It was not until 1866, following the Civil War, that the US Constitution was amended to extend these rights to persons of color, and not until 1920 that these rights were extended to women.[33]
By the later half of the 20th century, liberty was expanded further to prohibit government interference with personal choices.  In the United States Supreme Court decision Griswold v. Connecticut, Justice William O. Douglas argued that liberties relating to personal relationships, such as marriage, have a unique primacy of place in the hierarchy of freedoms.[34] Jacob M. Appel has summarized this principle:

I am grateful that I have rights in the proverbial public square – but, as a practical matter, my most cherished rights are those that I possess in my bedroom and hospital room and death chamber. Most people are far more concerned that they can control their own bodies than they are about petitioning Congress.[35]
In modern America, various competing ideologies have divergent views about how best to promote liberty.  Liberals in the original sense of the word see equality as a necessary component of freedom.  Progressives stress freedom from business monopoly as essential.  Libertarians disagree, and see economic and individual freedom as best.  The Tea Party movement sees the "big government" as the enemy of freedom.[36][37] Other major participants in the modern American liberty movement include the Libertarian Party,[38] the Free State Project,[39][40] and the Mises Institute.[41]

France[edit]
 Eugène Delacroix – Liberty Leading the People (La liberté guidant le people) (1830)
France supported the Americans in their revolt against English rule and, in 1789, overthrew their own monarchy, with the cry of "Liberté, égalité, fraternité".  The bloodbath that followed, known as the reign of terror, soured many people on the idea of liberty. Edmund Burke, considered one of the fathers of conservatism, wrote "The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world."[42]

Ideologies[edit]
Liberalism[edit]
Main article: Liberalism
Part of a series onLiberalism
History
Age of Enlightenment
List of liberal theorists (contributions to liberal theory)

Ideas
Consent of the governed
Due process
Democracy
Economic liberalism
Economic globalization
Equality
Gender
Legal
Federalism
Freedom
Economic
Market
Trade
Press
Religion
Speech
Harm principle
Internationalism
Invisible hand
Labor theory of property
Lockean proviso
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Negative
Positive
Limited government
Market economy
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Popular sovereignty
Property
Private
Public
Rights
Civil and political
Natural and legal
To own property
To bear arms
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Separation of powers
Social contract
Social justice
Basic income
Social services
Welfare state
State of nature

Schools of thought
Classical
Conservative
Cultural
Democratic
Feminist
Equity
Green
Internationalist
Muscular
National
Neo
Ordo
Radical
Radical centrism
Religious
Christian
Catholic
Islamic
Jewish
Secular
Social
Techno
Third Way

Thinkers
Acton
Alberdi
Arnold
Aron
Badawi
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Burke
Čapek
Cassirer
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Emerson
Friedman
Guizot
Hayek
Hobhouse
Hu
Humboldt
Jouvenel
Kant
Keynes
Korais
Kymlicka
Leoni
List
Locke
Martineau
Mill
Milton
Mises
Montesquieu
Nozick
Ortega
Paine
Popper
Priestley
Rawls
Ricardo
Rousseau
Say
Sen
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Staël
Tocqueville
Turgot
Voltaire
Weber
Wollstonecraft

Politicians
Artigas
Bright
Broglie
Cavour
Cobden
Deák
Deakin
Einaudi
Gladstone
Gokhale
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jenkins
Juárez
Kemal
Kennedy
King
Kołłątaj
Kossuth
Lamartine
Levski
Lincoln
Lloyd George
Macaulay
Madison
Madero
Mazzini
Milyukov
Mommsen
Naoroji
Ohlin
Pearson
Pino Suárez
Rathenau
Roosevelt
Sarmiento
Ståhlberg
Venizelos

Organizations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe Party
Amnesty International
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
Humanists International
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network

Regional variants
Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Venizelism
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Liberism
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Poland
Cracovian
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Cobdenism
Gladstonian
Manchester
Whiggism
United States
Arizona School
Classical
Jeffersonian
Modern
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

Related topics
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-communism
Bias in American academia
Bias in the media
Capitalism
Democratic
Centrism
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Empiricism
Humanism
Individualism
Anarchist
Land value tax
Libertarianism
Left
Right
Pirate Party
Progressivism
Sexually liberal feminism
Utilitarianism

 Liberalism portal
 Politics portalvte
According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, liberalism is "the belief that it is the aim of politics to preserve individual rights and to maximize freedom of choice".  But they point out that there is considerable discussion about how to achieve those goals.  Every discussion of freedom depends on three key components: who is free, what they are free to do, and what forces restrict their freedom.[43]  John Gray argues that the core belief of liberalism is toleration.  Liberals allow others freedom to do what they want, in exchange for having the same freedom in return.  This idea of freedom is personal rather than political.[44]  William Safire points out that liberalism is attacked by both the Right and the Left: by the Right for defending such practices as abortion, homosexuality, and atheism, and by the Left for defending free enterprise and the rights of the individual over the collective.[45]

Libertarianism[edit]
Main articles: Libertarianism, Minarchism, Austrian School, and Anarcho-capitalism
Part of a series onLibertarianism
Origins
Anarchism
Anarcho-communism
Liberalism
Libertarian communism
Libertarian Marxism
Libertarian socialism
Radicalism
Social anarchism

Concepts
Abstention
Age of consent reform
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-capitalism
Anti-militarism
Anti-statism
Autarchism
Civil libertarianism
Class conflict
Commune
Confederalism
Decentralization
Direct action
Egalitarianism
Expropriative anarchism
Federalism
Free association
Free love
Free market
Free-market anarchism
Free-market environmentalism
Free migration
Freedom of association
Gift economy
Global justice movement
Individualism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Natural law
Participatory economics
Propaganda of the deed
Property is theft!
Refusal of work
Self-governance
Self-ownership
Social ecology
Squatting
Stateless society
Taxation as theft
Taxation as slavery
Works council
Workers' self-management

People
Andrews
Armand
Bakunin
Berkman
Bookchin
Cleyre
Chomsky
Déjacque
Durruti
Ferrer
Friedman
Galleani
Godwin
Goldman
Goodman
Graeber
Greene
Hayek
Hazlitt
Hodgskin
Hospers
Kropotkin
La Boétie
Landauer
Laozi
Magón
Makhno
Malatesta
Margall
Michel
Mises
Most
Pannella
Paterson
Paul
Proudhon
Rocker
Rothbard
Spooner
Stirner
Stossel
Thoreau
Tucker
Voline
Warren

Regional variants
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States

Related topics
Criticism
Left-libertarianism
Libertarian feminism
Philosophical anarchism
Right-libertarianism

 Libertarianism portal
 Anarchism portalvte
According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, libertarians hold liberty as their primary political value.[46] Their approach to implementing liberty involves opposing any governmental coercion, aside from that which is necessary to prevent individuals from coercing each other.[47]
Libertarianism is guided by the principle commonly known as the Non-Aggression Principle (NAP). The Non-Aggression Principle asserts that aggression against an individual or an individual's property is always an immoral violation of one's life, liberty, and property rights.[48][49]  Utilizing deceit instead of consent to achieve ends is also a violation of the Non-Aggression principle. Therefore, under the framework of the Non-Aggression principle, rape, murder, deception, involuntary taxation, government regulation, and other behaviors that initiate aggression against otherwise peaceful individuals are considered violations of this principle.[50] This principle is most commonly adhered to by libertarians. A common elevator pitch for this principle is, "Good ideas don't require force."[51]

Republican liberty[edit]
Part of the Politics seriesRepublicanism
Central concepts
Anti-monarchism
Democracy
Democratization
Liberty as non-domination
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract

Schools
Classical
Federal
Kemalism
Nasserism
Neo-republicanism
Venizelism

Types of republics
Autonomous
Capitalist
Christian
Democratic
Federal
Federal parliamentary
Islamic
Parliamentary
People's
Revolutionary
Secular
Sister
Soviet

Important thinkers
Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
Niccolò Machiavelli
James Madison
Montesquieu
Polybius
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Algernon Sidney
Mary Wollstonecraft

History
Roman Republic
Gaṇasaṅgha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
5 October 1910 revolution
Chinese Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–1919
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
11 September 1922 Revolution
1935 Greek coup d'état attempt
Spanish Civil War
1946 Italian institutional referendum
Egyptian revolution of 1952
14 July Revolution
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
1969 Libyan coup d'état
Cambodian coup of 1970
Metapolitefsi
Iranian Revolution
1987 Fijian coups d'état
Nepalese Civil War

By country
Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

Scotland
Wales

United States

Related topics
Communitarianism
Criticism of monarchy
Egalitarianism
The Emperor's New Clothes
Liberalism
Monarchism
Primus inter pares

 Politics portalvte
According to republican theorists of freedom, like the historian Quentin Skinner[52][53] or the philosopher Philip Pettit,[54] one's liberty should not be viewed as the absence of interference in one's actions, but as non-domination. According to this view, which originates in the Roman Digest, to be a liber homo, a free man, means not being subject to another's arbitrary will, that is to say, dominated by another. They also cite Machiavelli who asserted that you must be a member of a free self-governing civil association, a republic, if you are to enjoy individual liberty.[55]
The predominance of this view of liberty among parliamentarians during the English Civil War resulted in the creation of the liberal concept of freedom as non-interference in Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan.[citation needed]

Socialism[edit]
Main article: Socialism
Part of a series onSocialism
HistoryOutline
Development
Age of the Enlightenment
French Revolution
Revolutions of 1848
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economics

Ideas
Calculation in kind
Collective ownership
Cooperative
Common ownership
Critique of political economy
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal liberty
Equal opportunity
Free association
Freed market
Industrial democracy
Input–output model
Internationalism
Labor-time calculation
Labour voucher
Material balance planning
Peer‑to‑peer economics
Production for use
Sharing economy
Social dividend
Social ownership
Socialism in one country
Socialist mode of production
To each according to his contribution/needs
Workers' self-management
Workplace democracy

Models
Socialist planned economy
Decentralized planning
Inclusive Democracy
OGAS
Project Cybersyn
Soviet-type
Market socialism
Lange model
Mutualism
Socialist market economy
Socialist-oriented market
Communal socialism
Participatory economics

Variants
21st-century
African
Arab
Agrarian
Anarchism
Authoritarian
Blanquism
Buddhist
Chinese
Christian
Communism
Democratic
Digital
Ethical
Ecological
Feminist
Fourierism
Free-market
Gandhian
Guild
Islamic
Jewish
Laissez-faire
Liberal
Libertarian
Marhaenism
Market
Marxism
Municipal
Nationalist
Nkrumaism
Owenism
Reformism
Religious
Revolutionary
Ricardian
Saint-Simonianism
Scientific
Sewer
Social democracy
State
Syndicalism
Third World
Utopian
Zionist

People
Gracchi Brothers
Mazdak
Wycliffe
Ball
More
Müntzer
Roshan
Jan van Leiden
Campanella
Winstanley
Bonnot
Morelly
Hall
d'Hupay
Maréchal
Godwin
Saint-Simon
Buonarroti
Owen
Fourier
Thompson
Hodgskin
Cabet
Buchez
Enfantin
Schulz
Leroux
Babeuf
Warren
Pecqueur
Sue
Sand
Blanqui
Ledru-Rollin
Spooner
Dézamy
Laponneraye
Considerant
Proudhon
Blanc
Andrews
Herzen
Büchner
Bakunin
Marx
Greene
Barmby
Engels
Wallace
Lavrov
Pi
Lassalle
Saltykov
Fanelli
Chernyshevsky
Tolstoy
Michel
Morris
Jones
Heywood
Bebel
Lorenzo
Mainwaring
Lafargue
Mikhaylovsky
Kropotkin
Tkachev
Carpenter
Sorel
Parsons
Bernstein
Bellamy
Iglesias
Parsons
Hong Xiuquan
León
Malatesta
Tucker
Kautsky
Wilde
Köster
Taylor
Debs
Pascoli
Shaw
Plekhanov
Ferrer
Jaurès
Dewey
Barone
Bain
Pouget
Kater
Wells
Pelloutier
Markievicz
Du Bois
Gorky
Connolly
Goldman
Gandhi
Landauer
Delesalle
Berkman
Luxemburg
Liebknecht
Blum
Russell
Pannekoek
Rocker
Czolgosz
Salvemini
Larkin
Griffuelhes
Lagardelle
De Ambris
Flores
Rühle
Recabarren
Witkop
Maurin
Einstein
Jouhaux
Trotsky
O'Casey
Keller
Tawney
Monatte
Schapiro
Pankhurst
Neurath
Attlee
Fitzgerald
Lukács
Pestaña
Korsch
Polanyi
Besnard
Peiró
Seguí
Vanzetti
Makhno
Bordiga
Cole
Gramsci
Sacco
Petrichenko
Tito
Souchy
Mayakovsky
Maximoff
Toller
Leval
Ibárruri
Nagy
Durruti
Pertini
Gerhardsen
Santillán
Day
Brecht
Marcuse
Orobón
James
García
Ascaso
Erlander
Dolgoff
Suslov
Orwell
Mattick
Guérin
Douglas
Montseny
Sartre
Ascaso
Senghor
Allende
van der Lubbe
Dunayevskaya
Kreisky
Goodman
Ellul
Pellicer
Camus
Gröndahl
Boggs
Mitterrand
Chartrand
Hobsbawm
Nasser
Mandela
Bookchin
Dubček
Zinn
Castoriadis
Gorz
Pallis
Thompson
Lefort
Ward
Manley
Benn
Che
Chomsky
King
Guattari
Gorbachev
Avrich
Debord
Briand
Negri
Craxi
Vaneigem
Hoffman
Bonanno
Scargill
Fotopoulos
Sanders
Federici
Wolff
Ali
Lula
Livingstone
Holloway
Albert
Žižek
Öcalan
Corbyn
Layton
West
Chávez
Hedges
Marcos
Morales
Graeber
Varoufakis
Crow

Organizations
International (International socialist organisations)
National (Socialist parties)

Related topics
Anarchism
Capitalism
Communist society
Criticism of capitalism
Criticism of socialism
Economic calculation problem
Economic system
French Left
Left-libertarianism
Libertarianism
List of socialist economists
Market abolitionism
Marxist philosophy
Nanosocialism
Progressivism
Socialism and LGBT rights
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist Party
Socialist state

Lists
Related lists
Category
By country
Socialists

 Socialism portal (WikiProject)
 Communism portal
 Organized Labour portalvte
Socialists view freedom as a concrete situation as opposed to a purely abstract ideal. Freedom is a state of being where individuals have agency to pursue their creative interests unhindered by coercive social relationships, specifically those they are forced to engage in as a requisite for survival under a given social system. Freedom thus requires both the material economic conditions that make freedom possible alongside social relationships and institutions conducive to freedom.[56]
The socialist conception of freedom is closely related to the socialist view of creativity and individuality. Influenced by Karl Marx's concept of alienated labor, socialists understand freedom to be the ability for an individual to engage in creative work in the absence of alienation, where "alienated labor" refers to work people are forced to perform and un-alienated work refers to individuals pursuing their own creative interests.[57]

Marxism[edit]
Main article: Marxism
For Karl Marx, meaningful freedom is only attainable in a communist society characterized by superabundance and free access. Such a social arrangement would eliminate the need for alienated labor and enable individuals to pursue their own creative interests, leaving them to develop and maximize their full potentialities. This goes alongside Marx's emphasis on the ability of socialism and communism progressively reducing the average length of the workday to expand the "realm of freedom", or discretionary free time, for each person.[58][59] Marx's notion of communist society and human freedom is thus radically individualistic.[60]

Anarchism[edit]
Main article: Anarchism
While many anarchists see freedom slightly differently, all oppose authority, including the authority of the state, of capitalism, and of nationalism.[61] For the Russian revolutionary anarchist Mikhail Bakunin, liberty did not mean an abstract ideal but a concrete reality based on the equal liberty of others. In a positive sense, liberty consists of "the fullest development of all the faculties and powers of every human being, by education, by scientific training, and by material prosperity." Such a conception of liberty is "eminently social, because it can only be realized in society," not in isolation. In a negative sense, liberty is "the revolt of the individual against all divine, collective, and individual authority."[62]

Cultural prerequisites[edit]
Some authors have suggested that a virtuous culture must exist as a prerequisite for liberty. Benjamin Franklin stated that "only a virtuous people are capable of freedom. As nations become corrupt and vicious, they have more need of masters."[63] Madison likewise declared: "To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea."[64] John Adams acknowledged: "Our constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is  wholly inadequate to the government of any other."[65]

Historical writings on liberty[edit]
John Locke (1689). Two Treatises of Government: In the Former, the False Principles, and Foundation of Sir Robert Filmer, and His Followers, Are Detected and Overthrown. the Latter Is an Essay Concerning the True Original, Extent, and End of Civil Government. London: Awnsham Churchill.
Frédéric Bastiat (1850). The Law. Paris: Guillaumin & Co.
John Stuart Mill (1859). On Liberty. London: John W Parker and Son.
James Fitzjames Stephen (1874). Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. London: Smith, Elder, & Co.
See also[edit]

Civil liberties
Cognitive liberty
Free will
Gratis versus Libre
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Liberty (personification)
List of freedom indices
Political freedom
Real freedom
Rule according to higher law

References[edit]


^ The Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2005, Merriam-Webster, Inc., ISBN 978-0-87779-636-7.

^ "liberty | Definition of liberty in English by Lexico Dictionaries". Lexico Dictionaries | English. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved 2019-07-22.

^ "liberty". Oxford English Dictionary. Freedom from arbitrary, despotic, or autocratic control; independence, esp. from a foreign power, monarchy, or dictatorship.

^ Oxford English Dictionary, liberty: "Chiefly in plural. Each of those social and political freedoms which are considered to be the entitlement of all members of a community; a civil liberty."

^ a b Charles Taylor, “What’s Wrong With Negative Liberty,” in Philosophy and the Human Sciences: Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 211–229.

^ Oxford English Dictionary, liberty: "The fact of not being controlled by or subject to fate; freedom of will."

^ Oxford English Dictionary, liberty: "Freedom from the bondage or dominating influence of sin, spiritual servitude, worldly ties."

^ a b Mill, J. S. (1869), "Chapter I: Introductory", On Liberty.

^ The Declaration of Independence, The World Almanac, 2016, ISBN 978-1-60057-201-2.

^ "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity – France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, DC".

^ Marcus Aurelius, "Meditations", Book I, Wordsworth Classics of World Literature, ISBN 1-85326-486-5

^ Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English, ISR, 2009, p. 76

^ Westbrooks, Logan Hart (2008) "Personal Freedom" p. 134 In Owens, William (compiler) (2008) Freedom: Keys to Freedom from Twenty-one National Leaders Main Street Publications, Memphis, Tennessee, pp. 3–38, ISBN 978-0-9801152-0-8

^ Metaphilosoph: Motives for Philosophizing Debunking and Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations. Kelly Dean Jolley. pp. 262–270[ISBN missing]

^ Rodriguez, Junius P. (2007) The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery: A–K; Vol. II, L–Z,[page needed]

^ Mogens Herman Hansen, 2010, Democratic Freedom and the Concept of Freedom in Plato and Aristotle

^ Baldissone, Riccardo (2018). Farewell to Freedom: A Western Genealogy of Liberty. doi:10.16997/book15. ISBN 978-1911534600. S2CID 158916040.

^ Aristotle, Politics 6.2

^ Mikalson, Jon (2009). Ancient Greek Religion (2nd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-4051-8177-8.

^ Arthur Henry Robertson, John Graham Merrills (1996). Human Rights in the World: An Introduction to the Study of the International Protection of Human Rights. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-4923-7.[page needed]

^ Amartya Sen (1997). Human Rights and Asian Values. ISBN 0-87641-151-0.[page needed]

^ Arrian, Indica:
"This also is remarkable in India, that all Indians are free, and no Indian at all is a slave. In this the Indians agree with the Lacedaemonians. Yet the Lacedaemonians have Helots for slaves, who perform the duties of slaves; but the Indians have no slaves at all, much less is any Indian a slave."

^ Hermann Kulke, Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A history of India. Routledge. p. 66. ISBN 0-415-32920-5

^ "The History of Human Rights". Liberty. 2010-07-20. Archived from the original on 2015-03-24. Retrieved 17 August 2015.

^ Bracton, Henry de (1878). "De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae". Retrieved 4 April 2019.

^ Danziger & Gillingham 2004, p. 278.

^ Breay 2010, p. 48.

^ "Bill of Rights". British Library. Retrieved 23 June 2015.

^ Mill, John Stuart (1859). On Liberty (2nd ed.). London: John W.Parker & Son. p. 1. editions:HMraC_Owoi8C.

^ Mill, John Stuart (1864). On Liberty (3rd ed.). London: Longman, Green, Longman Roberts & Green.

^ Carter, Ian (5 March 2012). "Positive and Negative Liberty". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 16 August 2015.

^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Final authorized text ed.). The British Library. 1952. Retrieved 16 August 2015.

^ The Constitution of the United States of America, The World Almanac and book of facts (2012), pp. 485–486, Amendment XIV "Citizenship Rights not to be abridged.", Amendment XV "Race no bar to voting rights.", Amendment XIX, "Giving nationwide suffrage to women.". World Almanac Books, ISBN 978-1-60057-147-3.

^ Griswold v. Connecticut. 381 U.S. 479 (1965) Decided June 7, 1965

^ "A Culture of Liberty". The Huffington Post. 21 July 2009.

^ Iain McLean and Alistair McMillan, Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, 3rd edition, Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5.

^ Capitol Reader (2013). Summary of Give Us Liberty: A Tea Party Manifesto – Dick Armey and Matt Kibbe. Primento. pp. 9–10. ISBN 978-2-511-00084-7.Haidt, Jonathan (16 October 2010). "What the Tea Partiers Really Want". Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. Retrieved 17 March 2015.Ronald P. Formisano (2012). The Tea Party: A Brief History. JHU Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-1-4214-0596-4.

^ "About the Libertarian Party". Retrieved May 16, 2022.

^ "Is the Free State Project a Better Idea than the Libertarian Party?". July 30, 2021.

^ "The Free State Project Grows Up". June 2013.

^ "What is the Mises Institute". Retrieved May 16, 2022.

^ Clark, J.C.D., Edmund Burke: Reflections on the Revolution in France: a Critical Edition, 2001, Stanford. pp. 66–67, ISBN 0-8047-3923-4.

^ Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5.[page needed]

^ John Gray, Two Faces of Liberalism, The New Press, 1990, ISBN 1-56584-589-7.[page needed]

^ William Safire, Safire's Political Dictionary, "Liberalism takes criticism from both the right and the left,...", p. 388, Oxford University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-534334-2.

^ "Libertarianism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2014-05-20. libertarianism, political philosophy that takes individual liberty to be the primary political value

^ David Kelley, "Life, liberty, and property." Social Philosophy and Policy (1984) 1#2 pp. 108–118.

^ "For Libertarians, There Is Only One Fundamental Right". 29 March 2015.

^ ""The Morality of Libertarianism"". 1 October 2015.

^ "The Non-Aggression Axiom of Libertarianism". Lew Rockwell. Retrieved 2016-03-22.

^ """Good ideas don't require force"". 4 July 2021.

^ Quentin Skinner, contributor and co-editor, Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, Volume I: Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-521-67235-1[page needed]

^ Quentil Skinner, contributor and co-editor, Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, Volume II:  The Values of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-521-67234-4[page needed]

^ Philip Pettit, Republicanism: a theory of freedom and government, 1997

^ The Foundations of Modern Political Thought: Volume 1, The Renaissance, By Quentin Skinner

^ Bhargava, Rajeev (2008). Political Theory: An Introduction. Pearson Education India. p. 255. Genuine freedom as Marx described it, would become possible only when life activity was no longer constrained by the requirements of production or by the limitations of material scarcity…Thus, in the socialist view, freedom is not an abstract ideal but a concrete situation that ensues only when certain conditions of interaction between man and nature (material conditions), and man and other men (social relations) are fulfilled.

^ Goodwin, Barbara (2007). Using Political Ideas. Wiley. pp. 107–109. ISBN 978-0-470-02552-9. Socialists consider the pleasures of creation equal, if not superior, to those of acquisition and consumption, hence the importance of work in socialist society.  Whereas the capitalist/Calvinist work ethic applauds the moral virtue of hard work, idealistic socialists emphasize the joy. This vision of 'creative man', Homo Faber, has consequences for their view of freedom...Socialist freedom is the freedom to unfold and develop one's potential, especially through unalienated work.

^ Wood, John Cunningham (1996). Karl Marx's Economics: Critical Assessments I. Routledge. pp. 248–249. ISBN 978-0-415-08714-8. Affluence and increased provision of free goods would reduce alienation in the work process and, in combination with (1), the alienation of man's 'species-life'. Greater leisure would create opportunities for creative and artistic activity outside of work.

^ Peffer, Rodney G. (2014). Marxism, Morality, and Social Justice. Princeton University Press. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-691-60888-4. Marx believed the reduction of necessary labor time to be, evaluatively speaking, an absolute necessity. He claims that real wealth is the developed productive force of all individuals. It is no longer the labor time but the disposable time that is the measure of wealth.

^ Karl Marx on Equality, by Woods, Allen. http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/docs/IO/19808/Allen-Wood-Marx-on-Equality.pdf https://web.archive.org/web/20151109182602/http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/docs/IO/19808/Allen-Wood-Marx-on-Equality.pdf: "A society that has transcended class antagonisms, therefore, would not be one in which some truly universal interest at last reigns, to which individual interests must be sacrificed. It would instead be a society in which individuals freely act as the truly human individuals they are. Marx's radical communism was, in this way, also radically individualistic."

^ The Routledge companion to social and political philosophy. Gaus, Gerald F., D'Agostino, Fred. New York: Routledge. 2013. ISBN 978-0415874564. OCLC 707965867.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)[page needed]

^ "Works of Mikhail Bakunin 1871". www.marxists.org. Retrieved 2019-10-16.

^ The Writings of Benjamin Franklin 569 (Albert H. Smyth ed., 1970).

^ The Writings of James Madison 223 (Gaillard Hunt ed., 1904).

^ John R. Howe, Jr., The Changing Political Thought of John Adams 165 (1966) (quoting from John Adams' "Reply to the Massachusetts Militia," Oct. 11, 1789).


Bibliography[edit]
Breay, Claire (2010). Magna Carta: Manuscripts and Myths. London: The British Library. ISBN 978-0-7123-5833-0.
Breay, Claire; Harrison, Julian, eds. (2015). Magna Carta: Law, Liberty, Legacy. London: The British Library. ISBN 978-0-7123-5764-7.
Danziger, Danny; Gillingham, John (2004). 1215: The Year of Magna Carta. Hodder Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0-340-82475-7.
External links[edit]
Library resources about  Liberty 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries

 Media related to Liberty at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Liberty at Wikiquote
vteLibertyConcepts
Cognitive liberty
Moral responsibility
Personification of Liberty
Libertas
Negative liberty
Positive liberty
Rights
Self-ownership
Social liberty
Free will
By type
Academic
Civil
Economic
Intellectual
Morphological
Political
By right
Assembly
Association
Choice
Education
Gun
Information
Life
Movement
Press
Property
Religion
Public speech
Thought

vteSubstantive human rightsPlease note: What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rightsCivil and political
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
LGBT rights
Liberty
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right to resist
Right of self-defense
Right to truth
Security of person
Suffrage
Economic, socialand cultural
Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to a healthy environment
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right to rest and leisure
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Sexual andreproductive
Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Sexual and reproductive health
Right to sexuality
Violations
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
War crimes

vteEthicsNormative ethics
Consequentialism
Utilitarianism
Deontology
Kantian ethics
Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics
Eudaimonia
Applied ethics
Animal ethics
Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Engineering ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Machine ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of artificial intelligence
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology
Ethics of terraforming
Ethics of uncertain sentience
Meta-ethics
Cognitivism
Moral realism
Ethical naturalism
Ethical non-naturalism
Ethical subjectivism
Ideal observer theory
Divine command theory
Error theory
Non-cognitivism
Emotivism
Expressivism
Quasi-realism
Universal prescriptivism
Moral universalism
Value monism – Value pluralism
Moral constructivism
Moral relativism
Moral nihilism
Moral rationalism
Ethical intuitionism
Moral skepticism
Concepts  (index)
Autonomy
Axiology
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Free will
Good and evil
Good
Evil
Happiness
Ideal
Immorality
Justice
Liberty
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
Ethicist philosophers
Laozi
Socrates
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
Related articles
Casuistry
Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Moral psychology
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Population ethics
Social philosophy
Suffering-focused ethics

 Category

Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberty&oldid=1113921085"
Categories: Concepts in ethicsConcepts in metaphysicsFree willHappinessLibertarian theoryLiberty symbolsPolitical conceptsSocial conceptsVirtueHidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNsWikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022CS1 maint: othersArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2022Articles containing Latin-language textArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛÆngliscالعربيةܐܪܡܝܐAsturianuAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBamanankanবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)Bikol CentralБългарскиབོད་ཡིགBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaИронIsiXhosaItalianoעבריתKabɩyɛქართულიҚазақшаKriyòl gwiyannenLatinaLatviešuLietuviųMagyarМакедонскиBahasa MelayuMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМокшеньNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپښتوPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийSarduShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSoomaaligaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்ไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtVõro吴语ייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 3 October 2022, at 21:47 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










