



Marriage - Wikipedia










































Marriage

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Culturally recognised union between people
For other uses, see Marriage (disambiguation).


"Married" and "Matrimony" redirect here. For other uses, see Married (disambiguation) and Matrimony (disambiguation).


 The ancient Germanic married couple Arminius and Thusnelda engaged in a romantic encounter. Created in 1884 by Johannes Gehrts, the art piece depicts Arminius saying farewell to his beloved wife before he goes off into battle.
Part of a series on theAnthropology of kinship
Basic concepts
Affinity
Consanguinity
Marriage
Incest taboo
Endogamy
Exogamy
Moiety
Monogamy
Polygyny
Polygamy
Concubinage
Polyandry
Bride price
Bride service
Dowry
Parallel / cross cousins
Cousin marriage
Levirate
Sororate
Ghost marriage
Joking relationship
Family
Lineage
Clan
Cohabitation
Fictive / Milk / Nurture kinship

Descent

Cognatic / Bilateral
Matrilateral
Lineal
Collateral
House society
Avunculate

Linealities
Ambilineality
Unilineality
Matrilineality
Patrilineality


Household forms and residence
Extended
Matrifocal
Matrilocal
Neolocal
Nuclear
Patrilocal


Terminology
Kinship terminology
Classificatory terminologies

By group

Iroquois
Crow
Omaha
Eskimo (Inuit)
Hawaiian
Sudanese
Dravidian (debated)



Case studies

Australian Aboriginal
Burmese
Chinese
Philippine
Polyandry in Tibet / in India


Feminist

Chambri
Mosuo


Sexuality
Coming of Age in Samoa


Major theorists
Diane Bell
Tom Boellstorff
Jack Goody
Gilbert Herdt
Don Kulick
Roger Lancaster
Louise Lamphere
Eleanor Leacock
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Bronisław Malinowski
Margaret Mead
Henrietta Moore
Lewis H. Morgan
Stephen O. Murray
Michelle Rosaldo
David M. Schneider
Marilyn Strathern


Related articles
Alliance theory
Matrilineal / matrilocal societies
Feminist anthropology
Sex and Repression in Savage Society
Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship

Social anthropologyCultural anthropologyvte
Relationships(Outline)
Types
Genetic or adoptive
Kinship
Family
Parent
father
mother
Grandparent
Sibling
Cousin

By marriage

Spouse
Husband
Wife
Open marriage


Polygamy
Polyandry
Polygyny

Group marriage
Mixed-orientation

Partner(s)

Significant other
Boyfriend
Girlfriend
Cohabitation
Same-sex
Life partner
Friendship (romantic / cross-sex / zone)

Intimate and sexual

Casual
Monogamy
Non-monogamy
Mutual monogamy
Polyamory
Polyfidelity


Cicisbeo
Concubinage
Courtesan
Mistress




Activities
Bonding
Courtship
Dating
Engagement
Bachelor's Day
Mating
Meet market
Romance
Singles event
Wedding

Endings
Breakup
Legal/marital separation
Annulment
Divorce
Widowhood

Emotions and feelings
Affinity
Attachment
Intimacy
Jealousy
Limerence
Love
Platonic
Unconditional
Passion
Sexuality

Practices
Bride price
dower
dowry
service
Hypergamy
Infidelity
Sexual activity
Transgression
Repression

Abuse
Child
Dating
Domestic
Elderly
Narcissistic parent
Power and control
Stalking
vte
 Swedish royal wedding clothes from 1766 at Livrustkammaren in Stockholm
 Indonesian wedding
 Nepali wedding
 Islamic wedding
Marriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a culturally and often legally recognized union between people called spouses. It establishes rights and obligations between them, as well as between them and their children, and between them and their in-laws.[1] It is considered a cultural universal,[citation needed] but the definition of marriage varies between cultures and religions, and over time. Typically, it is an institution in which interpersonal relationships, usually sexual, are acknowledged or sanctioned. In some cultures, marriage is recommended or considered to be compulsory before pursuing any sexual activity. A marriage ceremony is called a wedding.
Individuals may marry for several reasons, including legal, social, libidinal, emotional, financial, spiritual, and religious purposes. Whom they marry may be influenced by gender, socially determined rules of incest, prescriptive marriage rules, parental choice, and individual desire. In some areas of the world, arranged marriage, child marriage, polygamy, and forced marriage are practiced. In other areas, such practices are outlawed to preserve women's rights or children's rights (both female and male) or as a result of international law.[2] In some parts of the world, marriage has historically restricted the rights of women, who are (or were) considered the property of the husband. Around the world, primarily in developed democracies, there has been a general trend towards ensuring equal rights for women within marriage (including abolishing coverture, liberalizing divorce laws, and reforming reproductive and sexual rights) and legally recognizing the marriages of interfaith, interracial/interethnic/inter-caste and same-sex couples. Controversies continue regarding the legal status of married women, leniency towards violence within marriage, customs such as dowry and bride price, forced marriage, marriageable age, and criminalization of premarital and extramarital sex. Female age at marriage has proven to be a strong indicator for female autonomy and is continuously used by economic history research.[3]
Marriage can be recognized by a state, an organization, a religious authority, a tribal group, a local community, or peers. It is often viewed as a contract. A religious marriage is performed by a religious institution to recognize and create the rights and obligations intrinsic to matrimony in that religion. Religious marriage is known variously as sacramental marriage in Catholicism, nikah in Islam, nissuin in Judaism, and various other names in other faith traditions, each with their own constraints as to what constitutes, and who can enter into, a valid religious marriage.

Contents

1 Etymology
2 Definitions

2.1 Relation recognized by custom or law
2.2 Legitimacy of offspring
2.3 Collection of rights
2.4 Right of sexual access


3 Types

3.1 Monogamy

3.1.1 Serial monogamy


3.2 Polygamy

3.2.1 Polygyny
3.2.2 Polyandry
3.2.3 Plural marriage


3.3 Child marriage
3.4 Same-sex and third-gender marriages
3.5 Temporary marriages
3.6 Cohabitation


4 Partner selection

4.1 Age difference
4.2 Social status and wealth
4.3 The incest taboo, exogamy and endogamy
4.4 Prescriptive marriage
4.5 Forced marriage


5 Economic considerations

5.1 Dowry
5.2 Dower
5.3 Bridewealth
5.4 Taxation


6 Post-marital residence
7 Law

7.1 Rights and obligations
7.2 Property regime
7.3 Restrictions

7.3.1 Age
7.3.2 Kinship
7.3.3 Race
7.3.4 Sex/gender
7.3.5 Number of spouses


7.4 State recognition

7.4.1 Marriage license, civil ceremony and registration
7.4.2 Common-law marriage
7.4.3 Civil unions
7.4.4 "Marriage of convenience"


7.5 Contemporary legal and human rights criticisms of marriage

7.5.1 Power and gender roles
7.5.2 Extra-marital sex
7.5.3 Sexual violence
7.5.4 Laws, human rights and gender status
7.5.5 Right and ability to divorce
7.5.6 Dowry and bridewealth
7.5.7 Children born outside marriage




8 Religion

8.1 Abrahamic religions

8.1.1 Baháʼí Faith
8.1.2 Christianity

8.1.2.1 Christian attitudes to same-sex marriage


8.1.3 Islam
8.1.4 Judaism


8.2 Hinduism
8.3 Buddhism
8.4 Sikhism
8.5 Wicca


9 Health and income

9.1 Health


10 Divorce and annulment
11 History

11.1 Ancient world

11.1.1 Ancient Near East
11.1.2 Classical Greece and Rome
11.1.3 Germanic tribes


11.2 Europe
11.3 China


12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links


Etymology
The word "marriage" derives from Middle English mariage, which first appears in 1250–1300 CE. This, in turn, is derived from Old French, marier (to marry), and ultimately Latin, marītāre, meaning to provide with a husband or wife and marītāri meaning to get married. The adjective marīt-us -a, -um meaning matrimonial or nuptial could also be used in the masculine form as a noun for "husband" and in the feminine form for "wife".[4] The related word "matrimony" derives from the Old French word matremoine, which appears around 1300 CE and ultimately derives from Latin mātrimōnium, which combines the two concepts: mater meaning "mother" and the suffix -monium signifying "action, state, or condition".[5]

Definitions
Anthropologists have proposed several competing definitions of marriage in an attempt to encompass the wide variety of marital practices observed across cultures.[6] Even within Western culture, "definitions of marriage have careened from one extreme to another and everywhere in between" (as Evan Gerstmann has put it).[7]

Relation recognized by custom or law
In The History of Human Marriage (1891), Edvard Westermarck defined marriage as "a more or less durable connection between male and female lasting beyond the mere act of propagation till after the birth of the offspring."[8] In The Future of Marriage in Western Civilization (1936), he rejected his earlier definition, instead provisionally defining marriage as "a relation of one or more men to one or more women that is recognized by custom or law".[9]

Legitimacy of offspring
The anthropological handbook Notes and Queries (1951) defined marriage as "a union between a man and a woman such that children born to the woman are the recognized legitimate offspring of both partners."[10] In recognition of a practice by the Nuer people of Sudan allowing women to act as a husband in certain circumstances (the ghost marriage), Kathleen Gough suggested modifying this to "a woman and one or more other persons."[11]
In an analysis of marriage among the Nayar, a polyandrous society in India, Gough found that the group lacked a husband role in the conventional sense; that unitary role in the west was divided between a non-resident "social father" of the woman's children, and her lovers who were the actual procreators. None of these men had legal rights to the woman's child. This forced Gough to disregard sexual access as a key element of marriage and to define it in terms of legitimacy of offspring alone: marriage is "a relationship established between a woman and one or more other persons, which provides a child born to the woman under circumstances not prohibited by the rules of relationship, is accorded full birth-status rights common to normal members of his society or social stratum."[12]
Economic anthropologist Duran Bell has criticized the legitimacy-based definition on the basis that some societies do not require marriage for legitimacy. He argued that a legitimacy-based definition of marriage is circular in societies where illegitimacy has no other legal or social implications for a child other than the mother being unmarried.[6]

Collection of rights
Edmund Leach criticized Gough's definition for being too restrictive in terms of recognized legitimate offspring and suggested that marriage be viewed in terms of the different types of rights it serves to establish. In a 1955 article in Man, Leach argued that no one definition of marriage applied to all cultures. He offered a list of ten rights associated with marriage, including sexual monopoly and rights with respect to children, with specific rights differing across cultures. Those rights, according to Leach, included:

"To establish a legal father of a woman's children.
To establish a legal mother of a man's children.
To give the husband a monopoly in the wife's sexuality.
To give the wife a monopoly in the husband's sexuality.
To give the husband partial or monopolistic rights to the wife's domestic and other labor services.
To give the wife partial or monopolistic rights to the husband's domestic and other labor services.
To give the husband partial or total control over property belonging or potentially accruing to the wife.
To give the wife partial or total control over property belonging or potentially accruing to the husband.
To establish a joint fund of property – a partnership – for the benefit of the children of the marriage.
To establish a socially significant 'relationship of affinity' between the husband and his wife's brothers."[13]
Right of sexual access
In a 1997 article in Current Anthropology, Duran Bell describes marriage as "a relationship between one or more men (male or female) in severalty to one or more women that provides those men with a demand-right of sexual access within a domestic group and identifies women who bear the obligation of yielding to the demands of those specific men." In referring to "men in severalty", Bell is referring to corporate kin groups such as lineages which, in having paid bride price, retain a right in a woman's offspring even if her husband (a lineage member) deceases (Levirate marriage). In referring to "men (male or female)", Bell is referring to women within the lineage who may stand in as the "social fathers" of the wife's children born of other lovers. (See Nuer "ghost marriage".)[6]

Types
Main article: Types of marriages
Monogamy
 Ancient Sumerian depiction of the marriage of Inanna and Dumuzid[14]
Main article: Monogamy
Monogamy is a form of marriage in which an individual has only one spouse during their lifetime or at any one time (serial monogamy).
Anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas found a strong correlation between intensive plough agriculture, dowry and monogamy. This pattern was found in a broad swath of Eurasian societies from Japan to Ireland. The majority of Sub-Saharan African societies that practice extensive hoe agriculture, in contrast, show a correlation between "bride price" and polygamy.[15] A further study drawing on the Ethnographic Atlas showed a statistical correlation between increasing size of the society, the belief in "high gods" to support human morality, and monogamy.[16]
In the countries which do not permit polygamy, a person who marries in one of those countries a person while still being lawfully married to another commits the crime of bigamy. In all cases, the second marriage is considered legally null and void. Besides the second and subsequent marriages being void, the bigamist is also liable to other penalties, which also vary between jurisdictions.

Serial monogamy
Governments that support monogamy may allow easy divorce. In a number of Western countries, divorce rates approach 50%. Those who remarry do so usually no more than three times.[17] Divorce and remarriage can thus result in "serial monogamy", i.e. having multiple marriages but only one legal spouse at a time. This can be interpreted as a form of plural mating, as are those societies dominated by female-headed families in the Caribbean, Mauritius and Brazil where there is frequent rotation of unmarried partners. In all, these account for 16 to 24% of the "monogamous" category.[18]
Serial monogamy creates a new kind of relative, the "ex-". The "ex-wife", for example, may remain an active part of her "ex-husband's" or "ex-wife's" life, as they may be tied together by transfers of resources (alimony, child support), or shared child custody. Bob Simpson notes that in the British case, serial monogamy creates an "extended family" – a number of households tied together in this way, including mobile children (possible exes may include an ex-wife, an ex-brother-in-law, etc., but not an "ex-child"). These "unclear families" do not fit the mould of the monogamous nuclear family. As a series of connected households, they come to resemble the polygynous model of separate households maintained by mothers with children, tied by a male to whom they are married or divorced.[19]

Polygamy
Main article: Polygamy
Polygamy is a marriage which includes more than two spouses.[20] When a man is married to more than one wife at a time, the relationship is called polygyny, and there is no marriage bond between the wives; and when a woman is married to more than one husband at a time, it is called polyandry, and there is no marriage bond between the husbands. If a marriage includes multiple husbands or wives, it can be called group marriage.[20]
A molecular genetic study of global human genetic diversity argued that sexual polygyny was typical of human reproductive patterns until the shift to sedentary farming communities approximately 10,000 to 5,000 years ago in Europe and Asia, and more recently in Africa and the Americas.[21] As noted above, Anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas found that the majority of Sub-Saharan African societies that practice extensive hoe agriculture show a correlation between "Bride price" and polygamy.[15] A survey of other cross-cultural samples has confirmed that the absence of the plough was the only predictor of polygamy, although other factors such as high male mortality in warfare (in non-state societies) and pathogen stress (in state societies) had some impact.[22]
Marriages are classified according to the number of legal spouses an individual has. The suffix "-gamy" refers specifically to the number of spouses, as in bi-gamy (two spouses, generally illegal in most nations), and poly-gamy (more than one spouse).
Societies show variable acceptance of polygamy as a cultural ideal and practice. According to the Ethnographic Atlas, of 1,231 societies noted, 186 were monogamous; 453 had occasional polygyny; 588 had more frequent polygyny, and 4 had polyandry.[23] However, as Miriam Zeitzen writes, social tolerance for polygamy is different from the practice of polygamy, since it requires wealth to establish multiple households for multiple wives. The actual practice of polygamy in a tolerant society may actually be low, with the majority of aspirant polygamists practicing monogamous marriage. Tracking the occurrence of polygamy is further complicated in jurisdictions where it has been banned, but continues to be practiced (de facto polygamy).[24]
Zeitzen also notes that Western perceptions of African society and marriage patterns are biased by "contradictory concerns of nostalgia for traditional African culture versus critique of polygamy as oppressive to women or detrimental to development."[24] Polygamy has been condemned as being a form of human rights abuse, with concerns arising over domestic abuse, forced marriage, and neglect. The vast majority of the world's countries, including virtually all of the world's developed nations, do not permit polygamy. There have been calls[by whom?] for the abolition of polygamy in developing countries.[citation needed]

Polygyny
Main article: Polygyny
See also: Concubinage
Polygyny usually grants wives equal status, although the husband may have personal preferences. One type of de facto polygyny is concubinage, where only one woman gets a wife's rights and status, while other women remain legal house mistresses.
Although a society may be classified as polygynous, not all marriages in it necessarily are; monogamous marriages may in fact predominate. It is to this flexibility that Anthropologist Robin Fox attributes its success as a social support system: "This has often meant – given the imbalance in the sex ratios, the higher male infant mortality, the shorter life span of males, the loss of males in wartime, etc. – that often women were left without financial support from husbands. To correct this condition, females had to be killed at birth, remain single, become prostitutes, or be siphoned off into celibate religious orders. Polygynous systems have the advantage that they can promise, as did the Mormons, a home and family for every woman."[25]
Nonetheless, polygyny is a gender issue which offers men asymmetrical benefits. In some cases, there is a large age discrepancy (as much as a generation) between a man and his youngest wife, compounding the power differential between the two. Tensions not only exist between genders, but also within genders; senior and junior men compete for wives, and senior and junior wives in the same household may experience radically different life conditions, and internal hierarchy. Several studies have suggested that the wive's relationship with other women, including co-wives and husband's female kin, are more critical relationships than that with her husband for her productive, reproductive and personal achievement.[26] In some societies, the co-wives are relatives, usually sisters, a practice called sororal polygyny; the pre-existing relationship between the co-wives is thought to decrease potential tensions within the marriage.[27]
Fox argues that "the major difference between polygyny and monogamy could be stated thus: while plural mating occurs in both systems, under polygyny several unions may be recognized as being legal marriages while under monogamy only one of the unions is so recognized. Often, however, it is difficult to draw a hard and fast line between the two."[28]
As polygamy in Africa is increasingly subject to legal limitations, a variant form of de facto (as opposed to legal or de jure) polygyny is being practiced in urban centers. Although it does not involve multiple (now illegal) formal marriages, the domestic and personal arrangements follow old polygynous patterns. The de facto form of polygyny is found in other parts of the world as well (including some Mormon sects and Muslim families in the United States).[29]
In some societies such as the Lovedu of South Africa, or the Nuer of the Sudan, aristocratic women may become female 'husbands.' In the Lovedu case, this female husband may take a number of polygamous wives. This is not a lesbian relationship, but a means of legitimately expanding a royal lineage by attaching these wives' children to it. The relationships are considered polygynous, not polyandrous, because the female husband is in fact assuming masculine gendered political roles.[27]
Religious groups have differing views on the legitimacy of polygyny. It is allowed in Islam and Confucianism. Judaism and Christianity have mentioned practices involving polygyny in the past, however, outright religious acceptance of such practices was not addressed until its rejection in later passages. They do explicitly prohibit polygyny today.

Polyandry
Main articles: Polyandry, Polyandry in Tibet, and Polyandry in India
Polyandry is notably more rare than polygyny, though less rare than the figure commonly cited in the Ethnographic Atlas (1980) which listed only those polyandrous societies found in the Himalayan Mountains. More recent studies have found 53 societies outside the 28 found in the Himalayans which practice polyandry.[30] It is most common in egalitarian societies marked by high male mortality or male absenteeism. It is associated with partible paternity, the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father.[31]
The explanation for polyandry in the Himalayan Mountains is related to the scarcity of land; the marriage of all brothers in a family to the same wife (fraternal polyandry) allows family land to remain intact and undivided. If every brother married separately and had children, family land would be split into unsustainable small plots. In Europe, this was prevented through the social practice of impartible inheritance (the dis-inheriting of most siblings, some of whom went on to become celibate monks and priests).[32]

Plural marriage
Group marriage (also known as multi-lateral marriage) is a form of polyamory in which more than two persons form a family unit, with all the members of the group marriage being considered to be married to all the other members of the group marriage, and all members of the marriage share parental responsibility for any children arising from the marriage.[33] No country legally condones group marriages, neither under the law nor as a common law marriage, but historically it has been practiced by some cultures of Polynesia, Asia, Papua New Guinea and the Americas – as well as in some intentional communities and alternative subcultures such as the Oneida Perfectionists in up-state New York. Of the 250 societies reported by the American anthropologist George Murdock in 1949, only the Kaingang of Brazil had any group marriages at all.[34]

Child marriage
Main article: Child marriage
A child marriage is a marriage where one or both spouses are under the age of 18.[35][36] It is related to child betrothal and teenage pregnancy.
Child marriage was common throughout history, even up until the 1900s in the United States, where in 1880 CE, in the state of Delaware, the age of consent for marriage was 7 years old.[37] Still, in 2017, over half of the 50 United States have no explicit minimum age to marry and several states set the age as low as 14.[38] Today it is condemned by international human rights organizations.[39][40] Child marriages are often arranged between the families of the future bride and groom, sometimes as soon as the girl is born.[39] However, in the late 1800s in England and the United States, feminist activists began calling for raised age of consent laws, which was eventually handled in the 1920s, having been raised to 16–18.[41]
Child marriages can also occur in the context of bride kidnapping.[39]
In the year 1552 CE, John Somerford and Jane Somerford Brereton were both married at the ages of 3 and 2, respectively. Twelve years later, in 1564, John filed for divorce.[42]
While child marriage is observed for both boys and girls, the overwhelming majority of child spouses are girls.[43] In many cases, only one marriage-partner is a child, usually the female, due to the importance placed upon female virginity.[39] Causes of child marriage include poverty, bride price, dowry, laws that allow child marriages, religious and social pressures, regional customs, fear of remaining unmarried, and perceived inability of women to work for money.
Today, child marriages are widespread in parts of the world; being most common in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, with more than half of the girls in some countries in those regions being married before 18.[39] The incidence of child marriage has been falling in most parts of the world. In developed countries, child marriage is outlawed or restricted.
Girls who marry before 18 are at greater risk of becoming victims of domestic violence, than those who marry later, especially when they are married to a much older man.[40]

Same-sex and third-gender marriages
Main articles: Same-sex marriage and History of same-sex unions
Several kinds of same-sex marriages have been documented in Indigenous and lineage-based cultures. In the Americas, We'wha (Zuni), was a lhamana (male individuals who, at least some of the time, dress and live in the roles usually filled by women in that culture); a respected artist, We'wha served as an emissary of the Zuni to Washington, where he met President Grover Cleveland.[44] We'wha had at least one husband who was generally recognized as such.[45]
While it is a relatively new practice to grant same-sex couples the same form of legal marital recognition as commonly granted to mixed-sex couples, there is some history of recorded same-sex unions around the world.[46] Ancient Greek same-sex relationships were like modern companionate marriages, unlike their different-sex marriages in which the spouses had few emotional ties, and the husband had freedom to engage in outside sexual liaisons. The Codex Theodosianus (C. Th. 9.7.3) issued in 438 CE imposed severe penalties or death on same-sex relationships,[47] but the exact intent of the law and its relation to social practice is unclear, as only a few examples of same-sex relationships in that culture exist.[48] Same-sex unions were celebrated in some regions of China, such as Fujian.[49] Possibly the earliest documented same-sex wedding in Latin Christendom occurred in Rome, Italy, at the San Giovanni a Porta Latina basilica in 1581.[50]

Temporary marriages
Several cultures have practised temporary and conditional marriages. Examples include the Celtic practice of handfasting and fixed-term marriages in the Muslim community. Pre-Islamic Arabs practiced a form of temporary marriage that carries on today in the practice of Nikah mut‘ah, a fixed-term marriage contract. The Islamic prophet Muhammad sanctioned a temporary marriage – sigheh in Iran and muta'a in Iraq – which can provide a legitimizing cover for sex workers.[51] The same forms of temporary marriage have been used in Egypt, Lebanon and Iran to make the donation of a human ova legal for in vitro fertilisation; a woman cannot, however, use this kind of marriage to obtain a sperm donation.[52] Muslim controversies related to Nikah Mut'ah have resulted in the practice being confined mostly to Shi'ite communities. The matrilineal Mosuo of China practice what they call "walking marriage".

Cohabitation
See also: Cohabitation and Common-law marriage
In some jurisdictions cohabitation, in certain circumstances, may constitute a common-law marriage, an unregistered partnership, or otherwise provide the unmarried partners with various rights and responsibilities; and in some countries, the laws recognize cohabitation in lieu of institutional marriage for taxation and social security benefits. This is the case, for example, in Australia.[53] Cohabitation may be an option pursued as a form of resistance to traditional institutionalized marriage. However, in this context, some nations reserve the right to define the relationship as marital, or otherwise to regulate the relation, even if the relation has not been registered with the state or a religious institution.[54]
Conversely, institutionalized marriages may not involve cohabitation. In some cases, couples living together do not wish to be recognized as married. This may occur because pension or alimony rights are adversely affected; because of taxation considerations; because of immigration issues, or for other reasons. Such marriages have also been increasingly common in Beijing. Guo Jianmei, director of the center for women's studies at Beijing University, told a Newsday correspondent, "Walking marriages reflect sweeping changes in Chinese society." A "walking marriage" refers to a type of temporary marriage formed by the Mosuo of China, in which male partners live elsewhere and make nightly visits.[55] A similar arrangement in Saudi Arabia, called misyar marriage, also involves the husband and wife living separately but meeting regularly.[56]

Partner selection
 In an 1828 "Wife Wanted" advertisement, an Englishman claiming a "great taste for building" pledges to apply a prospective wife's dowry-like £1000+ to build property that will be "settled on her for life".[57]
There is wide cross-cultural variation in the social rules governing the selection of a partner for marriage. There is variation in the degree to which partner selection is an individual decision by the partners or a collective decision by the partners' kin groups, and there is variation in the rules regulating which partners are valid choices.
The United Nations World Fertility Report of 2003 reports that 89% of all people get married before age forty-nine.[58] The percent of women and men who marry before age forty-nine drops to nearly 50% in some nations and reaches near 100% in other nations.[59]
In other cultures with less strict rules governing the groups from which a partner can be chosen the selection of a marriage partner may involve either the couple going through a selection process of courtship or the marriage may be arranged by the couple's parents or an outside party, a matchmaker.

Age difference
Main article: Age disparity in sexual relationships
See also: Social stigma
Some people want to marry a person that is older or younger than them. This may impact marital stability[60] and partners with more than a 10-year gap in age tend to experience social disapproval[61] In addition, older women (older than 35) have increased health risks when getting pregnant (which may only be an issue if the couple indeed intends on having children).[62][63]

Social status and wealth
Main articles: Hypergamy and Gold digger
Some people want to marry a person with higher or lower status than them. Others want to marry people who have similar status. In many societies, women marry men who are of higher social status.[64] There are marriages where each party has sought a partner of similar status. There are other marriages in which the man is older than the woman.[65]
Some persons also wish to engage in transactional relationship for money rather than love (thus a type of marriage of convenience). Such people are sometimes referred to as gold diggers. Separate property systems can however be used to prevent property of being passed on to partners after divorce or death.
Higher income men are more likely to marry and less likely to divorce. High income women are more likely to divorce.[66]

The incest taboo, exogamy and endogamy
Further information: Prohibited degree of kinship, Cousin marriage, Affinity (Catholic canon law), and Avunculate marriage
Societies have often placed restrictions on marriage to relatives, though the degree of prohibited relationship varies widely. Marriages between parents and children, or between full siblings, with few exceptions,[67][68][69][70][71][72][73] have been considered incest and forbidden. However, marriages between more distant relatives have been much more common, with one estimate being that 80% of all marriages in history have been between second cousins or closer.[74] This proportion has fallen dramatically, but still, more than 10% of all marriages are believed to be between people who are second cousins or more closely related.[75] In the United States, such marriages are now highly stigmatized, and laws ban most or all first-cousin marriage in 30 states. Specifics vary: in South Korea, historically it was illegal to marry someone with the same last name and same ancestral line.[76]
An Avunculate marriage is a marriage that occurs between an uncle and his niece or between an aunt and her nephew. Such marriages are illegal in most countries due to incest restrictions. However, a small number of countries have legalized it, including Argentina, Australia, Austria, Malaysia,[77] and Russia.[78]

 Family chart showing relatives who, in Islamic Sharia law, would be considered mahrim (or maharem): unmarriageable kin with whom sexual intercourse would be considered incestuous
In various societies, the choice of partner is often limited to suitable persons from specific social groups. In some societies the rule is that a partner is selected from an individual's own social group – endogamy, this is often the case in class- and caste-based societies. But in other societies a partner must be chosen from a different group than one's own – exogamy, this may be the case in societies practicing totemic religion where society is divided into several exogamous totemic clans, such as most Aboriginal Australian societies. In other societies a person is expected to marry their cross-cousin, a woman must marry her father's sister's son and a man must marry his mother's brother's daughter – this is often the case if either a society has a rule of tracing kinship exclusively through patrilineal or matrilineal descent groups as among the Akan people of West Africa. Another kind of marriage selection is the levirate marriage in which widows are obligated to marry their husband's brother, mostly found in societies where kinship is based on endogamous clan groups.
Religion has commonly weighed in on the matter of which relatives, if any, are allowed to marry. Relations may be by consanguinity or affinity, meaning by blood or by marriage. On the marriage of cousins, Catholic policy has evolved from initial acceptance, through a long period of general prohibition, to the contemporary requirement for a dispensation.[79] Islam has always allowed it, while Hindu texts vary widely.[80][81]

Prescriptive marriage
Main article: Arranged marriage
 An arranged marriage between Louis XIV of France and Maria Theresa of Spain
In a wide array of lineage-based societies with a classificatory kinship system, potential spouses are sought from a specific class of relative as determined by a prescriptive marriage rule. This rule may be expressed by anthropologists using a "descriptive" kinship term, such as a "man's mother's brother's daughter" (also known as a "cross-cousin"). Such descriptive rules mask the participant's perspective: a man should marry a woman from his mother's lineage. Within the society's kinship terminology, such relatives are usually indicated by a specific term which sets them apart as potentially marriageable. Pierre Bourdieu notes, however, that very few marriages ever follow the rule, and that when they do so, it is for "practical kinship" reasons such as the preservation of family property, rather than the "official kinship" ideology.[82]
Insofar as regular marriages following prescriptive rules occur, lineages are linked together in fixed relationships; these ties between lineages may form political alliances in kinship dominated societies.[83] French structural anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss developed alliance theory to account for the "elementary" kinship structures created by the limited number of prescriptive marriage rules possible.[84]
A pragmatic (or 'arranged') marriage is made easier by formal procedures of family or group politics. A responsible authority sets up or encourages the marriage; they may, indeed, engage a professional matchmaker to find a suitable spouse for an unmarried person. The authority figure could be parents, family, a religious official, or a group consensus. In some cases, the authority figure may choose a match for purposes other than marital harmony.[85]

Forced marriage
Main article: Forced marriage
 Criticism about the Azeri society tradition from domestic violence to the social and political participation of women in the community
A forced marriage is a marriage in which one or both of the parties is married against their will. Forced marriages continue to be practiced in parts of the world, especially in South Asia and Africa. The line between forced marriage and consensual marriage may become blurred, because the social norms of these cultures dictate that one should never oppose the desire of one's parents/relatives in regard to the choice of a spouse; in such cultures, it is not necessary for violence, threats, intimidation etc. to occur, the person simply "consents" to the marriage even if they do not want it, out of the implied social pressure and duty. The customs of bride price and dowry, that exist in parts of the world, can lead to buying and selling people into marriage.[86][87]
In some societies, ranging from Central Asia to the Caucasus to Africa, the custom of bride kidnapping still exists, in which a woman is captured by a man and his friends. Sometimes this covers an elopement, but sometimes it depends on sexual violence. In previous times, raptio was a larger-scale version of this, with groups of women captured by groups of men, sometimes in war; the most famous example is The Rape of the Sabine Women, which provided the first citizens of Rome with their wives.
Other marriage partners are more or less imposed on an individual. For example, widow inheritance provides a widow with another man from her late husband's brothers.
In rural areas of India, child marriage is practiced, with parents often arranging the wedding, sometimes even before the child is born.[88] This practice was made illegal under the Child Marriage Restraint Act of 1929.

Economic considerations
See also: Economics of marriage and Family economics
The financial aspects of marriage vary between cultures and have changed over time.
In some cultures, dowries and bride wealth continue to be required today. In both cases, the financial arrangements are usually made between the groom (or his family) and the bride's family; with the bride often not being involved in the negotiations, and often not having a choice in whether to participate in the marriage.
In Early modern Britain, the social status of the couple was supposed to be equal. After the marriage, all the property (called "fortune") and expected inheritances of the wife belonged to the husband.

Dowry
A dowry is "a process whereby parental property is distributed to a daughter at her marriage (i.e. inter vivos) rather than at the holder's death (mortis causa)… A dowry establishes some variety of conjugal fund, the nature of which may vary widely. This fund ensures her support (or endowment) in widowhood and eventually goes to provide for her sons and daughters."[89]
In some cultures, especially in countries such as Turkey, India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Morocco, Nepal, dowries continue to be expected. In India, thousands of dowry-related deaths have taken place on yearly basis,[90][91] to counter this problem, several jurisdictions have enacted laws restricting or banning dowry (see Dowry law in India). In Nepal, dowry was made illegal in 2009.[92] Some authors believe that the giving and receiving of dowry reflects the status and even the effort to climb high in social hierarchy.[93]

Dower
Main article: Dower
Direct Dowry contrasts with bride wealth, which is paid by the groom or his family to the bride's parents, and with indirect dowry (or dower), which is property given to the bride herself by the groom at the time of marriage and which remains under her ownership and control.[94]
In the Jewish tradition, the rabbis in ancient times insisted on the marriage couple entering into a prenuptial agreement, called a ketubah. Besides other things, the ketubah provided for an amount to be paid by the husband in the event of a divorce or his estate in the event of his death. This amount was a replacement of the biblical dower or bride price, which was payable at the time of the marriage by the groom to the father of the bride.[95] This innovation was put in place because the biblical bride price created a major social problem: many young prospective husbands could not raise the bride price at the time when they would normally be expected to marry. So, to enable these young men to marry, the rabbis, in effect, delayed the time that the amount would be payable, when they would be more likely to have the sum. It may also be noted that both the dower and the ketubah amounts served the same purpose: the protection for the wife should her support cease, either by death or divorce. The only difference between the two systems was the timing of the payment. It is the predecessor to the wife's present-day entitlement to maintenance in the event of the breakup of marriage, and family maintenance in the event of the husband not providing adequately for the wife in his will. Another function performed by the ketubah amount was to provide a disincentive for the husband contemplating divorcing his wife: he would need to have the amount to be able to pay to the wife.
Morning gifts, which might also be arranged by the bride's father rather than the bride, are given to the bride herself; the name derives from the Germanic tribal custom of giving them the morning after the wedding night. She might have control of this morning gift during the lifetime of her husband, but is entitled to it when widowed. If the amount of her inheritance is settled by law rather than agreement, it may be called dower. Depending on legal systems and the exact arrangement, she may not be entitled to dispose of it after her death, and may lose the property if she remarries. Morning gifts were preserved for centuries in morganatic marriage, a union where the wife's inferior social status was held to prohibit her children from inheriting a noble's titles or estates. In this case, the morning gift would support the wife and children. Another legal provision for widowhood was jointure, in which property, often land, would be held in joint tenancy, so that it would automatically go to the widow on her husband's death.
Islamic tradition has similar practices. A 'mahr', either immediate or deferred, is the woman's portion of the groom's wealth (divorce) or estate (death). These amounts are usually set on the basis of the groom's own and family wealth and incomes, but in some parts these are set very high so as to provide a disincentive for the groom exercising the divorce, or the husband's family 'inheriting' a large portion of the estate, especially if there are no male offspring from the marriage. In some countries, including Iran, the mahr or alimony can amount to more than a man can ever hope to earn, sometimes up to US$1,000,000 (4000 official Iranian gold coins). If the husband cannot pay the mahr, either in case of a divorce or on demand, according to the current laws in Iran, he will have to pay it by installments. Failure to pay the mahr might even lead to imprisonment.[96]

Bridewealth
Main article: Bride price
 Traditional, formal presentation of the bridewealth (also known as "sin sot") at an engagement ceremony in Thailand
Bridewealth is a common practice in parts of Southeast Asia (Thailand, Cambodia), parts of Central Asia, and in much of sub-Saharan Africa. It is also known as brideprice although this has fallen in disfavor as it implies the purchase of the bride. Bridewealth is the amount of money or property or wealth paid by the groom or his family to the parents of a woman upon the marriage of their daughter to the groom. In anthropological literature, bride price has often been explained as payment made to compensate the bride's family for the loss of her labor and fertility. In some cases, bridewealth is a means by which the groom's family's ties to the children of the union are recognized.

Taxation
In some countries a married person or couple benefits from various taxation advantages not available to a single person. For example, spouses may be allowed to average their combined incomes. This is advantageous to a married couple with disparate incomes. To compensate for this, countries may provide a higher tax bracket for the averaged income of a married couple. While income averaging might still benefit a married couple with a stay-at-home spouse, such averaging would cause a married couple with roughly equal personal incomes to pay more total tax than they would as two single persons. In the United States, this is called the marriage penalty.[97]
When the rates applied by the tax code are not based income averaging, but rather on the sum of individuals' incomes, higher rates will usually apply to each individual in a two-earner households in a progressive tax systems. This is most often the case with high-income taxpayers and is another situation called a marriage penalty.[98]
Conversely, when progressive tax is levied on the individual with no consideration for the partnership, dual-income couples fare much better than single-income couples with similar household incomes. The effect can be increased when the welfare system treats the same income as a shared income thereby denying welfare access to the non-earning spouse. Such systems apply in Australia and Canada, for example.[citation needed]

Post-marital residence
In many Western cultures, marriage usually leads to the formation of a new household comprising the married couple, with the married couple living together in the same home, often sharing the same bed, but in some other cultures this is not the tradition.[99] Among the Minangkabau of West Sumatra, residency after marriage is matrilocal, with the husband moving into the household of his wife's mother.[100] Residency after marriage can also be patrilocal or avunculocal. In these cases, married couples may not form an independent household, but remain part of an extended family household.
Early theories explaining the determinants of postmarital residence[101] connected it with the sexual division of labor. However, to date, cross-cultural tests of this hypothesis using worldwide samples have failed to find any significant relationship between these two variables. However, Korotayev's tests show that the female contribution to subsistence does correlate significantly with matrilocal residence in general. However, this correlation is masked by a general polygyny factor.
Although, in different-sex marriages, an increase in the female contribution to subsistence tends to lead to matrilocal residence, it also tends simultaneously to lead to general non-sororal polygyny which effectively destroys matrilocality. If this polygyny factor is controlled (e.g., through a multiple regression model), division of labor turns out to be a significant predictor of postmarital residence. Thus, Murdock's hypotheses regarding the relationships between the sexual division of labor and postmarital residence were basically correct, though[102] the actual relationships between those two groups of variables are more complicated than he expected.[103][104]
There has been a trend toward the neolocal residence in western societies.[105]

Law
Family law
Family
Marriage and other  equivalent or similar unions and status
Types of marriages
Cohabitation
Concubinage
Common-law marriage
Civil union
Domestic partnership

Validity of marriages
Marriage licence
Marriage certificate
Prenuptial agreement
Matrimonial regime
Void and Voidable marriages
Annulment
Marriageable age
Sham marriage

Dissolution of marriages
Divorce
Adultery
Grounds for divorce
No-fault divorce
Matrimonial Causes Act
Legal separation
Alimony
Parenting plan
Residence [UK (EW and NI)]
Parental rights
Custody evaluator (US)
Parenting coordinator (US)

Other issues
Paternity
DNA paternity testing
Legitimacy
Child custody
Legal guardian
Adoption
Tender years doctrine
Filial responsibility
Contact & visitation
CAFCASS [UK (EW)]
Grandparent visitation
UN Rights of the Child
Children's rights
Emancipation
Foster care
Ward
Child support
Paper abortion
Paternal rights and abortion

Private international law
Private international law
Divorce
Marriage
Hague Convention (adoption)
International child abduction
Hague Convention (child abduction)
Hague Convention (maintenance)

Family and criminal code  (or criminal law)
Bigamy
Child abuse
CPS (US)
Child selling
Domestic violence
Incest
Legality of incest
Parental child abduction
Paternity fraud
vte
Main article: Marriage law
Marriage laws refer to the legal requirements which determine the validity of a marriage, which vary considerably between countries.
Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights declares that "Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses."[106]

Rights and obligations
See also: Matrimonial regime and Rights and responsibilities of marriages in the United States
A marriage bestows rights and obligations on the married parties, and sometimes on relatives as well, being the sole mechanism for the creation of affinal ties (in-laws). These may include, depending on jurisdiction:

Giving one spouse or his/her family control over the other spouse's sexual services, labor, and property.
Giving one spouse responsibility for the other's debts.
Giving one spouse visitation rights when the other is incarcerated or hospitalized.
Giving one spouse control over the other's affairs when the other is incapacitated.
Establishing the second legal guardian of a parent's child.
Establishing a joint fund of property for the benefit of children.
Establishing a relationship between the families of the spouses.
These rights and obligations vary considerably between societies, and between groups within society.[107] These might include arranged marriages, family obligations, the legal establishment of a nuclear family unit, the legal protection of children and public declaration of commitment.[108][109]

Property regime
In many countries today, each marriage partner has the choice of keeping his or her property separate or combining properties. In the latter case, called community property, when the marriage ends by divorce each owns half. In lieu of a will or trust, property owned by the deceased generally is inherited by the surviving spouse.
In some legal systems, the partners in a marriage are "jointly liable" for the debts of the marriage. This has a basis in a traditional legal notion called the "Doctrine of Necessities" whereby, in a heterosexual marriage, a husband was responsible to provide necessary things for his wife. Where this is the case, one partner may be sued to collect a debt for which they did not expressly contract. Critics of this practice note that debt collection agencies can abuse this by claiming an unreasonably wide range of debts to be expenses of the marriage. The cost of defense and the burden of proof is then placed on the non-contracting party to prove that the expense is not a debt of the family. The respective maintenance obligations, both during and eventually after a marriage, are regulated in most jurisdictions; alimony is one such method.

Restrictions
Marriage is an institution that is historically filled with restrictions. From age, to race, to social status, to consanguinity, to gender, restrictions are placed on marriage by society for reasons of benefiting the children, passing on healthy genes, maintaining cultural values, or because of prejudice and fear. Almost all cultures that recognize marriage also recognize adultery as a violation of the terms of marriage.[110]

Age
Most jurisdictions set a minimum age for marriage; that is, a person must attain a certain age to be legally allowed to marry. This age may depend on circumstances, for instance exceptions from the general rule may be permitted if the parents of a young person express their consent and/or if a court decides that said marriage is in the best interest of the young person (often this applies in cases where a girl is pregnant). Although most age restrictions are in place in order to prevent children from being forced into marriages, especially to much older partners – marriages which can have negative education and health related consequences, and lead to child sexual abuse and other forms of violence[111] – such child marriages remain common in parts of the world. According to the UN, child marriages are most common in rural sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. The ten countries with the highest rates of child marriage are: Niger (75%), Chad, Central African Republic, Bangladesh, Guinea, Mozambique, Mali, Burkina Faso, South Sudan, and Malawi.[112]

Kinship
Main article: Cousin marriage
See also: Coefficient of relationship
To prohibit incest and eugenic reasons, marriage laws have set restrictions for relatives to marry. Direct blood relatives are usually prohibited to marry, while for branch line relatives, laws are wary.[113][114]
Kinship relations through marriage is also called "affinity," relationships that arise in one's group of origin, can also be called one's descent group. Some cultures in kinship relationships may be considered to extend out to those who they have economic or political relationships with; or other forms of social connections. Within some cultures they may lead you back to gods[115] or animal ancestors (totems). This can be conceived of on a more or less literal basis.

Race
 U.S States, by the date of repeal of anti-miscegenation laws:   No laws passed   Repealed before 1887   Repealed between 1948 and 1967   Overturned on 12 June 1967
Main article: Interracial marriage
Laws banning "race-mixing" were enforced in certain North American jurisdictions from 1691[116] until 1967, in Nazi Germany (The Nuremberg Laws) from 1935 until 1945, and in South Africa during most part of the Apartheid era (1949–1985). All these laws primarily banned marriage between persons of different racially or ethnically defined groups, which was termed "amalgamation" or "miscegenation" in the U.S. The laws in Nazi Germany and many of the U.S. states, as well as South Africa, also banned sexual relations between such individuals.
In the United States, laws in some but not all of the states prohibited the marriage of whites and blacks, and in many states also the intermarriage of whites with Native Americans or Asians.[117] In the U.S., such laws were known as anti-miscegenation laws. From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced such laws.[118] Although an "Anti-Miscegenation Amendment" to the United States Constitution was proposed in 1871, in 1912–1913, and in 1928,[119][120] no nationwide law against racially mixed marriages was ever enacted. In 1967, the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously ruled in Loving v. Virginia that anti-miscegenation laws are unconstitutional. With this ruling, these laws were no longer in effect in the remaining 16 states that still had them.
The Nazi ban on interracial marriage and interracial sex was enacted in September 1935 as part of the Nuremberg Laws, the Gesetz zum Schutze des deutschen Blutes und der deutschen Ehre (The Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour). The Nuremberg Laws classified Jews as a race and forbade marriage and extramarital sexual relations at first with people of Jewish descent, but was later ended to the "Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring" and people of "German or related blood".[121] Such relations were marked as Rassenschande (lit. "race-disgrace") and could be punished by imprisonment (usually followed by deportation to a concentration camp) and even by death.
South Africa under apartheid also banned interracial marriage. The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act, 1949 prohibited marriage between persons of different races, and the Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations with a person of a different race a crime.

Sex/gender
   Marriage open to same-sex couples (rings: individual cases)   Legislation or binding domestic court ruling establishing same-sex marriage, but marriage is not yet provided for   Same-sex marriage recognized when performed in certain other jurisdictions, and accorded greater rights than local same-sex unions (if any)   Civil unions or domestic partnerships   Limited legal recognition (registered cohabitation)   Local certification without legal force   Limited recognition of marriage performed in certain other jurisdictions (residency rights for spouses)   Country subject to an international court ruling to recognize same-sex marriage   Same-sex unions not legally recognized
Main article: Same-sex marriage
Same-sex marriage is legally performed and recognized (nationwide or in some jurisdictions) in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,[a] the Netherlands,[b] New Zealand,[c] Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, the United Kingdom,[d] the United States,[e] and Uruguay.  Israel recognizes same-sex marriages entered into abroad as full marriages. Furthermore, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has issued a ruling that is expected to facilitate recognition in several countries in the Americas.[f][122]
The introduction of same-sex marriage has varied by jurisdiction, being variously accomplished through legislative change to marriage law, a court ruling based on constitutional guarantees of equality, or by direct popular vote (via ballot initiative or referendum). The recognition of same-sex marriage is considered to be a human right and a civil right as well as a political, social, and religious issue.[123] The most prominent supporters of same-sex marriage are human rights and civil rights organizations as well as the medical and scientific communities, while the most prominent opponents are religious groups. Various faith communities around the world support same-sex marriage, while many religious groups oppose it. Polls consistently show continually rising support for the recognition of same-sex marriage in all developed democracies and in some developing democracies.[124]
The establishment of recognition in law for the marriages of same-sex couples is one of the most prominent objectives of the LGBT rights movement.

Number of spouses
    Polygamy is legal   Polygamy is legal only for Muslims   Polygamy is legal in some regions (Indonesia)   Polygamy is illegal, but practice is not criminalised   Polygamy is illegal and practice criminalised   Legal status unknown  In India, Malaysia, Philippines and Singapore polygamy is only legal for Muslims.In Nigeria and South Africa, polygamous marriages under customary law and for Muslims are legally recognized.In Mauritius, polygamous unions have no legal recognition. Muslim men may, however, "marry" up to four women, but they do not have the legal status of wives.Main article: Legality of polygamy
Polygyny is widely practiced in mostly Muslim and African countries.[125][126] In the Middle Eastern region, Israel, Turkey and Tunisia are notable exceptions.[127]
In most other jurisdictions, polygamy is illegal. For example, In the United States, polygamy is illegal in all 50 states.[128]
In the late-19th century, citizens of the self-governing territory of what is present-day Utah were forced by the United States federal government to abandon the practice of polygamy through the vigorous enforcement of several Acts of Congress, and eventually complied. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints formally abolished the practice in 1890, in a document labeled 'The Manifesto' (see Latter Day Saint polygamy in the late-19th century).[129] Among American Muslims, a small minority of around 50,000 to 100,000 people are estimated to live in families with a husband maintaining an illegal polygamous relationship.[128]
Several countries such as India and Sri Lanka,[130] permit only their Islamic citizens to practice polygamy. Some Indians have converted to Islam in order to bypass such legal restrictions.[131] Predominantly Christian nations usually do not allow polygamous unions, with a handful of exceptions being the Republic of the Congo, Uganda, and Zambia.

State recognition
When a marriage is performed and carried out by a government institution in accordance with the marriage laws of the jurisdiction, without religious content, it is a civil marriage. Civil marriage recognizes and creates the rights and obligations intrinsic to matrimony in the eyes of the state. Some countries do not recognize locally performed religious marriage on its own, and require a separate civil marriage for official purposes. Conversely, civil marriage does not exist in some countries governed by a religious legal system, such as Saudi Arabia, where marriages contracted abroad might not be recognized if they were contracted contrary to Saudi interpretations of Islamic religious law. In countries governed by a mixed secular-religious legal system, such as Lebanon and Israel, locally performed civil marriage does not exist within the country, which prevents interfaith and various other marriages that contradict religious laws from being entered into in the country; however, civil marriages performed abroad may be recognized by the state even if they conflict with religious laws.  For example, in the case of recognition of marriage in Israel, this includes recognition of not only interfaith civil marriages performed abroad, but also overseas same-sex civil marriages.
In various jurisdictions, a civil marriage may take place as part of the religious marriage ceremony, although they are theoretically distinct. Some jurisdictions allow civil marriages in circumstances which are notably not allowed by particular religions, such as same-sex marriages or civil unions.
The opposite case may happen as well. Partners may not have full juridical acting capacity and churches may have less strict limits than the civil jurisdictions. This particularly applies to minimum age, or physical infirmities.[citation needed]
It is possible for two people to be recognized as married by a religious or other institution, but not by the state, and hence without the legal rights and obligations of marriage; or to have a civil marriage deemed invalid and sinful by a religion. Similarly, a couple may remain married in religious eyes after a civil divorce.
Most sovereign states and other jurisdictions limit legally recognized marriage to opposite-sex couples and a diminishing number of these permit polygyny, child marriages, and forced marriages. In modern times, a growing number of countries, primarily developed democracies, have lifted bans on, and have established legal recognition for, the marriages of interfaith, interracial, and same-sex couples. In some areas, child marriages and polygamy may occur in spite of national laws against the practice.

Marriage license, civil ceremony and registration
Main article: Wedding
 Couple married in a Shinto ceremony in Takayama, Gifu prefecture
 A newly married Assyrian couple
A marriage is usually formalized at a wedding or marriage ceremony. The ceremony may be officiated either by a religious official, by a government official or by a state approved celebrant. In various European and some Latin American countries, any religious ceremony must be held separately from the required civil ceremony. Some countries – such as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, the Netherlands, Romania and Turkey[132] – require that a civil ceremony take place before any religious one. In some countries – notably the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Norway and Spain – both ceremonies can be held together; the officiant at the religious and civil ceremony also serving as agent of the state to perform the civil ceremony. To avoid any implication that the state is "recognizing" a religious marriage (which is prohibited in some countries) – the "civil" ceremony is said to be taking place at the same time as the religious ceremony. Often this involves simply signing a register during the religious ceremony. If the civil element of the religious ceremony is omitted, the marriage ceremony is not recognized as a marriage by government under the law.
Some countries, such as Australia, permit marriages to be held in private and at any location; others, including England and Wales, require that the civil ceremony be conducted in a place open to the public and specially sanctioned by law for the purpose. In England, the place of marriage formerly had to be a church or register office, but this was extended to any public venue with the necessary licence. An exception can be made in the case of marriage by special emergency license (UK: licence), which is normally granted only when one of the parties is terminally ill. Rules about where and when persons can marry vary from place to place. Some regulations require one of the parties to reside within the jurisdiction of the register office (formerly parish).
Each religious authority has rules for the manner in which marriages are to be conducted by their officials and members. Where religious marriages are recognised by the state, the officiator must also conform with the law of the jurisdiction.

Common-law marriage
See also: Common-law marriage
In a small number of jurisdictions marriage relationships may be created by the operation of the law alone.[133] Unlike the typical ceremonial marriage with legal contract, wedding ceremony, and other details, a common-law marriage may be called "marriage by habit and repute (cohabitation)." A de facto common-law marriage without a license or ceremony is legally binding in some jurisdictions but has no legal consequence in others.[133]

Civil unions
Main article: Civil union
 Various advocates of same-sex marriage, such as this protester at a demonstration in New York City against California Proposition 8, consider civil unions an inferior alternative to legal recognition of same-sex marriage.[134]
A civil union, also referred to as a civil partnership, is a legally recognized form of partnership similar to marriage. Beginning with Denmark in 1989, civil unions under one name or another have been established by law in several countries in order to provide same-sex couples rights, benefits, and responsibilities similar (in some countries, identical) to opposite-sex civil marriage. In some jurisdictions, such as Brazil, New Zealand, Uruguay, Ecuador, France and the U.S. states of Hawaii and Illinois, civil unions are also open to opposite-sex couples.

"Marriage of convenience"
Sometimes people marry to take advantage of a certain situation, sometimes called a marriage of convenience or a sham marriage. In 2003, over 180,000 immigrants were admitted to the U.S. as spouses of U.S. citizens;[135] more were admitted as fiancés of US citizens for the purpose of being married within 90 days. These marriages had a diverse range of motives, including obtaining permanent residency, securing an inheritance that has a marriage clause, or to enroll in health insurance, among many others. While all marriages have a complex combination of conveniences motivating the parties to marry, a marriage of convenience is one that is devoid of normal reasons to marry. In certain countries like Singapore sham marriages are punishable criminal offences.[136]

Contemporary legal and human rights criticisms of marriage
 "Esposas de Matrimonio" ("Wedding Cuffs"), a wedding ring sculpture expressing the criticism of marriages' effects on individual liberty. Esposas is a play on Spanish, in which the singular form of the word esposa refers to a spouse, and the plural refers to handcuffs.
Main article: Criticism of marriage
People have proposed arguments against marriage for reasons that include political, philosophical and religious criticisms; concerns about the divorce rate; individual liberty and gender equality; questioning the necessity of having a personal relationship sanctioned by government or religious authorities; or the promotion of celibacy for religious or philosophical reasons.

Power and gender roles
 Countries where married women are required by law to obey their husbands as of 2015[137]
Historically, in most cultures, married women had very few rights of their own, being considered, along with the family's children, the property of the husband; as such, they could not own or inherit property, or represent themselves legally (see, for example, coverture). Since the late 19th century, in some (primarily Western) countries, marriage has undergone gradual legal changes, aimed at improving the rights of the wife. These changes included giving wives legal identities of their own, abolishing the right of husbands to physically discipline their wives, giving wives property rights, liberalizing divorce laws, providing wives with reproductive rights of their own, and requiring a wife's consent when sexual relations occur. In the 21st century, there continue to be controversies regarding the legal status of married women, legal acceptance of or leniency towards violence within marriage (especially sexual violence), traditional marriage customs such as dowry and bride price, forced marriage, marriageable age, and criminalization of consensual behaviors such as premarital and extramarital sex.
Feminist theory approaches opposite-sex marriage as an institution traditionally rooted in patriarchy that promotes male superiority and power over women. This power dynamic conceptualizes men as "the provider operating in the public sphere" and women as "the caregivers operating within the private sphere".[138] "Theoretically, women ... [were] defined as the property of their husbands .... The adultery of a woman was always treated with more severity than that of a man."[139] "[F]eminist demands for a wife's control over her own property were not met [in parts of Britain] until ... [laws were passed in the late 19th century]."[140]
Traditional heterosexual marriage imposed an obligation of the wife to be sexually available for her husband and an obligation of the husband to provide material/financial support for the wife. Numerous philosophers, feminists and other academic figures have commented on this throughout history, condemning the hypocrisy of legal and religious authorities in regard to sexual issues; pointing to the lack of choice of a woman in regard to controlling her own sexuality; and drawing parallels between marriage, an institution promoted as sacred, and prostitution, widely condemned and vilified (though often tolerated as a "necessary evil"). Mary Wollstonecraft, in the 18th century, described marriage as "legal prostitution".[141] Emma Goldman wrote in 1910: "To the moralist prostitution does not consist so much in the fact that the woman sells her body, but rather that she sells it out of wedlock".[142] Bertrand Russell in his book Marriage and Morals wrote that: "Marriage is for woman the commonest mode of livelihood, and the total amount of undesired sex endured by women is probably greater in marriage than in prostitution."[143] Angela Carter in Nights at the Circus wrote: "What is marriage but prostitution to one man instead of many?"[144]
Some critics object to what they see as propaganda in relation to marriage – from the government, religious organizations, the media – which aggressively promote marriage as a solution for all social problems; such propaganda includes, for instance, marriage promotion in schools, where children, especially girls, are bombarded with positive information about marriage, being presented only with the information prepared by authorities.[145][146]
The performance of dominant gender roles by men and submissive gender roles by women influence the power dynamic of a heterosexual marriage.[147] In some American households, women internalize gender role stereotypes and often assimilate into the role of "wife", "mother", and "caretaker" in conformity to societal norms and their male partner. Author bell hooks states "within the family structure, individuals learn to accept sexist oppression as 'natural' and are primed to support other forms of oppression, including heterosexist domination."[148] "[T]he cultural, economic, political and legal supremacy of the husband" was "[t]raditional ... under English law".[149] This patriarchal dynamic is contrasted with a conception of egalitarian or Peer Marriage in which power and labour are divided equally, and not according to gender roles.[138]
In the US, studies have shown that, despite egalitarian ideals being common, less than half of respondents viewed their opposite-sex relationships as equal in power, with unequal relationships being more commonly dominated by the male partner.[150] Studies also show that married couples find the highest level of satisfaction in egalitarian relationships and lowest levels of satisfaction in wife dominate relationships.[150] In recent years, egalitarian or Peer Marriages have been receiving increasing focus and attention politically, economically and culturally in a number of countries, including the United States.

Extra-marital sex
See also: Chastity and Adultery
 Christ and the woman taken in adultery by Jan Brueghel the Elder, Pinakothek
 Magdalene laundries were institutions that existed from the 18th to the late 20th centuries, throughout Europe and North America, where "fallen women", including unmarried mothers, were detained. Photo: Magdalene laundry in Ireland, ca. early 20th century.[151]
Different societies demonstrate variable tolerance of extramarital sex. The Standard Cross-Cultural Sample describes the occurrence of extramarital sex by gender in over 50 pre-industrial cultures.[152][153] The occurrence of extramarital sex by men is described as "universal" in 6 cultures, "moderate" in 29 cultures, "occasional" in 6 cultures, and "uncommon" in 10 cultures. The occurrence of extramarital sex by women is described as "universal" in 6 cultures, "moderate" in 23 cultures, "occasional" in 9 cultures, and "uncommon" in 15 cultures. Three studies using nationally representative samples in the United States found that between 10 and 15% of women and 20–25% of men engage in extramarital sex.[154][155][156]
Many of the world's major religions look with disfavor on sexual relations outside marriage.[157] There are non-secular states that sanction criminal penalties for sexual intercourse before marriage.[citation needed] Sexual relations by a married person with someone other than his/her spouse is known as adultery. Adultery is considered in many jurisdictions to be a crime and grounds for divorce.
In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan,[158] Afghanistan,[159][160] Iran,[160] Kuwait,[161] Maldives,[162] Morocco,[163] Oman,[164] Mauritania,[165] United Arab Emirates,[166][167] Sudan,[168] Yemen,[169] any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal.
In some parts of the world, women and girls accused of having sexual relations outside marriage are at risk of becoming victims of honor killings committed by their families.[170][171] In 2011 several people were sentenced to death by stoning after being accused of adultery in Iran, Somalia, Afghanistan, Sudan, Mali and Pakistan.[172][173][174][175][176][177][178][179][180] Practices such as honor killings and stoning continue to be supported by mainstream politicians and other officials in some countries. In Pakistan, after the 2008 Balochistan honour killings in which five women were killed by tribesmen of the Umrani Tribe of Balochistan, Pakistani Federal Minister for Postal Services Israr Ullah Zehri defended the barbaric practice; he said:[181] "These are centuries-old traditions, and I will continue to defend them. Only those who indulge in immoral acts should be afraid."[182]

Sexual violence
Main article: Marital rape
An issue that is a serious concern regarding marriage and which has been the object of international scrutiny is that of sexual violence within marriage. Throughout much of the history, in most cultures, sex in marriage was considered a 'right', that could be taken by force (often by a man from a woman), if 'denied'. As the concept of human rights started to develop in the 20th century, and with the arrival of second-wave feminism, such views have become less widely held.[citation needed]
The legal and social concept of marital rape has developed in most industrialized countries in the mid- to late 20th century; in many other parts of the world it is not recognized as a form of abuse, socially or legally. Several countries in Eastern Europe and Scandinavia made marital rape illegal before 1970, and other countries in Western Europe and the English-speaking Western world outlawed it in the 1980s and 1990s. In England and Wales, marital rape was made illegal in 1991. Although marital rape is being increasingly criminalized in developing countries too, cultural, religious, and traditional ideologies about "conjugal rights" remain very strong in many parts of the world; and even in many countries that have adequate laws against rape in marriage these laws are rarely enforced.[citation needed]
Apart from the issue of rape committed against one's spouse, marriage is, in many parts of the world, closely connected with other forms of sexual violence: in some places, like Morocco, unmarried girls and women who are raped are often forced by their families to marry their rapist. Because being the victim of rape and losing virginity carry extreme social stigma, and the victims are deemed to have their "reputation" tarnished, a marriage with the rapist is arranged. This is claimed to be in the advantage of both the victim – who does not remain unmarried and does not lose social status – and of the rapist, who avoids punishment. In 2012, after a Moroccan 16-year-old girl committed suicide after having been forced by her family to marry her rapist and enduring further abuse by the rapist after they married, there have been protests from activists against this practice which is common in Morocco.[183]
In some societies, the very high social and religious importance of marital fidelity, especially female fidelity, has as result the criminalization of adultery, often with harsh penalties such as stoning or flogging; as well as leniency towards punishment of violence related to infidelity (such as honor killings).[184] In the 21st century, criminal laws against adultery have become controversial with international organizations calling for their abolition.[185][186] Opponents of adultery laws argue that these laws are a major contributor to discrimination and violence against women, as they are enforced selectively mostly against women; that they prevent women from reporting sexual violence; and that they maintain social norms which justify violent crimes committed against women by husbands, families and communities. A Joint Statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that "Adultery as a criminal offence violates women's human rights".[186] Some human rights organizations argue that the criminalization of adultery also violates internationally recognized protections for private life, as it represents an arbitrary interference with an individual's privacy, which is not permitted under international law.[187]

Laws, human rights and gender status
The laws surrounding heterosexual marriage in many countries have come under international scrutiny because they contradict international standards of human rights; institutionalize violence against women, child marriage and forced marriage; require the permission of a husband for his wife to work in a paid job, sign legal documents, file criminal charges against someone, sue in civil court etc.; sanction the use by husbands of violence to "discipline" their wives; and discriminate against women in divorce.[188][189][190]
Such things were legal even in many Western countries until recently: for instance, in France, married women obtained the right to work without their husband's permission in 1965,[191][192][193] and in West Germany women obtained this right in 1977 (by comparison women in East Germany had many more rights).[194][195] In Spain, during Franco's era, a married woman needed her husband's consent, referred to as the permiso marital, for almost all economic activities, including employment, ownership of property, and even traveling away from home; the permiso marital was abolished in 1975.[196]
An absolute submission of a wife to her husband is accepted as natural in many parts of the world, for instance surveys by UNICEF have shown that the percentage of women aged 15–49 who think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain circumstances is as high as 90% in Afghanistan and Jordan, 87% in Mali, 86% in Guinea and Timor-Leste, 81% in Laos, 80% in Central African Republic.[197] Detailed results from Afghanistan show that 78% of women agree with a beating if the wife "goes out without telling him [the husband]" and 76% agree "if she argues with him".[198]
Throughout history, and still today in many countries, laws have provided for extenuating circumstances, partial or complete defenses, for men who killed their wives due to adultery, with such acts often being seen as crimes of passion and being covered by legal defenses such as provocation or defense of family honor.[199]

Right and ability to divorce
While international law and conventions recognize the need for consent for entering a marriage – namely that people cannot be forced to get married against their will – the right to obtain a divorce is not recognized; therefore holding a person in a marriage against their will (if such person has consented to entering in it) is not considered a violation of human rights, with the issue of divorce being left at the appreciation of individual states.[200]
In the EU, the last country to allow divorce was Malta, in 2011. Around the world, the only countries to forbid divorce are Philippines and Vatican City,[201] although in practice in many countries which use a fault-based divorce system obtaining a divorce is very difficult. The ability to divorce, in law and practice, has been and continues to be a controversial issue in many countries, and public discourse involves different ideologies such as feminism, social conservatism, religious interpretations.[202]

Dowry and bridewealth
 Anti-dowry poster in Bangalore, India
In recent years, the customs of dowry and bride price have received international criticism for inciting conflicts between families and clans; contributing to violence against women; promoting materialism; increasing property crimes (where men steal goods such as cattle in order to be able to pay the bride price); and making it difficult for poor people to marry. African women's rights campaigners advocate the abolishing of bride price, which they argue is based on the idea that women are a form of property which can be bought.[203] Bride price has also been criticized for contributing to child trafficking as impoverished parents sell their young daughters to rich older men.[204] A senior Papua New Guinea police officer has called for the abolishing of bride price arguing that it is one of the main reasons for the mistreatment of women in that country.[205] The opposite practice of dowry has been linked to a high level of violence (see Dowry death) and to crimes such as extortion.[206]

Children born outside marriage
Further information: Legitimacy (family law)
 The Outcast, by Richard Redgrave, 1851. A patriarch casts his daughter and her illegitimate baby out of the family home.
 Percentage of births to unmarried women, selected countries, 1980 and 2007[207]
Historically, and still in many countries, children born outside marriage suffered severe social stigma and discrimination. In England and Wales, such children were known as bastards and whoresons.
There are significant differences between world regions in regard to the social and legal position of non-marital births, ranging from being fully accepted and uncontroversial to being severely stigmatized and discriminated.[208][209]
The 1975 European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born out of Wedlock protects the rights of children born to unmarried parents.[210] The convention states, among others, that: "The father and mother of a child born out of wedlock shall have the same obligation to maintain the child as if it were born in wedlock" and that "A child born out of wedlock shall have the same right of succession in the estate of its father and its mother and of a member of its father's or mother's family, as if it had been born in wedlock."[211]
While in most Western countries legal inequalities between children born inside and outside marriage have largely been abolished, this is not the case in some parts of the world.
The legal status of an unmarried father differs greatly from country to country. Without voluntary formal recognition of the child by the father, in most cases there is a need of due process of law in order to establish paternity. In some countries however, unmarried cohabitation of a couple for a specific period of time does create a presumption of paternity similar to that of formal marriage. This is the case in Australia.[212] Under what circumstances can a paternity action be initiated, the rights and responsibilities of a father once paternity has been established (whether he can obtain parental responsibility and whether he can be forced to support the child) as well as the legal position of a father who voluntarily acknowledges the child, vary widely by jurisdiction. A special situation arises when a married woman has a child by a man other than her husband. Some countries, such as Israel, refuse to accept a legal challenge of paternity in such a circumstance, in order to avoid the stigmatization of the child (see Mamzer, a concept under Jewish law). In 2010, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favor of a German man who had fathered twins with a married woman, granting him right of contact with the twins, despite the fact that the mother and her husband had forbidden him to see the children.[213]
The steps that an unmarried father must take in order to obtain rights to his child vary by country. In some countries (such as the UK – since 2003 in England and Wales, 2006 in Scotland, and 2002 in Northern Ireland) it is sufficient for the father to be listed on the birth certificate for him to have parental rights;[214] in other countries, such as Ireland, simply being listed on the birth certificate does not offer any rights, additional legal steps must be taken (if the mother agrees, the parents can both sign a "statutory declaration", but if the mother does not agree, the father has to apply to court).[215]
Children born outside marriage have become more common, and in some countries, the majority. Recent data from Latin America showed figures for non-marital childbearing to be 74% for Colombia, 69% for Peru, 68% for Chile, 66% for Brazil, 58% for Argentina, 55% for Mexico.[216][217] In 2012, in the European Union, 40% of births were outside marriage,[218] and in the United States, in 2013, the figure was similar, at 41%.[219] In the United Kingdom 48% of births were to unmarried women in 2012; in Ireland the figure was 35%.[218]
During the first half of the 20th century, unmarried women in some Western countries were coerced by authorities to give their children up for adoption. This was especially the case in Australia, through the forced adoptions in Australia, with most of these adoptions taking place between the 1950s and the 1970s. In 2013, Julia Gillard, then Prime Minister of Australia, offered a national apology to those affected by the forced adoptions.[220][221]
Some married couples choose not to have children. Others are unable to have children because of infertility or other factors preventing conception or the bearing of children. In some cultures, marriage imposes an obligation on women to bear children. In northern Ghana, for example, payment of bridewealth signifies a woman's requirement to bear children, and women using birth control face substantial threats of physical abuse and reprisals.[222]

Religion
 A man and woman exchange rings
Further information: Religion and divorce
Religions develop in specific geographic and social milieux.[223] Religious attitudes and practices relating to marriage vary, but have many similarities.[224]

Abrahamic religions
Baháʼí Faith
The Baháʼí Faith encourages marriage and views it as a mutually strengthening bond. A Baháʼí marriage is contingent on the consent of all living parents.[225]

Christianity
Main article: Christian views on marriage
Further information: Wedding § Christian customs
"'Then the Lord God made a woman from the rib he had taken out of the man, and he brought her to the man. The man said, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 'woman, ' for she was taken out of man."  For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and they will become one flesh.[226]
"'...So they are no longer two, but one. Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate."— Jesus[227]
 Crowning during Holy Matrimony in the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, an Eastern Catholic Church and a part of the Saint Thomas Christian community in India
 Christian wedding in Kyoto, Japan
 Russian orthodox wedding ceremony
Modern Christianity bases its views on marriage upon the teachings of Jesus and the Paul the Apostle.[228] Many of the largest Christian denominations regard marriage as a sacrament, sacred institution, or covenant.[229]
The first known decrees on marriage were during the Roman Catholic Council of Trent (twenty-fourth session of 1563), decrees that made the validity of marriage dependent on the wedding occurring in the presence of a priest and two witnesses.[230][231] The absence of a requirement of parental consent ended a debate that proceeded from the 12th century.[231][232] In the case of a civil divorce, the innocent spouse had and has no right to marry again until the death of the other spouse terminates the still valid marriage, even if the other spouse was guilty of adultery.[231]
The Christian Church performed marriages in the narthex of the church prior to the 16th century, when the emphasis was on the marital contract and betrothal. Subsequently, the ceremony moved inside the sacristy of the church.[230][233]
Christians often[quantify] marry for religious reasons, ranging from following the biblical injunction for a "man to leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife, and the two shall become one",[234][235] to accessing the Divine grace of the Roman Catholic Sacrament.[236]
Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, as well as many Anglicans and Methodists, consider marriage termed holy matrimony to be an expression of divine grace,[237] termed a sacrament and mystery in the first two Christian traditions. In Western ritual, the ministers of the sacrament are the spouses themselves, with a bishop, priest, or deacon merely witnessing the union on behalf of the Church and blessing it. In Eastern ritual churches, the bishop or priest functions as the actual minister of the Sacred Mystery; Eastern Orthodox deacons may not perform marriages. Western Christians commonly refer to marriage as a vocation, while Eastern Christians consider it an ordination and a martyrdom, though the theological emphases indicated by the various names are not excluded by the teachings of either tradition.[dubious  – discuss] Marriage is commonly celebrated in the context of a Eucharistic service (a nuptial Mass or Divine Liturgy). The sacrament of marriage is indicative of the relationship between Christ and the Church.[238]
The Roman Catholic tradition of the 12th and 13th centuries defined marriage as a sacrament ordained by God,[228] signifying the mystical marriage of Christ to his Church.[239]

The matrimonial covenant, by which a man and a woman establish between themselves a partnership of the whole of life, is by its nature ordered toward the good of the spouses and the procreation and education of offspring; this covenant between baptized persons has been raised by Christ the Lord to the dignity of a sacrament.[240]

For Catholic and Methodist Christians, the mutual love between husband and wife becomes an image of the eternal love with which God loves humankind.[241] In the United Methodist Church, the celebration of Holy Matrimony ideally occurs in the context of a Service of Worship, which includes the celebration of the Eucharist.[237] Likewise, the celebration of marriage between two Catholics normally takes place during the public liturgical celebration of the Holy Mass, because of its sacramental connection with the unity of the Paschal mystery of Christ (Communion). Sacramental marriage confers a perpetual and exclusive bond between the spouses. By its nature, the institution of marriage and conjugal love is ordered to the procreation and upbringing of offspring. Marriage creates rights and duties in the Church between the spouses and towards their children: "[e]ntering marriage with the intention of never having children is a grave wrong and more than likely grounds for an annulment".[242] According to Roman Catholic legislation, progeny of annulled relationships are considered legitimate. Civilly remarried persons who civilly divorced a living and lawful spouse are not separated from the Church, but they cannot receive Eucharistic Communion.[243]
Divorce and remarriage, while generally not encouraged, are regarded differently by each Christian denomination, with certain traditions, such as the Catholic Church, teaching the concept of an annulment. For example, the Reformed Church in America permits divorce and remarriage,[244] while connexions such as the Evangelical Methodist Church Conference forbid divorce except in the case of fornication and do not allow for remarriage in any circumstance.[245] The Eastern Orthodox Church allows divorce for a limited number of reasons, and in theory, but usually not in practice, requires that a marriage after divorce be celebrated with a penitential overtone. With respect to marriage between a Christian and a pagan, the early Church "sometimes took a more lenient view, invoking the so-called Pauline privilege of permissible separation (1 Cor. 7) as legitimate grounds for allowing a convert to divorce a pagan spouse and then marry a Christian."[246]
The Catholic Church adheres to the proscription of Jesus in Matthew, 19: 6 that married spouses who have consummated their marriage "are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.”[247] Consequently, the Catholic Church understands that it is wholly without authority to terminate a sacramentally valid and consummated marriage, and its Codex Iuris Canonici (1983 Code of Canon Law) confirms this in Canons 1055–7. Specifically, Canon 1056 declares that "the essential properties of marriage are unity and indissolubility; in [C]hristian marriage they acquire a distinctive firmness by reason of the sacrament."[248] Canon 1057, §2 declares that marriage is "an irrevocable covenant".[249] Therefore, divorce of such a marriage is a metaphysical, moral, and legal impossibility. However, the Church has the authority to annul a presumed "marriage" by declaring it to have been invalid from the beginning, i. e., declaring it not to be and never to have been a marriage, in an annulment procedure,[250] which is basically a fact-finding and fact-declaring effort.
For Protestant denominations, the purposes of marriage include intimate companionship, rearing children, and mutual support for both spouses to fulfill their life callings. Most Reformed Christians did not regard marriage to the status of a sacrament "because they did not regard matrimony as a necessary means of grace for salvation"; nevertheless it is considered a covenant between spouses before God.cf.[251] In addition, some Protestant denominations (such as the Methodist Churches) affirmed that Holy Matrimony is a "means of grace, thus, sacramental in character".[252]

 A couple following their marriage in the Manti Utah Temple
Since the 16th century, five competing models have shaped marriage in the Western tradition, as described by John Witte, Jr.:[253]

Marriage as Sacrament in the Roman Catholic Tradition
Marriage as Social Estate in the Lutheran Reformation
Marriage as Covenant in the Reformed (and Methodist) Traditions[254]
Marriage as Commonwealth in the Anglican Tradition
Marriage as Contract in the Enlightenment Tradition
Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that "marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children."[255] Their view of marriage is that family relationships can endure beyond the grave.[256] This is known as 'eternal marriage' which can be eternal only when authorized priesthood holders perform the sealing ordinance in sacred temples.[257]
With respect to religion, historic Christian belief emphasizes that Christian weddings should occur in a church as Christian marriage should begin where one also starts their faith journey (Christians receive the sacrament of baptism in church in the presence of their congregation).[258] Catholic Christian weddings must "take place in a church building" as holy matrimony is a sacrament; sacraments normatively occur in the presence of Christ in the house of God, and "members of the faith community [should be] present to witness the event and provide support and encouragement for those celebrating the sacrament."[258] Bishops never grant permission "to those requesting to be married in a garden, on the beach, or some other place outside of the church" and a dispensation is only granted "in extraordinary circumstances (for example, if a bride or groom is ill or disabled and unable to come to the church)."[258] Marriage in the church, for Christians, is seen as contributing to the fruit of the newlywed couple regularly attending church each Lord's Day and raising children in the faith.[258]

Christian attitudes to same-sex marriage
Main article: Religious arguments about same-sex marriage
Although many Christian denominations do not currently perform same-sex marriages, many do, such as the Presbyterian Church (USA), some dioceses of the Episcopal Church, the Metropolitan Community Church, Quakers, United Church of Canada, and United Church of Christ congregations, and some Anglican dioceses, for example.[259][260] Same-sex marriage is recognized by various religious denominations.[261][262]

Islam
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: Islamic marital jurisprudence
 Pakistani Marriage Culture Video
 Newlywed couples visit Timur's statues to receive wedding blessings in Uzbekistan.
 A Muslim bride of Pakistan origin signing the nikkah nama or marriage certificate
 A Muslim couple being wed alongside the Tungabhadra River at Hampi, India
Islam also commends marriage, with the age of marriage being whenever the individuals feel ready, financially and emotionally.[263]
In Islam, polygyny is allowed while polyandry is not, with the specific limitation that a man can have no more than four legal wives at any one time and an unlimited number of female slaves as concubines who may have rights similar wives, with the exception of not being free unless the man has children with them, with the requirement that the man is able and willing to partition his time and wealth equally among the respective wives and concubines (this practice of concubinage, as in Judaism, is not applicable in contemporary times and has been deemed by scholars as invalid due to shifts in views about the role of slavery in the world).[264]
For a Muslim wedding to take place, the bridegroom and the guardian of the bride (wali) must both agree on the marriage. Should the guardian disagree on the marriage, it may not legally take place. If the wali of the girl is her father or paternal grandfather, he has the right to force her into marriage even against her proclaimed will, if it is her first marriage. A guardian who is allowed to force the bride into marriage is called wali mujbir.[265]
From an Islamic (Sharia) law perspective, the minimum requirements and responsibilities in a Muslim marriage are that the groom provide living expenses (housing, clothing, food, maintenance) to the bride, and in return, the bride's main responsibility is raising children to be proper Muslims. All other rights and responsibilities are to be decided between the husband and wife, and may even be included as stipulations in the marriage contract before the marriage actually takes place, so long as they do not go against the minimum requirements of the marriage.
In Sunni Islam, marriage must take place in the presence of at least two reliable witnesses, with the consent of the guardian of the bride and the consent of the groom. Following the marriage, the couple may consummate the marriage. To create an 'urf marriage, it is sufficient that a man and a woman indicate an intention to marry each other and recite the requisite words in front of a suitable Muslim. The wedding party usually follows but can be held days, or months later, whenever the couple and their families want to; however, there can be no concealment of the marriage as it is regarded as public notification due to the requirement of witnesses.[266][267][268][269]
In Shia Islam, marriage may take place without the presence of witnesses as is often the case in temporary Nikah mut‘ah (prohibited in Sunni Islam), but with the consent of both the bride and the groom. Following the marriage, they may consummate their marriage.[270]

Judaism
 A Jewish wedding, painting by Jozef Israëls, 1903
 A Ketubah in Hebrew, a Jewish marriage-contract outlining the duties of each partner
Main article: Jewish views on marriage
In Judaism, marriage is based on the laws of the Torah and is a contractual bond between spouses in which the spouses dedicate to be exclusive to one another.[271] This contract is called Kiddushin.[272] Though procreation is not the sole purpose, a Jewish marriage is also expected to fulfill the commandment to have children.[273] The main focus centers around the relationship between the spouses. Kabbalistically, marriage is understood to mean that the spouses are merging into a single soul. This is why a man is considered "incomplete" if he is not married, as his soul is only one part of a larger whole that remains to be unified.[274]
The Hebrew Bible (Christian Old Testament) describes a number of marriages, including those of Isaac,[275] Jacob[276] and Samson.[277] Polygyny, or men having multiple wives at once, is one of the most common marital arrangements represented in the Hebrew Bible;[278] another is that of concubinage (pilegesh) which was often arranged by a man and a woman who generally enjoyed the same rights as a full legal wife (other means of concubinage can be seen in Judges 19-20 where mass marriage by abduction was practiced as a form of punishment on transgressors).[279] Today Ashkenazi Jews are prohibited to take more than one wife because of a ban instituted on this by Gershom ben Judah (Died 1040).
Among ancient Hebrews, marriage was a domestic affair and not a religious ceremony; the participation of a priest or rabbi was not required.[280]
Betrothal (erusin), which refers to the time that this binding contract is made, is distinct from marriage itself (nissu'in), with the time between these events varying substantially.[278][281]
In biblical times, a wife was regarded as personal property, belonging to her husband;[278][281] the descriptions of the Bible suggest that she would be expected to perform tasks such as spinning, sewing, weaving, manufacture of clothing, fetching of water, baking of bread, and animal husbandry.[282] However, wives were usually looked after with care, and men with more than one wife were expected to ensure that they continue to give the first wife food, clothing, and marital rights.[283]
Since a wife was regarded as property, her husband was originally free to divorce her for any reason, at any time.[281] Divorcing a woman against her will was also banned by Gershom ben Judah for Ashkenazi Jews. A divorced couple were permitted to get back together, unless the wife had married someone else after her divorce.[284]

Hinduism
Main article: Marriage in Hinduism
 Hindu marriage ceremony from a Rajput wedding
 A Nepali Hindu couple in marriage ceremony
Hinduism sees marriage as a sacred duty that entails both religious and social obligations. Hindu Dharma has prescribed four Purusarthas, that is Dharma, Artha (Wealth), Kama (Desires) and Moksha. The purpose of the marriage sanskar is to fulfill the Purushartha of ‘Kama’ and then gradually advance towards ‘Moksha’. Old Hindu literature in Sanskrit gives many different types of marriages and their categorization ranging from "Gandharva Vivaha" (instant marriage by mutual consent of participants only, without any need for even a single third person as witness) to normal (present day) marriages, to "Rakshasa Vivaha" ("demoniac" marriage, performed by abduction of one participant by the other participant, usually, but not always, with the help of other persons). In the Indian subcontinent, arranged marriages, the spouse's parents or an older family member choose the partner, are still predominant in comparison with so-called love marriages until nowadays. The Hindu Widow's Remarriage Act 1856 empowers a Hindu widow to remarry.[285]

Buddhism
Main article: Buddhist view of marriage
The Buddhist view of marriage considers marriage a secular affair and thus not a sacrament. Buddhists are expected to follow the civil laws regarding marriage laid out by their respective governments. Gautama Buddha, being a kshatriya was required by Shakyan tradition to pass a series of tests to prove himself as a warrior, before he was allowed to marry.

Sikhism
In a Sikh marriage, the couple walks around the Guru Granth Sahib holy book four times, and a holy man recites from it in the kirtan style. The ceremony is known as 'Anand Karaj' and represents the holy union of two souls united as one.

Wicca
Wiccan marriages are commonly known as handfastings and is a celebration held by Wiccans. Handfastings is an ancient Celtic ritual which the hands are tied together to symbolize the binding of two lives. It is commonly used in Wicca and Pagan ceremonies, but it has become more mainstream and comes up in both religious and secular vows and readings. Although handfastings vary for each Wiccan they often involve honoring Wiccan gods.[286] Wicca has a common marriage vow "for as long as love lasts" instead of the traditional Christian "till death do us part". The first Wicca marriage took place in 1960, between Frederic Lamond and his wife, Gillian. Wicca's are not limited to the traditional marriages regardless of gender and how long they are willing to commit themselves to a lifelong relationship.[286]
Sex is considered a pious and sacred activity for the Wiccans. In some traditions sex is ritualized in performing in the form of the Great Rite, whereby a High Priest and High Priestess invoke the God and Goddesses to possess them before performing sexual intercourse with one another. It is to raise magical energy for the use of spell work. It is said that it is used symbolically, using the athame to symbolize the penis and the chalice to symbolize the vagina.[287]

Health and income
Marriages are correlated with better outcomes for the couple and their children, including higher income for men, better health and lower mortality. Part of these effects is due to the fact that those with better expectations get married more often. According to a systematic review on research literature, a significant part of the effect seems to be due to a true causal effect. The reason may be that marriages make particularly men become more future-oriented and take an economic and other responsibility of the family. The studies eliminate the effect of selectivity in numerous ways. However, much of the research is of low quality in this sense. On the other hand, the causal effect might be even higher if money, working skills and parenting practices are endogenous. Married men have less drug abuse and alcohol use and are more often at home during nights.[288]

Health
Main article: Marriage and health
Marriage, like other close relationships, exerts considerable influence on health.[289] Married people experience lower morbidity and mortality across such diverse health threats as cancer, heart attacks, and surgery.[290] Research on marriage and health is part of the broader study of the benefits of social relationships.
Social ties provide people with a sense of identity, purpose, belonging, and support.[291] Simply being married, as well as the quality of one's marriage, have been linked to diverse measures of health.[289][clarification needed]
The health-protective effect of marriage is stronger for men than women.[290][292] Marital status—the simple fact of being married—confers more health benefits to men than women.[290]
Women's health is more strongly impacted than men's by marital conflict or satisfaction, such that unhappily married women do not enjoy better health relative to their single counterparts.[290][292][293] Most research on marriage and health has focused on heterosexual couples; more work is needed to clarify the health impacts of same-sex marriage.[289]

Divorce and annulment
Main articles: Divorce and Divorce law by country
In most societies, the death of one of the partners terminates the marriage, and in monogamous societies, this allows the other partner to remarry, though sometimes after a waiting or mourning period.
In some societies, a marriage can be annulled, when an authority declares that a marriage never happened. Jurisdictions often have provisions for void marriages or voidable marriages.
A marriage may also be terminated through divorce. Countries that have relatively recently legalized divorce are Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Paraguay (1991), Colombia (1991), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011). As of 2012, the Philippines and the Vatican City are the only jurisdictions which do not allow divorce (this is currently under discussion in Philippines).[294] After divorce, one spouse may have to pay alimony. Laws concerning divorce and the ease with which a divorce can be obtained vary widely around the world. After a divorce or an annulment, the people concerned are free to remarry (or marry).
A statutory right of two married partners to mutually consent to divorce was enacted in western nations in the mid-20th century. In the United States, no-fault divorce was first enacted in California in 1969 and the final state to legalize it was New York in 1989.[295]
About 45% of marriages in Britain[296] and, according to a 2009 study, 46% of marriages in the U.S.[297] end in divorce.

History
The history of marriage is often considered under History of the family or legal history.[298]

Ancient world
Ancient Near East
Many cultures have legends concerning the origins of marriage. The way in which a marriage is conducted and its rules and ramifications have changed over time, as has the institution itself, depending on the culture or demographic of the time.[299]
The first recorded evidence of marriage ceremonies uniting a man and a woman dates back to approximately 2350 BC, in ancient Mesopotamia.[300] Wedding ceremonies, as well as dowry and divorce, can be traced back to Mesopotamia and Babylonia.[301]
According to ancient Hebrew tradition, a wife was seen as being property of high value and was, therefore, usually, carefully looked after.[278][281] Early nomadic communities in the middle east practiced a form of marriage known as beena, in which a wife would own a tent of her own, within which she retains complete independence from her husband;[302] this principle appears to survive in parts of early Israelite society, as some early passages of the Bible appear to portray certain wives as each owning a tent as a personal possession[302] (specifically, Jael,[303] Sarah,[304] and Jacob's wives[305]).
The husband, too, is indirectly implied to have some responsibilities to his wife. The Covenant Code orders "If he take him another; her food, her clothing, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish(or lessen)".[306] If the husband does not provide the first wife with these things, she is to be divorced, without cost to her.[307] The Talmud interprets this as a requirement for a man to provide food and clothing to, and have sex with, each of his wives.[308][clarification needed] However, "duty of marriage" is also interpreted as whatever one does as a married couple, which is more than just sexual activity. And the term diminish, which means to lessen, shows the man must treat her as if he was not married to another.
As a polygynous society, the Israelites did not have any laws that imposed marital fidelity on men.[309][310] However, the prophet Malachi states that none should be faithless to the wife of his youth and that God hates divorce.[311] Adulterous married women, adulterous betrothed women, and the men who slept with them, however, were subject to the death penalty by the biblical laws against adultery[312][313][314] According to the Priestly Code of the Book of Numbers, if a pregnant[315] woman was suspected of adultery, she was to be subjected to the Ordeal of Bitter Water,[316] a form of trial by ordeal, but one that took a miracle to convict. The literary prophets indicate that adultery was a frequent occurrence, despite their strong protests against it,[317][318][319][320] and these legal strictness's.[309]

Classical Greece and Rome
See also: Marriage in ancient Rome and Ancient Greek wedding customs
In ancient Greece, no specific civil ceremony was required for the creation of a heterosexual marriage – only mutual agreement and the fact that the couple must regard each other as husband and wife accordingly.[321] Men usually married when they were in their 20s and women in their teens.[322] It has been suggested that these ages made sense for the Greeks because men were generally done with military service or financially established by their late 20s, and marrying a teenage girl ensured ample time for her to bear children, as life expectancies were significantly lower.[citation needed] Married Greek women had few rights in ancient Greek society and were expected to take care of the house and children.[citation needed] Time was an important factor in Greek marriage. For example, there were superstitions that being married during a full moon was good luck and Greeks married in the winter in honor of Hera.[323] Inheritance was more important than feelings: a woman whose father dies without male heirs could be forced to marry her nearest male relative – even if she had to divorce her husband first.[324]
There were several types of marriages in ancient Roman society. The traditional ("conventional") form called conventio in manum required a ceremony with witnesses and was also dissolved with a ceremony.[325] In this type of marriage, a woman lost her family rights of inheritance of her old family and gained them with her new one. She now was subject to the authority of her husband.[326] There was the free marriage known as sine manu. In this arrangement, the wife remained a member of her original family; she stayed under the authority of her father, kept her family rights of inheritance with her old family and did not gain any with the new family.[327] The minimum age of marriage for girls was 12.[328]

Germanic tribes
 Seuso and his wife
Among ancient Germanic tribes, the bride and groom were roughly the same age and generally older than their Roman counterparts, at least according to Tacitus:

The youths partake late of the pleasures of love, and hence pass the age of puberty unexhausted: nor are the virgins hurried into marriage; the same maturity, the same full growth is required: the sexes unite equally matched and robust, and the children inherit the vigor of their parents.[329]
Where Aristotle had set the prime of life at 37 years for men and 18 for women, the Visigothic Code of law in the 7th century placed the prime of life at 20 years for both men and women, after which both presumably married. Tacitus states that ancient Germanic brides were on average about 20 and were roughly the same age as their husbands.[330] Tacitus, however, had never visited the German-speaking lands and most of his information on Germania comes from secondary sources. In addition, Anglo-Saxon women, like those of other Germanic tribes, are marked as women from the age of 12 and older, based on archaeological finds, implying that the age of marriage coincided with puberty.[331]

Europe
Further information: History of the family and Royal intermarriage
 Woodcut. How Reymont and Melusina were betrothed / And by the bishop were blessed in their bed on their wedlock. From the Melusine, 15th century.
From the early Christian era (30 to 325 CE), marriage was thought of as primarily a private matter, with no uniform religious or other ceremony being required.[332] However, bishop Ignatius of Antioch writing around 110 to bishop Polycarp of Smyrna exhorts, "[I]t becomes both men and women who marry, to form their union with the approval of the bishop, that their marriage may be according to God, and not after their own lust."[333]
In 12th-century Europe, women took the surname of their husbands and starting in the second half of the 16th century parental consent along with the church's consent was required for marriage.[334]
With few local exceptions, until 1545, Christian marriages in Europe were by mutual consent, declaration of intention to marry and upon the subsequent physical union of the parties.[335][336] The couple would promise verbally to each other that they would be married to each other; the presence of a priest or witnesses was not required.[337] This promise was known as the "verbum." If freely given and made in the present tense (e.g., "I marry you"), it was unquestionably binding;[335] if made in the future tense ("I will marry you"), it would constitute a betrothal.
In 1552 a wedding took place in Zufia, Navarre, between Diego de Zufia and Mari-Miguel following the custom as it was in the realm since the Middle Ages, but the man denounced the marriage on the grounds that its validity was conditioned to "riding" her ("si te cabalgo, lo cual dixo de bascuence (...) balvin yo baneça aren senar içateko"). The tribunal of the kingdom rejected the husband's claim, validating the wedding, but the husband appealed to the tribunal in Zaragoza, and this institution annulled the marriage.[338] According to the Charter of Navarre, the basic union consisted of a civil marriage with no priest required and at least two witnesses, and the contract could be broken using the same formula.[citation needed] The Church in turn lashed out at those who got married twice or thrice in a row while their formers spouses were still alive. In 1563 the Council of Trent, twenty-fourth session, required that a valid marriage must be performed by a priest before two witnesses.[338]
One of the functions of churches from the Middle Ages was to register marriages, which was not obligatory. There was no state involvement in marriage and personal status, with these issues being adjudicated in ecclesiastical courts. During the Middle Ages marriages were arranged, sometimes as early as birth, and these early pledges to marry were often used to ensure treaties between different royal families, nobles, and heirs of fiefdoms. The church resisted these imposed unions, and increased the number of causes for nullification of these arrangements.[334] As Christianity spread during the Roman period and the Middle Ages, the idea of free choice in selecting marriage partners increased and spread with it.[334]
In Medieval Western Europe, later marriage and higher rates of definitive celibacy (the so-called "European marriage pattern") helped to constrain patriarchy at its most extreme level. For example, Medieval England saw marriage age as variable depending on economic circumstances, with couples delaying marriage until the early twenties when times were bad and falling to the late teens after the Black Death, when there were labor shortages;[339] by appearances, marriage of adolescents was not the norm in England.[340][341] Where the strong influence of classical Celtic and Germanic cultures (which were not rigidly patriarchal)[342][343] helped to offset the Judaeo-Roman patriarchal influence,[344] in Eastern Europe the tradition of early and universal marriage (often in early adolescence),[345] as well as traditional Slavic patrilocal custom,[346] led to a greatly inferior status of women at all levels of society.[347]
The average age of marriage for most of Northwestern Europe from 1500 to 1800 was around 25 years of age;[348][349][350] as the Church dictated that both parties had to be at least 21 years of age to marry without the consent of their parents, the bride and groom were roughly the same age, with most brides in their early twenties and most grooms two or three years older,[350] and a substantial number of women married for the first time in their thirties and forties, particularly in urban areas,[351] with the average age at first marriage rising and falling as circumstances dictated. In better times, more people could afford to marry earlier and thus fertility rose and conversely marriages were delayed or forgone when times were bad, thus restricting family size;[352] after the Black Death, the greater availability of profitable jobs allowed more people to marry young and have more children,[353] but the stabilization of the population in the 16th century meant fewer job opportunities and thus more people delaying marriages.[354]
The age of marriage was not absolute, however, as child marriages occurred throughout the Middle Ages and later, with just some of them including:

The 1552 CE marriage between John Somerford and Jane Somerford Brereto, at the ages of 3 and 2, respectively.[42]
In the early 1900s, Magnus Hirschfeld surveyed the age of consent in about 50 countries, which he found to often range between 12 and 16. In the Vatican, the age of consent was 12.[355]
As part of the Protestant Reformation, the role of recording marriages and setting the rules for marriage passed to the state, reflecting Martin Luther's view that marriage was a "worldly thing".[356] By the 17th century, many of the Protestant European countries had a state involvement in marriage.
In England, under the Anglican Church, marriage by consent and cohabitation was valid until the passage of Lord Hardwicke's Act in 1753. This act instituted certain requirements for marriage, including the performance of a religious ceremony observed by witnesses.[357]

 A marriage in 1960 in Italy. Photo by Paolo Monti.
As part of the Counter-Reformation, in 1563 the Council of Trent decreed that a Roman Catholic marriage would be recognized only if the marriage ceremony was officiated by a priest with two witnesses. The Council also authorized a Catechism, issued in 1566, which defined marriage as "The conjugal union of man and woman, contracted between two qualified persons, which obliges them to live together throughout life."[228]
In the early modern period, John Calvin and his Protestant colleagues reformulated Christian marriage by enacting the Marriage Ordinance of Geneva, which imposed "The dual requirements of state registration and church consecration to constitute marriage"[228] for recognition.
In England and Wales, Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act 1753 required a formal ceremony of marriage, thereby curtailing the practice of Fleet Marriage, an irregular or a clandestine marriage.[358] These were clandestine or irregular marriages performed at Fleet Prison, and at hundreds of other places. From the 1690s until the Marriage Act of 1753 as many as 300,000 clandestine marriages were performed at Fleet Prison alone.[359] The Act required a marriage ceremony to be officiated by an Anglican priest in the Anglican Church with two witnesses and registration. The Act did not apply to Jewish marriages or those of Quakers, whose marriages continued to be governed by their own customs.

 Newlyweds after a civil ceremony in the tower of Stockholm City Hall in 2016
In England and Wales, since 1837, civil marriages have been recognized as a legal alternative to church marriages under the Marriage Act 1836. In Germany, civil marriages were recognized in 1875. This law permitted a declaration of the marriage before an official clerk of the civil administration, when both spouses affirm their will to marry, to constitute a legally recognized valid and effective marriage, and allowed an optional private clerical marriage ceremony.
In contemporary English common law, a marriage is a voluntary contract by a man and a woman, in which by agreement they choose to become husband and wife.[360] Edvard Westermarck proposed that "the institution of marriage has probably developed out of a primeval habit".[361]
Since the late twentieth century, major social changes in Western countries have led to changes in the demographics of marriage, with the age of first marriage increasing, fewer people marrying, and more couples choosing to cohabit rather than marry. For example, the number of marriages in Europe decreased by 30% from 1975 to 2005.[362] As of 2000, the average marriage age range was 25–44 years for men and 22–39 years for women.

China
Main article: Chinese marriage
The mythological origin of Chinese marriage is a story about Nüwa and Fu Xi who invented proper marriage procedures after becoming married. In ancient Chinese society, people of the same surname are supposed to consult with their family trees prior to marriage to reduce the potential risk of unintentional incest. Marrying one's maternal relatives was generally not thought of as incest. Families sometimes intermarried from one generation to another. Over time, Chinese people became more geographically mobile. Individuals remained members of their biological families. When a couple died, the husband and the wife were buried separately in the respective clan's graveyard. In a maternal marriage, a male would become a son-in-law who lived in the wife's home.
The New Marriage Law of 1950 radically changed Chinese marriage traditions, enforcing monogamy, equality of men and women, and choice in marriage; arranged marriages were the most common type of marriage in China until then. Starting October 2003, it became legal to marry or divorce without authorization from the couple's work units.[363][clarification needed] Although people with infectious diseases such as AIDS may now marry, marriage is still illegal for the mentally ill.[364]

See also
Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages
List of countries by marriage rate
Marriage certificate
Relationship science
Notes


^ Same-sex marriage is legally performed and recognized in the states of Aguascalientes, Baja California, Baja California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Colima, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Michoacán, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo León, Oaxaca, Puebla, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosí, and Mexico City as well as in some municipalities in Guerrero, Querétaro and Zacatecas. Marriages entered into in these jurisdictions are fully recognized by law throughout Mexico. In other states, same-sex marriage is available by court injunction (amparo).

^ Same-sex marriage is performed and recognized by law in the Netherlands proper, including Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba. Marriages entered into there have minimal recognition in Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten.

^ Same-sex marriage is performed and recognized by law in New Zealand proper, but not in Tokelau, the Cook Islands or Niue, which together make up the Realm of New Zealand.

^ Except the British Overseas Territories of Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the Turks and Caicos Islands.

^ Same-sex marriage is performed and recognized by law in all fifty states and the District of Columbia, all territories except American Samoa, and in some tribal nations.

^ The IACHR ruling was issued on 9 January 2018, with Costa Rica accepting the result in a national ruling by the Supreme Court of Costa Rica on 8 August 2018. Ecuador became the first country in which the international ruling was implemented, following a national ruling by the Constitutional Court of Ecuador on 12 June 2019. The other countries that are signatories to the American Convention on Human Rights and recognize the binding jurisdiction of the court, and which do not already have same-sex marriage nationally, are Barbados, Bolivia, Chile, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Suriname. Dominica, Grenada and Jamaica, which are also signatories to the convention, have not agreed to the court's blanket jurisdiction.




References


^ Haviland, William A.; Prins, Harald E.L.; McBride, Bunny; Walrath, Dana (2011). Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge (13th ed.). Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-81178-7. "A nonethnocentric definition of marriage is a culturally sanctioned union between two or more people that establishes certain rights and obligations between the people, between them and their children, and between them and their in-laws."

^ Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2008, Vol. 1, p. 1353, US Department of State.

^ Baten, Joerg; de Pleijt, Alexandra M. (2018). "Girl power Generates Superstars in Long-term Development: Female Autonomy and Human Capital Formation in Early Modern Europe". CEPR Working Paper. 13348.

^ Oxford English Dictionary 11th Edition, "marriage"

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com.

^ a b c Bell, Duran (1997). "Defining Marriage and Legitimacy" (PDF). Current Anthropology. 38 (2): 237–54. doi:10.1086/204606. JSTOR 2744491. S2CID 144637145. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2013.

^ Gerstmann, Evan.  Same-sex Marriage and the Constitution, p. 22 (Cambridge University Press, 2004).

^ Westermarck, Edward (1 April 2003). History of Human Marriage 1922. Kessinger Publishing. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-7661-4618-1.

^ Westermarck, Edward (1936). The Future of Marriage in Western Civilisation. Books for Libraries Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8369-5304-6.

^ Notes and Queries on Anthropology. Royal Anthropological Institute. 1951. p. 110.

^ Gough, E. Kathleen (1959). "The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage". Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 89 (1): 23–34. doi:10.2307/2844434. JSTOR 2844434. Nuer female-female marriage is done to keep property within a family that has no sons. It is not a form of lesbianism.

^ Gough, Kathleen (1968). "The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage".  In Paul Bohannan & John Middleton (ed.). Marriage, Family and Residence. New York: Natural History Press. p. 68.

^ Leach, Edmund (December 1955). "Polyandry, Inheritance and the Definition of Marriage". Man. 55 (12): 183. doi:10.2307/2795331. JSTOR 2795331.

^ Lung, Tang (2014). "Marriage of Inanna and Dumuzi". World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia.

^ a b Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 7.

^ Roes, Frans L. (1992). "The Size of Societies, Monogamy, and Belief in High Gods Supporting Human Morality". Tijdschrift voor Sociale Wetenschappen. 37 (1): 53–58.

^ "The Demographics of Remarriage". Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project. 14 November 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2021.

^ Fox, Robin (1997). Reproduction & Succession: Studies in Anthropology, Law and Society. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. p. 34.

^ Simpson, Bob (1998). Changing Families: An Ethnographic Approach to Divorce and Separation. Oxford: Berg.

^ a b Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: a cross-cultural analysis. Berg. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-84520-220-0.

^ Dupanloup I, Pereira L, Bertorelle G, Calafell F, Prata MJ, Amorim A, Barbujani G (2003). "A recent shift from polygyny to monogamy in humans is suggested by the analysis of worldwide Y-chromosome diversity". J Mol Evol. 57 (1): 85–97. Bibcode:2003JMolE..57...85D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.454.1662. doi:10.1007/s00239-003-2458-x. PMID 12962309. S2CID 2673314.

^ Ember, Carol R. (2011). "What we know and what we don't know about variation in social organization: Melvin Ember's approach to the study of kinship". Cross-Cultural Research. 45 (1): 27–30. doi:10.1177/1069397110383947. S2CID 143952998.

^ Ethnographic Atlas Codebook Archived 18 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine derived from George P. Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas recording the marital composition of 1231 societies from 1960 to 1980

^ a b Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-84788-617-0.

^ Fox, Robin (1997). Reproduction & Succession: Studies in Anthropology, Law, and Society. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. p. 48.

^ Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. pp. 125–27.

^ a b Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. p. 9.

^ Fox, Robin (1997). Reproduction & Succession: Studies in Anthropology, Law and Society. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. p. 21.

^ Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. pp. 17, 89–107.

^ Starkweather, Katherine; Hames, Raymond (June 2012). "A survey of non-classical polyandry". Human Nature. 23 (2): 149–72. doi:10.1007/s12110-012-9144-x. PMID 22688804. S2CID 2008559. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017.

^ Starkweather, Katherine; Hames, Raymond (June 2012). "A survey of non-classical polyandry". Human Nature. 23 (2): 149–72. doi:10.1007/s12110-012-9144-x. PMID 22688804. S2CID 2008559.

^ Levine, Nancy (1998). The Dynamics of polyandry: kinship, domesticity, and population on the Tibetan border. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Murdock, 1949, p. 24. "group marriage or a marital union embracing at once several men and several women."

^ "Group Marriage". Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Child Marriage Archived 7 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine UNICEF (2011)

^ "Q & A: Child Marriage and Violations of Girls' Rights – Human Rights Watch". 14 June 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2014.

^ Robertson, Stephen. "Age of Consent Laws". Children and Youth in History. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2019.

^ "Understanding State Statutes on Minimum Marriage Age and Exceptions Laws" (PDF). Tahirih Justice Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2017.

^ a b c d e "I have a right to". BBC World Service. Retrieved 7 October 2014.

^ a b "Child marriages: 39,000 every day". WHO. Archived from the original on 14 March 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2014.

^ Bullough, Vern L. "Age of Consent". Encyclopedia. Gale Group. Retrieved 18 October 2015.

^ a b Hermann Heinrich Ploss, Max Bartels, Paul Bartels (1935). Woman: An Historical Gynæcological and Anthropological Compendium. London: William Heinemann (Medical Books) Ltd. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-4831-9419-6.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ A Note on Child Marriage UNICEF (July 2012), p. 3

^ Matilda Coxe Stevenson, The Zuni Indians: Their Mythology, Esoteric Fraternities, and Ceremonies, (BiblioBazaar, 2010) p. 37 Quote: "the most intelligent person in the pueblo. Strong character made his word law among both men and women with whom he associated. Though his wrath was dreaded by men as well as women, he was loved by all children, to whom he was ever kind."

^ Eskridge, William N. (1993). "A History of Same-Sex Marriage". Virginia Law Review. 79 (7): 1453–58. doi:10.2307/1073379. JSTOR 1073379.

^ Alderson, Kevin; Lahey, Kathleen A. (2004). Same-Sex Marriage: The Personal and the Political. Insomniac Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-894663-63-2.

^ ubi scelus est id, quod non proficit scire, ubi venus mutatur in alteram formam, ubi amor quaeritur nec videtur, iubemus insurgere leges, armari iura gladio ultore, ut exquisitis poenis subdantur infames, qui sunt vel qui futuri sunt rei.Ancientrome.ru "where that crime is found, which is unfit even to know, we command the law to arise armed with an avenging sword that the infamous men who are, or shall in future be guilty of it, may undergo the most severe punishments." translation by Lord William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1769, Vol. IV, pp. 215–16.

^ Kuefler, Mathew (2007). "The Marriage Revolution in Late Antiquity: The Theodosian Code and Later Roman Marriage Law". Journal of Family History. 32 (4): 343–70. doi:10.1177/0363199007304424. S2CID 143807895.

^ Hinsch, Bret (1990). Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition in China. Reed Business Information, Inc. ISBN 978-0-520-07869-7.

^ "Gay Marriage in Montaigne". bway.net. 5 December 1998. Archived from the original on 5 December 1998. Retrieved 5 December 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ İlkkaracan, Pınar (2008). Deconstructing sexuality in the Middle East: challenges and discourses. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7546-7235-7.

^ Inhorn, Marcia (2006). "Making Muslim Babies: IVF and Gamete Donation in Sunni versus Shi'a Islam". Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry. 30 (4): 427–50. doi:10.1007/s11013-006-9027-x. PMC 1705533. PMID 17051430.

^ Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 – Sect 995.1(1): ""spouse" of an individual includes: (a) another individual (whether of the same sex or a different sex) with whom the individual is in a relationship that is registered under a * State law or * Territory law prescribed for the purposes of section 22B of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 as a kind of relationship prescribed for the purposes of that section; and (b) another individual who, although not legally married to the individual, lives with the individual on a genuine domestic basis in a relationship as a couple."

^ Cherlin, Andrew J. (2004). "The Deinstitutionalization of American Marriage" (PDF). Journal of Marriage and the Family. 66 (4): 848–61. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.614.8920. doi:10.1111/j.0022-2445.2004.00058.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017.

^ Gargan, Edward A. (19 March 2001). "China's New Brides Put Freedom First/All perks, no work in 'walking marriages'". Newsday. p. A.04.

^ Karam, Souhail (21 July 2006). "Misyar offers marriage-lite in strict Saudi society". The Boston Globe. Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 February 2009.

^ "A Wife Wanted". Royal Cornwall Gazette, Falmouth Packet and Plymouth Journal. 18 October 1828. p. 3.

^ "World Fertility Report: 2003". United Nations. 2004. Retrieved 26 April 2006.

^ "World Marriage Patterns 2000". United Nations. 2000. Retrieved 26 April 2006.

^ DREFAHL, SVEN (7 May 2010). "How Does the Age Gap Between Partners Affect Their Survival?". Demography. 47 (2): 313–326. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0106. PMC 3000022. PMID 20608099.

^ "Mind the gap – does age difference in relationships matter?". phys.org.

^ Harmanci, Reyhan (15 April 2020). "The Truth About Pregnancy Over 40". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020.

^ "Having a Baby at 40: Benefits, Risks, and What to Expect". Healthline. 4 March 2019.

^ Stephen K. Sanderson (2010), "Why Rational Choice Theory and Sociobiology Are Natural Allies" (PDF), Evolution, Biology and Society, 7 (1), archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2015, retrieved 18 April 2015

^ Lancaster, J.B.; Altmann, J.; Sherrod, L.R.; Rossi, A. (2010). Parenting Across the Life Span: Biosocial Dimensions. Aldine Transaction. ISBN 978-1-4128-4452-9.

^ Hopcroft, Rosemary L. (April 2021). "High income men have high value as long-term mates in the U.S. (abstract)". Evolution and Human Behavior. 42 (3). doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2021.03.004. S2CID 233667442. Retrieved 26 March 2021.

^ Strong, Anise (2006). "Incest Laws and Absent Taboos in Roman Egypt". Ancient History Bulletin. 20.

^ Lewis, N. (1983). Life in Egypt under Roman Rule. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-814848-7.

^ Frier, Bruce W.; Bagnall, Roger S. (1994). The Demography of Roman Egypt. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-46123-8.

^ Shaw, B.D. (1992). "Explaining Incest: Brother-Sister Marriage in Graeco-Roman Egypt". Man. New Series. 27 (2): 267–99. doi:10.2307/2804054. JSTOR 2804054.

^ Hopkins, Keith (1980). "Brother-Sister Marriage in Roman Egypt". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 22 (3): 303–54. doi:10.1017/S0010417500009385. S2CID 143698328.

^ remijsen, sofie. "Incest or Adoption? Brother-Sister Marriage in Roman Egypt Revisited" (PDF).

^ Scheidel, W. (1997). "Brother-sister marriage in Roman Egypt" (PDF). Journal of Biosocial Science. 29 (3): 361–71. doi:10.1017/s0021932097003611. PMID 9881142. S2CID 23732024. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2013.

^ Conniff, Richard (1 August 2003). "Richard Conniff. "Go Ahead, Kiss Your Cousin."". Discovermagazine.com.

^ Kershaw, Sarah (26 November 2009). "Shaking Off the Shame". The New York Times.

^ See Article 809 of the Korean Civil Code and "The first ten years of the Korean Constitutional Court" (PDF). Constitutional Court of Korea. p. 242 (p. 256 of the PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2012.

^ Law Reform (Marriage and Divorce) Act 1976 Archived 7 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine (for Hindus only)

^ (in Russian) The Family Code of the Russian Federation, Article 14 (in Russian). Semkodeks.ru (13 May 2009). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ 
Ottenheimer, Martin (1996). "Chapter 3". Forbidden Relatives: The American Myth of Cousin Marriage. University of Illinois.

^ "Islamic View on Marrying Cousins". IslamonLine.net. Archived from the original on 16 July 2007. Retrieved 4 June 2017.

^ Srinivas, Mysore Narasimhachar (1980). India: Social Structure. Delhi: Hindustan Publishing Corporation. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-4128-2619-8.

^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1972). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 27–29.

^ Radcliffe-Brown, A.R., Daryll Forde (1950). African Systems of Kinship and Marriage. London: KPI Limited.

^ Lévi-Strauss, Claude (1963). Structural Anthropology. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 9780465082308.

^ "Orange County Register". Orange County Register. 4 July 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2021.

^ Ethics – Slavery: Modern slavery. BBC. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, Gulnara Shahinian. United Nations. Human Rights Council Twenty-first session. 10 July 2012

^ "Child Marriage Factsheet: State of World Population 2005". UNFPA. Archived from the original on 16 August 2007.

^ Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 6.

^ "India's dowry deaths". BBC News. 16 July 2003.

^ Anita Pratap (11 September 1995) Women: killed by greed and oppression". Time Magazine. Volume 146, No. 11

^ "Nepal bans dowry, caste-based discrimination – OneWorld South Asia". Southasia.oneworld.net. 27 January 2009. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2012.

^ Tanwar, Reicha (2007). Dowery the North Indian Perspective. Pinnacle Technology. pp. 36–. ISBN 978-1-61820-208-6.

^ Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 8.

^ Exodus 22:15–16

^ "A translation of some parts of the Civil Code of Iran". International-divorce.com.

^ "What are marriage penalties and bonuses?". Tax Policy Center. Retrieved 28 June 2021.

^ Renacci, James B. "Simplifying America's Tax System." Simplifying America's Tax System (2016): 1–11. Renacci.house.gov. July 2016. Web. 26 Feb. 2017.

^ Rosenblatt, Paul C. (2006). Two in a Bed: The Social System of Couple Bed Sharing. State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-6829-6. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 13 January 2007.

^ Sanday, Peggy Reeves (2002). Women at the center: life in a modern matriarchy. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-8906-8.

^ For example, Lewis Henry Morgan, Edward Tylor, or George Peter Murdock

^ as has been shown by Korotayev

^ Korotayev, A. (2003). "Form of marriage, sexual division of labor, and postmarital residence in cross-cultural perspective: A reconsideration". Journal of Anthropological Research. 59 (1): 69–89. doi:10.1086/jar.59.1.3631445. JSTOR 3631445. S2CID 147513567.

^ Korotayev, A. (2003). "Division of Labor by Gender and Postmarital Residence in Cross-Cultural Perspective: A Reconsideration". Cross-Cultural Research. 37 (4): 335–72. doi:10.1177/1069397103253685. S2CID 145694651.

^ Ember, Melvin; Ember, Carol R. (1983). Marriage, Family, and Kinship: Comparative Studies of Social Organization. New Haven: HRAF Press. ISBN 978-0-87536-113-0.

^ "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations. Retrieved 26 December 2013.

^ Leach, Edmund (1968).  Paul Bonannan and John Middleton (ed.). Marriage, Family, and Residence. The Natural History Press. ISBN 978-1-121-64470-0.

^ Krier, James E.; Gregory S. Alexander; Michael H. Schill; Jesse Dukeminier (2006). Property. Aspen Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7355-5792-5. Excerpt – p. 335: "...at the wedding; hence the importance of including in the marriage ceremony the words, 'With all my worldly goods I thee endow.'"

^ Gallagher, Maggie (2002). "What is Marriage For? The Public Purposes of Marriage Law" (PDF). Louisiana law review.

^ "Adultery" Encyclopædia Britannica

^ Q & A: Child Marriage and Violations of Girls' Rights | Human Rights Watch. Hrw.org (14 June 2013). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ WHO | Child marriages: 39,000 every day. Who.int (7 March 2013). Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ "State Variations on American Marriage Prohibitions". www.umanitoba.ca. Retrieved 10 July 2021.

^ Hafen, Bruce C. (1983). "The Constitutional Status of Marriage, Kinship, and Sexual Privacy: Balancing the Individual and Social Interests". Michigan Law Review. 81 (3): 463–574. doi:10.2307/1288509. ISSN 0026-2234. JSTOR 1288509.

^ Campagno, Marcelo (18 August 2014). "Patronage and Other Logics of Social Organization in Ancient Egypt during the IIIrd Millennium bce". Journal of Egyptian History. 7 (1): 1–33. doi:10.1163/18741665-12340012. ISSN 1874-1657.

^ Frank W Sweet (1 January 2005). "The Invention of the Color Line: 1691—Essays on the Color Line and the One-Drop Rule". Backentyme Essays. Archived from the original on 9 April 2007. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Karthikeyan, Hrishi; Chin, Gabriel (2002). "Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asian Americans, 1910–1950". Asian Law Journal. 9 (1). SSRN 283998.

^ "Where were Interracial Couples Illegal?". LovingDay.

^ "Courtroom History" Archived 31 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Lovingday.org Retrieved 28 June 2007

^ Stein, Edward (2004). "Past and present proposed amendments to the United States constitution regarding marriage". Washington University Law Quarterly. 82 (3). SSRN 576181.

^ Michael Burleigh (7 November 1991). The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945. Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-521-39802-2.

^ "Inter-American Court endorses same-sex marriage". Agence France-Presse. Yahoo7. 9 January 2018. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018. Retrieved 9 January 2018.

^ "Inter-American Human Rights Court backs same-sex marriage". BBC. 10 January 2018. Retrieved 6 April 2018."Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. ___ (2015)". Justia. 26 June 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2018.Smith, Susan K. (30 July 2009). "Marriage a Civil Right, not Sacred Rite". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 September 2012."Decision in Perry v. Schwarzenegger" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2010.

^ "Two in Three Americans Support Same-Sex Marriage". Gallup. 23 May 2018."For several years a majority of Australians have supported marriage equality". Australian Marriage Equality Incorporated. Retrieved 22 May 2015."Support for Same‐Sex Marriage in Latin America" (PDF). Vanderbilt University. Retrieved 25 September 2012.

^ "Polygamy in Muslim countries". Waleg.com. 26 June 2005. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2013.

^ Berstein, Nina (25 March 2007). "Polygamy, Practiced in Secrecy, Follows Africans to New York City". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 July 2008.

^ "Tunisia: Notable Features: Polygamy". Law.emory.edu.

^ a b Hagerty, Barbara Bradley (27 May 2008). "Some Muslims in U.S. Quietly Engage in Polygamy". National Public Radio: All Things Considered.

^ Lyman, Edward Leo (1994). "Statehood for Utah".  In Powell, Allan Kent (ed.). Utah History Encyclopedia. Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press. ISBN 978-0-87480-425-6. OCLC 30473917. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013.

^ "Sri Lanka: Family Code". Genderindex.org. Archived from the original on 27 October 2010.

^ See Polygamy in India

^ "Turkish Civil and Penal Code Reforms from a Gender Perspective: The Success of two Nationwide Campaigns" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 December 2006. (6.21 MB) (p. 18)

^ a b "Common Law Marriage FAQ." Nolo. 31 July 2009.

^ NYC Protest and Civil Rights March Opposing Proposition 8, Andy Towle, Towleroad.com, 13 November 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2008.

^ "Immigration to the United States: Fiscal years 1820–2003" (PDF). (2.03 MB)

^ "Sham marriage: Married on the day they met to prolong her stay". Retrieved 26 June 2014.

^ "Are married women required by law to obey their husbands?". Our World in Data. Retrieved 15 February 2020.

^ a b Weadock, Briana. "Disciplining Marriage: Gender, Power and Resistance" Archived 25 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association, Hilton San Francisco & Renaissance Parc 55 Hotel, San Francisco, CA,, 14 August 2004.

^ Evans, Tanya (2005) Women, Marriage and the Family, p. 64 in Barker, Hannah, & Elaine Chalus, eds., Women's History: Britain, 1700–1850: An Introduction, Oxon/London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-29177-1.

^ Evans, Tanya, Women, Marriage and the Family, op. cit., in Barker, Hannah, & Elaine Chalus, eds., Women's History, op. cit., p. 66 & n. 69.

^ Wollstonecraft, Mary (1995). Wollstonecraft: A Vindication of the Rights of Man and a Vindication of the Rights of Woman and Hints. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43633-5.

^ The Traffic in Women by Emma Goldman 1910. Marxists.org. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1929). Marriage And Morals.

^ Carter, Angela (1984). Nights at the circus. Chatto & Windus. ISBN 9780701139322.

^ Hardisty, Jean (2008) Marriage as a cure for poverty?. Red Sun Press, ISBN 0-915987-21-X.

^ Reduce Poverty Using Proven Methods: Eliminate Federal Funding of "Marriage Promotion" and Staff HHS with Appointees Who Value All Families. arts.cornell.edu

^ Veronica Jaris Tichenor, "Thinking About Gender and Power in Marriage", The Kaleidoscope of Gender, 2010

^ bell hooks (2000). Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-1663-5.

^ Barnett, Hilaire A, Introduction to Feminist Jurisprudence (London: Cavendish Publishing, 1998 (ISBN 1-85941-237-8)), p. 35 and, per p. 35 n. 35, see chap. 3 (author then of Queen Mary & Westfield Coll., Univ. of London).

^ a b Sprecher, Susan; Felmlee, Diane (1997). "The Balance of Power in Romantic Heterosexual Couples Over Time from "His" and "Her" Perspectives". Sex Roles. 37 (5/6): 361–79. doi:10.1023/A:1025601423031. S2CID 141083115. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011.

^ Figure 9, Frances Finnegan, Do Penance or Perish, Congrave Press, 2001.

^ Divale, W. (2000). Pre-Coded Variables for the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, Volume I and II (PDF). Jamaica, New York: York College, CUNY. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008. See Variable 170 and Variable 171

^ Murdock, G.P.; White, D.R. (1969). "Standard cross-cultural sample". Ethnology. 8 (4): 329–69. doi:10.2307/3772907. JSTOR 3772907.

^ Clements, M. (7 August 1994). "Sex in America today: A new national survey reveals how our attitudes are changing". Parade Magazine. pp. 4–6.

^ Laumann, E.O.; Gagnon, J.H.; Michael, R.T.; Michaels, S. (1994). The social organization of sexuality: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Wiederman, M.W. (1997). "Extramarital sex: Prevalence and correlates in a national survey". Journal of Sex Research. 34 (2): 167–74. doi:10.1080/00224499709551881.

^ Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (31 December 2006). "Human sexuality and gender topics: Subjects of major concern to many faith groups". Religioustolerance.org.

^ "Human Rights Voices – Pakistan, August 21, 2008". Eyeontheun.org. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013.

^ "Home". AIDSPortal. Archived from the original on 26 October 2008.

^ a b "Iran". Travel.state.gov. Archived from the original on 1 August 2013.

^ "United Nations Human Rights Website – Treaty Bodies Database – Document – Summary Record – Kuwait". Unhchr.ch.

^ "Culture of Maldives – history, people, clothing, women, beliefs, food, customs, family, social". Everyculture.com.

^ Fakim, Nora (9 August 2012). "BBC News – Morocco: Should pre-marital sex be legal?". BBC.

^ "Legislation of Interpol member states on sexual offences against children – Oman" (PDF). Interpol. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 May 2016.

^ "2010 Human Rights Report: Mauritania". State.gov. 8 April 2011.

^ Dubai FAQs. "Education in Dubai". Dubaifaqs.com.

^ Judd, Terri (10 July 2008). "Briton faces jail for sex on Dubai beach – Middle East – World". The Independent. London.

^ "Sudan must rewrite rape laws to protect victims". Reuters. 28 June 2007. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012.

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "Refworld | Women's Rights in the Middle East and North Africa – Yemen". UNHCR.

^ Ethics – Honour crimes. BBC. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Pandey, Geeta. (16 June 2010) BBC News – Indian community torn apart by 'honour killings'. Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Iran Stoning: Woman To Be Executed For Adultery. Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ "Somali woman stoned for adultery". BBC News. 18 November 2009.

^ Tait, Robert & Hoseiny, Noushin (21 July 2008). "Eight women and a man face stoning in Iran for adultery". The Guardian. London.

^ "Two Men Stoned to Death for Adultery in Iran" Archived 27 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Foxnews.com (13 January 2009). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ "Taliban 'kill adulterous Afghan couple'". BBC News. 16 August 2010.

^ Woman stoned to death in north Afghanistan « RAWA News. Rawa.org. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Smith, David (31 May 2012). "Sudanese woman sentenced to stoning death over adultery claims". The Guardian. London.

^ Islamists: Two stoned to death for committing adultery in Mali. CNN. 2 August 2012.

^ Pakistani couple face death by stoning threat after conviction for adultery | World news. The Guardian. 18 July 2010.

^ Hussain, Zahid (5 September 2008). "Three teenagers buried alive in 'honour killings'". Times Online. London.

^ "Pakistani women buried alive 'for choosing husbands'". Telegraph. London. 1 September 2008. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.

^ "Morocco protest after raped Amina Filali kills herself". BBC News. 15 March 2012.

^ Domestic violence is today illegal in the Western World, but this is not the case in many developing countries. In Jordan, for instance, part of article 340 of the Penal Code states that "he who discovers his wife or one of his female relatives committing adultery and kills, wounds, or injures one of them, is exempted from any penalty. Altstein, Howard & Simon, Rita James (2003). Global perspectives on social issues: marriage and divorce. Lexington, Mass: Lexington Books. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-7391-0588-7.

^ IPS – Adultery Laws Unfairly Target Women, U.N. Says | Inter Press Service. Ipsnews.net (24 October 2012). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ a b DisplayNews. Ohchr.org (18 October 2012). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Indonesia: New Aceh Law Imposes Torture | Human Rights Watch. Hrw.org (11 October 2009). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Court in UAE says beating wife, child OK if no marks are left – CNN.com Archived 25 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Articles.cnn.com. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ Key human rights concerns highlighted by Amnesty International in advance of Swaziland's Universal Periodic Review hearing in October 2011. Amnesty International

^ Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Twenty-eighth session, United Nations, 14 February 2003.

^ Women in France Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Modern and Contemporary France, Taylor and Francis.

^ France's leading women show the way Archived 28 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Parisvoice.com. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ Lesson – The French Civil Code (Napoleonic Code) – Teaching Women's Rights From Past to Present. Womeninworldhistory.com. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ Bennhold, Katrin (5 October 2010). 20 Years After Fall of Wall, Women of Former East Germany Thrive, The New York Times.

^ Trzcinski, Eileen and Holst, Elke (April 2010) Gender Differences in Subjective Well-Being in and out of Management Positions, German Institute for Economic Research, Berlin.

^ Spain – Social Values And Attitudes. Countrystudies.us. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ Statistics by Area – Attitudes towards wife-beating – Statistical table Archived 4 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Childinfo.org. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ "UNICEF Data" (PDF). Retrieved 8 February 2013.

^ "Decriminalization of adultery and defenses". www.endvawnow.org.

^ Collins, Jem (25 July 2018). "It's 2018 And You Still Don't Have A Right To Divorce". EachOther. Retrieved 31 July 2022.

^ Lichauco de Leon, Sunshine (6 October 2014). "The fight to make divorce legal in the Philippines". CNN. Retrieved 11 August 2021.

^ Bartlett, Katherine T. (1999). "Feminism and Family Law". Family Law Quarterly. 33 (3): 475–500.

^ "The Economics of Dowry and Brideprice" (PDF). econ.arts.ubc.ca. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2012.

^ "Human rights groups ask NWFP Govt. to ban 'bride price' to curb women Trafficking". Thefreelibrary.com. 18 January 2010.

^ iSite Interactive Limited (21 November 2011). "PNG Police blame bride price for violence in marriage". Islands Business. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013.

^ "Addressing dowry-related violence through criminalization of dowry demands". Endvawnow.org.

^ "Changing Patterns of Nonmarital Childbearing in the United States". CDC/National Center for Health Statistics. 13 May 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ The 1997 Global Study on Family Values found that only 3% of respondents in Iceland, 8% in France, and 9% in Germany, thought that it was "wrong" to have a child outside marriage. Global Study of Family Values. An International Gallup Poll. Family Values Differ Sharply Around the World. hi-ho.ne.jp

^ In many parts of the world, especially in Muslim majority countries, children born outside marriage and their mothers face severe social and legal difficulties Refugee Review Tribunal Australia. mrt-rrt.gov.au. 21 April 2009.

^ European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born out of Wedlock. Conventions.coe.int. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Council of Europe – ETS no. 085 – European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born out of Wedlock. Conventions.coe.int. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Family Law Act 1975 – SECT 69Q Presumption of paternity arising from cohabitation. Austlii.edu.au. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ ECHR : Anayo v. Germany Publication : [not yet received] Archived 26 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Sim.law.uu.nl. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Parental rights and responsibilities. GOV.UK (1 July 2013). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ Legal guardianship and cohabiting couples. Citizensinformation.ie (8 March 2013). Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ "Global Children's Trends | The Sustainable Demographic Dividend". Sustaindemographicdividend.org.

^ Joice Melo Vieira. The Evolution of Births Outside of Marriage, Paternal Recognition and Children's Rights in Brazil. Department of Demography (IFCH) and Population Studies Center (Nepo), State University of Campinas

^ a b "Eurostat – Tables, Graphs and Maps Interface (TGM) table". ec.europa.eu.

^ "FastStats". www.cdc.gov. 8 August 2018.

^ AGD. "National Apology for Forced Adoptions". www.ag.gov.au. Retrieved 1 July 2019.

^ "Gillard sorry for forced adoptions". BBC News.

^ Bawah, AA.; Akweongo P; Simmons R; Phillips JF. (1999). "Women's fears and men's anxieties: the impact of family planning on gender relations in northern Ghana" (PDF). Studies in Family Planning. 30 (1): 54–66. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4465.1999.00054.x. hdl:2027.42/73927. PMID 10216896.

^ 
Olson, Duane (2011). Issues in Contemporary Christian Thought: A Fortress Introduction. Fortress Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-1-4514-0731-0. Retrieved 17 September 2015. In the course of human history, over thousands of years, many human cultures arise in relative isolation from each other, and major world religions develop in these relatively independent cultures.

^ Zarean, Mansoureh; Barzegar, Khadijeh (2016). "Marriage in Islam, Christianity, and Judaism". Religious Inquiries. 5 (9): 67–80. Retrieved 30 May 2020.

^ Smith, Peter (2000). "Marriage". A concise encyclopedia of the Baháʼí Faith. Oxford: Oneworld Publications. pp. 232–33. ISBN 978-1-85168-184-6.

^ Genesis 2:22–24

^ Matthew 19:6

^ a b c d Witte, John Jr. (1997). From Sacrament to Contract: Marriage, Religion, and Law in the Western Tradition. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 39–40. ISBN 978-0-664-25543-5.

^ "Religions – Christianity: Marriage and weddings". BBC.

^ a b Monger, George P. (2004). "Christian Weddings". Marriage Customs of the World: From Henna to Honeymoons. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC CLIO. pp. 70–71. ISBN 978-1-57607-987-4. OCLC 469368346.

^ a b c *O'Malley, John W. (15 January 2013). Trent: What Happened at the Council. Harvard University Press. p. 225. ISBN 978-0-674-06760-8.
O’Malley, John (22 May 2013). The Council of Trent. Myths, Misunderstandings and Unintended Consequences. Gregorian Biblical BookShop. p. 6. ISBN 978-88-7839-255-7.

^ For clarification, see State of Virginity: Gender, Religion, and Politics in an Early Modern Europe (Google Books) by Ulrike Strasser, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 2007

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Ritual of Marriage". www.newadvent.org.

^ Gen. 2:24

^ See also [Mark 10:7], Gen. 2:24, Matt. 19:5, Eph. 5:31

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Sacrament of Marriage" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b Yrigoyen, Charles Jr.; Warrick, Susan E. (7 November 2013). Historical Dictionary of Methodism. Scarecrow Press. p. 236. ISBN 978-0-8108-7894-5. In Methodism, the sacred service celebrates a covenenat grounded in the will of God and sustained by divine grace. ... Methodism encourages the solemnization of marriages within the context of congregational worship and eucharistic celebration.

^ Eph. 5:29–32

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition, Article Seven, Paragraph 1612". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007.

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition, Article Seven, Paragraph 1601". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007.

^ The Book of Resolutions of The United Methodist Church 2016. United Methodist Publishing House. 16 December 2016. p. 623. ISBN 978-1-5018-3325-0. For the church, the marriage covenant is grounded in the covenant between God and God's people into which Christians enter in their baptism.

^ McLachlan, P. Sacrament of Holy Matrimony. Catholic-pages.com

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition, Article Seven, Paragraph 1665". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007.

^ "Statements of General Synod". Reformed Church in America. 1975. Retrieved 4 June 2021.

^ Evangelical Methodist Church Discipline. Evangelical Methodist Church Conference. 15 July 2017. pp. 22–21. The marriage contract is so sacred that we advise against seeking divorce on any grounds whatseover. Should any member seek divorce on any unscriptural grounds (Matt. 5:32 "But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced comitteth adultery."), and that well proven, he shall be summoned to appear at a meeting in the local church, with the general board working in co-operation with the local church board. If proven guilty of such offense, he shall be dismissed at once, and no longer considered a member of Evangelical Methodist Church. We advise against the remarriage of all divorced persons, as the scriptures declare in Romans 7:3a "...So then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress." If any person becoming converted, and having such marital complications as mentioned above in the days of their sin and ignorance, it is our belief that God will and does forgive them; however, we shall not receive such persons into church membership, but with to extend to them the right hand of fellowship, promising the prayers of God's people. Should any pastor, knowingly or unknowingly, receive such persons that have been divorced and remarried into membership, such membership shall not be valid. Ministers are advised to have nothing to do with the re-marriage of persons divorced on any grounds. In the event any person is divorced by an unbelieving companion and shall remain in an unmarried state, retaining his or her Christian integrity, he or she shall not be dismissed or barred from church membership.

^ Divorce and Remarriage from Augustine to Zwingli. Christianity Today. Retrieved on 6 April 2013.

^ Matthew, 19: 6, New American Bible Revised Edition, [1].

^ Code of Canon Law Annotated, edited by Ernest Caparros et alia, Canon 1056, pp. 806–07 (Woodridge, Illinois: Midwest Theological Forum, 2004); see the printed work to correctly cite the translator(s) et alia; emphasis added.

^ Code of Canon Law Annotated, edited by Ernest Caparros et alia, Canon 1057, §2, p. 807 (Woodridge, Illinois: Midwest Theological Forum, 2004); see the printed work to correctly cite the translator(s) et alia; emphasis added.

^ "GCSE Bitesize: Marriage". BBC.

^ Ephesians 5:31–33

^ Mulhall, Daniel S. (18 September 2013). The Ecumenical Christian Dialogues and The Catechism of the Catholic Church. Paulist Press. p. 155. ISBN 978-1-61643-809-8. The Protestant reformers of the sixteenth century were unwilling to call marriage a sacrament because they did not regard matrimony as a necessary means of grace for salvation. Though not necessary for salvation certainly marriage is a means of grace, thus, sacramental in character.

^ Witte, John (2007). From Sacarament to Contract: Marriage, Religion, and Law in the Western Tradition. The Family, Religion, and Culture (1st ed.). Westminster John Knox Press.

^ Book of Discipline of the Free Methodist Church. Free Methodist Church. 2015. pp. 53–54.

^ "The Family: A Proclamation to the World". ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

^ "Lesson 5: Laws and Ordinances". ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

^ "Lesson 15: Eternal Marriage". ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

^ a b c d Dooley, Sandra (20 June 2016). A Guide to Catholic Weddings. Liturgy Training Publications. pp. 29–30. ISBN 978-1-61833-134-2.

^ "World Religions and Same-Sex Marriage", Marriage Law Project, Columbus School of Law at The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, July 2002 revision

^ "Affirming Congregations, The Episcopal Church and Ministries of the United Church of Canada". United-church.ca. Archived from the original on 31 May 2010.

^ "Religious Groups' Official Positions on Same-Sex Marriage". pewforums.org. 1 April 2008. Archived from the original on 9 November 2008.

^ Shaila Dewan (5 July 2005). "United Church of Christ Backs Same-Sex Marriage". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 July 2005.

^ Levy, Reuben (2000). The Social Structure of Islam. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-20910-6.

^ "Global Connections . How Many Wives? | PBS". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 31 July 2022.

^ The Encyclopaedia of Islam, New Edition, Vol. VIII, p. 27, Leiden 1995.

^ "The method of pronouncing the marriage formula".

^ Marriage formula. sistani.org

^ Conditions of pronouncing Nikah. sistani.org

^ "Women with whom matrimony is Haraam".

^ "The Four Pillars Of Mut'a". Al-Islam.org. 27 September 2012.

^ Mishnah Kidushin 1:1

^ "The Babylonian Talmud, Kiddushin". juchre.org. JCR.

^ Gen. 1:28

^ "Why Marry?". Chabad.org. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007.

^ Gen 24:49–67

^ Gen 29:27

^ Judges 14:7–12

^ a b c d  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Singer, Isidore;  et al., eds. (1901–1906). "Marriage". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

^ Pitts, Chuck (31 October 2015). "Judges 19 as a Paradigm for Understanding and Responding to Human Trafficking". Priscilla Papers: The Academic Journal of Christians for Biblical Equality. Retrieved 28 December 2020. Their solution to the loss of Benjamin’s men was to conquer the town of Jabesh-Gilead—killing everyone except four hundred young virgins—and taking their virgins to repopulate Benjamin. Unfortunately, there were not enough virgins in Jabesh-Gilead for all the men of Benjamin, so virgins participating in a ritual celebration at Shiloh were kidnapped and given to the men of Benjamin.

^ Sumner, William Graham (2007) [1906]. "X. The Marriage Institution". Folkways: A Study of Mores, Manners, Customs and Morals. New York: Cosimo, Inc. p. 398. ISBN 978-1-60206-758-5. OCLC 254079323. The whole proceeding was a domestic and family affair, in which no priest or other outsider had any part, except as witness, and there was no religious element in it.1 Bergel, Eheverhält. der Juden, 19.

^ a b c d This article incorporates text from the 1903 Encyclopaedia Biblica article "MARRIAGE", a publication now in the public domain.

^ Genesis 29:9; Exodus 2:16;[2], 8:13

^ Ex 21:10

^ Deut 24:2–4

^ "What is The Hindu Widows' Remarriage Act, 1856?". Jagranjosh.com. 20 July 2020. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

^ a b Bedard, Karlie (2012). All about Wicca (PDF). Delhi: University Publications. pp. 17–18. ISBN 978-1-283-50016-6.

^ A Wiccan Bible: Exploring the Mysteries of the Craft from Birth to Summerland – p. 124, A. J. Drew – 2003

^ David C. Ribar (2004). "What Do Social Scientists Know About the Benefits of Marriage? A Review of Quantitative Methodologies". IZA: vi--viii, 7–8. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 4 August 2019. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ a b c "PsycNET". psycnet.apa.org. Retrieved 17 July 2019.

^ a b c d Kiecolt-Glaser, JK; Newton, TL (2001). "Marriage and health: His and hers". Psychological Bulletin. 127 (4): 472–503. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.127.4.472. PMID 11439708.

^ Thoits, P. A. (2011). "Mechanisms Linking Social Ties and Support to Physical and Mental Health". Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 52 (2): 145–61. doi:10.1177/0022146510395592. PMID 21673143. S2CID 18169869.

^ a b Wanic, R.; Kulik, J. (2011). "Toward an understanding of gender differences in the impact of marital conflict on health". Sex Roles. 65 (5–6): 297–312. doi:10.1007/s11199-011-9968-6. S2CID 145011583.

^ Saxbe, DE; Repetti, RL; Nishina, A (2008). "Marital satisfaction, recovery from work, and diurnal cortisol among men and women" (PDF). Health Psychology. 27 (1): 15–25. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.597.2884. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.27.1.15. PMID 18230009.

^ Malig, Jojo (6 July 2012). "Is Philippines ready for a divorce law?". ABS-CBN News. Archived from the original on 7 June 2012.

^ "No-Fault Divorce – The Pros and Cons Of No-Fault Divorce". Divorcesupport.about.com. 30 July 2010. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2010.

^ Nearly half of marriaged doomed for divorce, The Guardian (27 March 2008)

^ Yen, Hope (18 May 2011) Census; divorce decline but 7 year itch persists, Associated Press.

^ for the historiography see Frederik J.G. Pedersen, "Marriage" in Kelly Boyd, ed. (1999). Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing vol 2. Taylor & Francis. pp. 766–68. ISBN 978-1-884964-33-6.

^ Hobhouse, Leonard Trelawny (1906) Morals in evolution: a study in comparative ethics, New York: H. Holt and Co, p. 180.

^ "The origins of marriage". The Week. 1 January 2007. Retrieved 8 December 2019.

^ Naranjo, Robert. "Marriage in Ancient Mesopotamia and Babylonia". eHistory.osu.edu. Ohio State University. Retrieved 8 December 2019.

^ a b William Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in early Arabia, (1885), 167

^ Judges 4:7

^ Genesis 24:26

^ Genesis 31:33–34

^ Exodus 21:10

^ Exodus 21:11

^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Singer, Isidore;  et al., eds. (1901–1906). "Husband and Wife". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

^ a b This article incorporates text from the 1903 Encyclopaedia Biblica article "Jealousy, Ordeal of", a publication now in the public domain.

^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Singer, Isidore;  et al., eds. (1901–1906). "Adultery". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

^ Malachi 2:15–16

^ Ezekiel 16:40

^ Leviticus 20:10

^ Deuteronomy 22:22–25

^ Peake's commentary on the Bible (1962 edition), ad loc

^ Numbers 5:11–31

^ Jeremiah 7:9

^ Jeremiah 23:10

^ Hosea 4:2

^ Malachi 3:5

^ WILLIAMSON, MALCOLM (1998). The Sacred and the Feminine in Ancient Greece. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415126632.

^ "Greek Women: Marriage and Divorce". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 28 June 2021.

^ WILLIAMSON, MALCOLM (1998). The Sacred and the Feminine in Ancient Greece. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415126632.

^ "Marriage, a History." Psychology Today, 1 May 2005

^ "Magnus Hirschfeld Archive of Sexology". Erwin J. Haeberle.

^ Frier and McGinn, Casebook, p. 53.

^ "Roman empire.net marriage". Roman-empire.net. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009.

^ Treggiari, Susan (1993). Roman Marriage: Isusti Coniuges from the Time of Cicero to the Time of Ulpian. Clarendon Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-19-814939-2.

^ Tacitus (by commentator Edward Brooks). 2013. The Germany and the Agricola of Tacitus. Project Gutenberg. Footnotes 121-122.

^ Herlihy, David. (1985). Medieval Households. Harvard University Press, pp. 73–5, ISBN 0-674-56376-X.

^ Green, Dennis Howard and Siegmund, Frank. 2003. The Continental Saxons from the Migration Period to the Tenth Century. Boydell Press. p. 107

^ McSheffrey, Shannon (2006). Marriage, sex, and civic culture in late medieval London. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-8122-3938-6.

^ "St. Ignatius of Antioch to Polycarp (Roberts-Donaldson translation)". Earlychristianwritings.com. 2 February 2006.

^ a b c Pernoud, Régine (2000). Those terrible Middle Ages: debunking the myths. San Francisco: Ignatius Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-89870-781-6.

^ a b Excerpt from Marriage, Sex, and Civic Culture in Late Medieval London Archived 23 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine "the sacramental bond of marriage could be made only through the freely given consent of both parties."

^ "marriage.about.com". marriage.about.com. 16 June 2010.

^ "Marriage Records". Exploregenealogy.co.uk. 29 October 2007.

^ a b Esparza Zabalegi, Jose Mari (March 2010). "Matrimonios a lo Navarro". Nabarralde Kazeta (7): 45.

^ Hanawalt, Barbara A. 1986. The Ties That Bound: Peasant Families in Medieval England. Oxford University Press, Inc. Pg 96

^ Hanawalt, pp. 98–100

^ 33. Young, Bruce W. 2008. Family Life in the Age of Shakespeare. Greenwood Press. pp. 21, 24, 28

^ John T. Koch, Antone Minard. 2012. The Celts: History, Life, and Culture. ABC-CLIO. p. 495

^ Young, Bruce W. 2008. Family Life in the Age of Shakespeare. Greenwood Press. pp. 16–17, 20

^ Greif, Avner. 2005. Family Structure, Institutions, and Growth: The Origin and Implications of Western Corporatism. Stanford University. 2011. pp. 2–3. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 2015-11-20.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Levin, Eve. 1995. Sex and Society in the World of the Orthodox Slavs, 900-1700. Cornell University Press. pp 96-98

^ Levin, 1995; pp. 137, 142

^ Levin, 1995; pp. 225–27

^ Stone, Linda. (2010). Kinship and Gender. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, pp. 231–36, ISBN 0-8133-4402-6.

^ Schofield, Phillipp R. (2003). Peasant and community in Medieval England, 1200–1500. Medieval culture and society. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan. p. 98, ISBN 0-333-64710-6.

^ a b Laslett, Peter. (1965). The World We Have Lost. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 82, ISBN 0-415-31527-1.

^ Coontz, Stephanie. (2005). Marriage, a History: From Obedience to Intimacy, or How Love Conquered Marriage. New York: Viking Press, Penguin Group Inc. pp. 125–29, ISBN 0-14-303667-X.

^ Kertzer, David I and Marzio Barbagli. (2001). The history of the European family. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. xxii, ISBN 0-300-09090-0.

^ Lehmberg, Stanford E. and Samantha A. Meigs. (2008). The Peoples of the British Isles: A New History: From Prehistoric Times to 1688. Lyceum Books. p. 117, ISBN 1-933478-01-2.

^ De Moor, Tine; Van Zanden, Jan Luiten (2010). "Girl power: The European marriage pattern and labour markets in the North Sea region in the late medieval and early modern period". The Economic History Review. 63: 1–33 (17). doi:10.1111/j.1468-0289.2009.00483.x.

^ Bullough, Vern L. (3 June 2014). Adolescence, Sexuality, and the Criminal Law: Multidisciplinary Perspectives. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-317-95499-6. Retrieved 18 October 2015.

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "History of Marriage" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ West's Encyclopedia of American Law, 2nd Edition. Thomson Gale, 2005. ISBN 0-7876-6367-0

^ Leneman, Leah (1999). "The Scottish Case That Led to Hardwicke's Marriage Act". Law and History Review. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 8 June 2008.

^ Gillis, John R. (1985). For Better, for Worse: British Marriages, 1600 to the Present. Oxford University Press. p. 92. ISBN 978-0-19-503614-5.

^ "Marriage|LII / Legal Information Institute". Topics.law.cornell.edu. 19 August 2010. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011.

^ Westermarck, Edward Alexander (1903). The History of Human Marriage (reprint ed.). Macmillan and Co., Ltd., London. ISBN 978-1-4021-8548-9.

^ Vucheva, Elitsa. (30 July 2013) / Social Affairs / Europeans marry older, less often. Euobserver.com. Retrieved on 5 September 2013.

^ "Danwei". Retrieved 7 October 2014.

^ Spencer, Richard (21 August 2003). "China relaxes laws on love and marriage". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.


Further reading
Bellarmine, Robert (1847). "The fifteenth precept, on Matrimony" . The Art of Dying Well. Translated by John Dalton. Richardson and Son.
Jones, Lucy; Mills, Sara; Paterson, Laura L.; Turner, Georgina; Coffey-Glover, Laura (2017). "Identity and naming practices in British marriage and civil partnerships" (PDF). Gender and Language. 11 (3): 309–35. doi:10.1558/genl.27916.
Council of Trent (1829). "Part 2: Holy Matrimony" . The catechism of the Council of Trent. Translated by James Donovan. Lucas Brothers.
External links


Marriage  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource

For Better, for Worse: British Marriages, 1600 to the Present John Gillis. 1985. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-503614-X
The Council of Trent on Marriage by the Catholic Church
"Legal Regulation of Marital Relations: An Historical and Comparative Approach – Gautier 19 (1): 47 – International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family". Archived from the original on 17 December 2005.
"Marriage – Its Various Forms and the Role of the State" on BBC Radio 4's In Our Time featuring Janet Soskice, Frederik Pedersen and Christina Hardyment
Radical Principles and the Legal Institution of Marriage: Domestic Relations Law and Social Democracy in Sweden – Bradley 4 (2): 154 – International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family
Recordings & Photos from a College Historical Society debate on the role of marriage, featuring Senator David Norris and Senator Rónán Mullen.
Chris Knight. "Early Human Kinship Was Matrilineal." In N. J. Allen, H. Callan, R. Dunbar and W. James (eds.), Early Human Kinship. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 61–82.
The Delights of Wisdom Concerning Marriage ("Conjugial") Love, After Which Follows the Pleasures of Insanity Concerning Scortatory Love. by Emanuel Swedenborg (Swedenborg Society 1953)
vteFamily
History
Household
Nuclear family
Extended family
Conjugal family
Immediate family
Matrifocal family
First-degree relatives
Parent
father
mother
Child
son
daughter
Sibling
brother
sister
Second-degree relatives
Grandparent
Grandchild
Aunt
Uncle
Niece
Nephew
Third-degree relatives
Great-grandparent
Great-grandchild
Great-aunt
Great-uncle
Cousin
Family-in-law
Spouse
wife
husband
Parent-in-law
Sibling-in-law
Child-in-law
daughter-in-law
son-in-law
Stepfamily
Stepparent
stepfather
stepmother
Stepchild
Stepsibling
Kinship terminology
Kinship
Australian Aboriginal kinship
Adoption
Affinity
Consanguinity
Disownment
Divorce
Estrangement
Fictive kinship
Marriage
Nurture kinship
Hawaiian kinship
Sudanese kinship
Eskimo kinship
Iroquois kinship
Crow kinship
Omaha kinship
Genealogyand lineage
Bilateral descent
Common ancestor
Family name
Heirloom
Heredity
Inheritance
Lineal descendant
collateral descent
Matrilineality
Patrilineality
Progenitor
Clan
Royal descent
Family trees
Pedigree chart
Genogram
Ahnentafel
Genealogical numbering systems
Seize quartiers
Quarters of nobility

Relationships
Agape (parental love)
Eros (marital love)
Philia (brotherly love)
Storge (familial love)
Filial piety
Polyfidelity
Holidays
Mother's Day
U.S.
Father's Day
Father-Daughter Day
Siblings Day
National Grandparents Day
Parents' Day
Children's Day
Japan
Family Day
Canada
American Family Day
International Day of Families
National Family Week
UK
National Adoption Day
Related
Single parent
Only child
Wedding anniversary
Godparent
Sociology of the family
Museum of Motherhood
Incest
Dysfunctional family

vteFamily rightsElements
Fetal rights
Children's rights
Matrimonial rights
Mothers' rights
Youth rights
Reproductive rights
Rights movements
Children's
Fathers'
Mothers' rights
Parents'
Grandparents
See also
Family law
Parental responsibility
Parental liability
Related
Human rights

vteTypes of marriagesLegal scenarios
Civil
Covenant
Customary
Nikah 'urfi
Plaçage
Fleet
Monogamy
Serial monogamy
Marriage
Remarriage
Same-sex
Temporary
Hollywood
Nikah mut'ah
Wedlease
Voidable
Putative
Void
Religious
Jewish
Christian
Catholic
Josephite
Eastern Orthodox
Mormon
Quaker
Clerical marriage
Islamic
Marriage in Islam
Misyar
Nikah mut'ah
Nikah 'urfi
Levirate
Yibbum
Natural
Scientology
Self-uniting
Widow conservation
Hindu
Vivaaha
Brahma
Daiva
Arsha
Prajapatya
Gandharva
Asura
Rakshasa
Paishacha
Ayyavazhi
Vedic
Yogic
Age
Marriageable age
Child
Teen
Arranged
Sister exchange
Flash
Forced
Abduction
Raptio
Heqin
Miai
Shotgun
Tongyangxi
Ceremonial
Betrothal
Handfasting
Mystery of Crowning
Wedding
Las Vegas
Proxy
CircumstantialbasisDeath
Posthumous
France
Germany
Chinese ghost marriage
Widow inheritance
Ghost marriage in South Sudan
Levirate
Yibbum
Financial
Flash
Hypergamy
Naked
Peer
Tongyangxi
Trial
Convenience
Lavender
Sham
Green card
Marriage allowance
Predatory
Other
Exchange
Watta satta
Heqin
Love
Sologamy
Mixed-orientation
Sororate
De facto
Common-law
Plaçage
Endogamy
Consanguine
Avunculate
Cousin
Middle Eastern
Same-surname
Homogamy
Royal intermarriage
Exogamy
Human–animal
Hypergamy
Inter-caste
Interethnic
International
Interracial
Interfaith
Morganatic
Non-monogamous
Group
Line
Open
Plural
Bigamy
Polygamy
Polyandry
Polygyny
Sexless
Mariage blanc
Other
Boston
Concubinage
Dishu system
Mail-order bride
Marriage in pre-Islamic Arabia
Walking

 Category

vteWeddings
Collective
Elopement
Handfasting
Same-sex
White
Pre-wedding
Marriage proposal planner
Marriage proposal
Engagement
Banns of marriage
Wedding planner
Bridal registry
Bridal shower
Engagement party
Wedding invitation
Bachelor party
Bachelorette party
Stag and doe party
Marriage license
Rehearsal dinner
Locations
Wedding chapel
Gretna Green
Las Vegas
ClothingWestern dress codes
Formal
White tie
Morning dress
Semi-formal
Black tie
Black lounge suit
Informal
Suit

Wedding dress
Contemporary
Bridal crown
Dress
Evening gown
Ball gown
Debutante
Opera gloves
Cocktail dress
Garters
CasualObjects
Chuppah
Las arras
Lebes Gamikos
Wedding cord
Wedding favors
Wedding mandap
Wedding ring cushion
Wishing well
Participants
Bride
child bride
Bridegroom
child bridegroom
Bridesmaid
Bridesman
Flower girl
Groomsman
Page boy
Officiant
Traditions
Ahesta Bero
Bedding ceremony
Bridal Chorus
First dance
Hesitation step
"Indian" Wedding Blessing
Jumping the broom
Lychgate
Money dance
Music
Polterabend
Pounded rice ritual
Pyebaek
Trash the dress
Unity candle
Walima
Wedding March
Wedding photography
Wedding reception
Wedding videography
Food and drink
Wedding breakfast
Wedding cake
Wedding cake topper
Cookie table
Groom's cake
Hochzeitssuppe
Icingtons
Jordan almonds
Kolach (bread)
Korovai
Loving cup
Place card
By religionor culture
Anand Karaj (Sikh)
Arab
Ayie
Ayyavazhi
Bengali Hindu
Bengali Muslim
Brunei Malay
Chinese
Pre-wedding customs
Catholic
Hajong
Hindu
Islamic
Iyer
Jewish
Mandaean
Mormon
Odia
Persian
Poruwa ceremony
Punjabi
Quaker
Saint Thomas Christian
Shinto
Timorese
Vőfély (Hungary)
Zoroastrian
By country
Vőfély (Hungary)
Iceland
India
Myanmar (Burma)
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia
Sri Lanka
Ukraine
United States and Canada
United Kingdom
England and Wales
Scotland
history
Vietnam
Honeymoon
Honeymoon registry
Consummation
Other
Black wedding
Elopement
Maiden and married names
Marriage vows
Newlywed
Royal weddings
Shotgun wedding
Knobstick wedding
Wedding anniversary
Wedding crashing
Wedding vow renewal ceremony
Womanless wedding

vteOutline of human sexualityPhysiology and biology
Erection
Insemination
Intersex
Libido
Nocturnal emission
Orgasm
Female and male ejaculation
Pelvic thrust
Pre-ejaculate
Pregnancy
Sexual arousal
Sexual stimulation
Health andeducation
Birth control
Condom
Masters and Johnson
Obesity and sexuality
Reproductive medicine
Andrology
Gynaecology
Urology
Safe sex
Sex education
Sex therapy (PLISSIT model)
Sexology
Sexual dysfunction
Erectile dysfunction
Hypersexuality
Hyposexuality
Sexual medicine
Sexual surrogate
Sexually transmitted infection
Identity and diversity
Gender binary
Gender identity
Men who have sex with men
Sexual identity
Sexual orientation
Women who have sex with women
Law
Age of consent
Criminal transmission of HIV
Child sexual abuse
Incest
Indecent exposure
Obscenity
Sexual abuse
Cybersex trafficking
Rape
Sex trafficking
Sexual assault
Sexual harassment
Sexual misconduct
Sexual slavery
Sexual violence
History
Blue Movie
Counterculture of the 1960s
Feminist sex wars
Golden Age of Porn
History of erotic depictions
Sexual revolution
Relationships and society
Anarchism and love/sex
Extramarital sex
Family planning
Flirting
Free love
Marriage
Modesty
Polyamory
Premarital sex
Promiscuity
Romance
Sex-positive movement
Sexual abstinence
Sexual addiction
Sexual attraction
Sexual capital
Sexual ethics
Sexual objectification
Sexual slang
By country
Ancient Rome
China
India
Japan
Philippines
South Korea
United States
Sexual activities
Conventional sex
Anal sex
Bareback
BDSM
Child sex
Creampie
Edging
Erotic sexual denial
Fetishism
Fingering
Fisting
Gang bang
Group sex
Masturbation
Mechanics of sex
Nipple stimulation
Non-penetrative sex
Facial
Foot fetishism
Footjob
Forced orgasm
Frot
Handjob
Mammary intercourse
Sumata
Oral sex
69
Anilingus
Cunnilingus
Fellatio
Irrumatio
Paraphilia
Pompoir
Quickie
Sex in space
Sex positions
Sexual fantasy
Sexual fetishism
Sexual intercourse
Foreplay
Sexual penetration
Swinging
Tribadism
Urethral intercourse
Urolagnia
Virtual sex
Cybersex
Erotic talk
Wet T-shirt contest
Sex industry
Red-light district
Adult video games
Erotica
Pornography
Film actor
Prostitution
Survival sex
Sex museum
Sex shop
Sex tourism
Child
Female
Sex worker
Sex toy
doll
Strip club
Webcam model
Religion andsexuality
Buddhism
Christian demonology
Daoism
Islam
Mormonism
Sex magic

 Human sexuality portal

vteParentingKinship terminology
Adoptive
Alloparenting
Coparenting
Extended family
Foster care
Kommune 1
Noncustodial
Nuclear family
Orphaned
Shared parenting
Single parent
Blended family
Surrogacy
In loco parentis
Theories · Areas
Attachment theory
Applied behavior analysis
Behaviorism
Child development
Cognitive development
Developmental psychology
Human development
Love
Maternal bond
Nature versus nurture
Parental investment
Paternal bond
Pediatrics
Social psychology
Styles
Attachment parenting
Baby talk
Buddha-like parenting
Concerted cultivation
Gatekeeper parent
Helicopter parent
Nurturant parenting
Slow parenting
Soccer mom
Strict father model
Taking children seriously
Theybie
Tiger parenting
Work at home parent
Techniques
After-school activity
Allowance
Bedtime
Child care
Co-sleeping
Homeschooling
Latchkey kid
Parent management training
Play (date)
Role model
Spoiled child
Television
The talk (race)
The talk (sex education)
Toy (educational)
Child discipline
Blanket training
Corporal punishment in the home
Curfew
Grounding
Positive discipline
Tactical ignoring
Time-out
Abuse
Child abandonment
Child abuse
Child labour
Child neglect
Cinderella effect
Incest
Narcissistic parent
Parental abuse by children
Legal andsocial aspects
Child custody
Child support
Cost of raising a child
Deadbeat parent
Disownment
Marriage
Parental alienation
Parental responsibility
Paternity
Shared parenting
Experts
Mary Ainsworth
John Bowlby
T. Berry Brazelton
Rudolf Dreikurs
David Elkind
Jo Frost
Haim Ginott
Thomas Gordon
Alan E. Kazdin
Truby King
Annette Lareau
Penelope Leach
William Sears
B. F. Skinner
Benjamin Spock
Organizations
Families Need Fathers
Mothers Apart from Their Children
Mothers' Union
National Childbirth Trust
National Fatherhood Initiative
National Parents Organization
Parent–teacher association
Parents Against Child Sexual Exploitation

Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marriage&oldid=1115311838"
Categories: MarriageDemographyFamilyKinship and descentMatingPhilosophy of loveSocial institutionsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: uses authors parameterCS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownCS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyArticles with Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 errors: missing periodicalArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1903 Encyclopaedia BiblicaCS1 maint: archived copy as titleArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from January 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2022Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2022Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from January 2010Articles needing additional references from August 2011All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2013Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2013Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource




Languages


AfrikaansAkanAlemannischአማርኛالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐԱրեւմտահայերէնঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDagbanliDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraEʋegbeفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFulfuldeGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતીGungbe客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLingálaLombardMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीمصرىمازِرونیBahasa MelayuMirandésမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟSoomaaligaکوردیSranantongoСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣತುಳುTürkçeTwiУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtWalonWinaray吴语Xitsongaייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 21:04 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










