



Masonry - Wikipedia










































Masonry

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Building of structures from individual units of stone, brick, or block
This article refers to the building structure component. For the fraternal organization, see Freemasonry.
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian.  (October 2019) Click [show] for important translation instructions.
View a machine-translated version of the Russian article.
Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate  is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 2,627 articles in the main category, and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at [[:ru:Каменная кладка]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|ru|Каменная кладка}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.
 A mason laying a brick on top of the mortar
Masonry is the building of structures from individual units, which are often laid in and bound together by mortar; the term masonry can also refer to the units themselves. The common materials of masonry construction are brick, building stone such as marble, granite, and limestone, cast stone, concrete block, glass block, and adobe. Masonry is generally a highly durable form of construction. However, the materials used, the quality of the mortar and workmanship, and the pattern in which the units are assembled can substantially affect the durability of the overall masonry construction. A person who constructs masonry is called a mason or bricklayer. These are both classified as construction trades.

Contents

1 Applications

1.1 Advantages
1.2 Disadvantages
1.3 Structural limitations


2 Dry set masonry
3 Stonework
4 Brick

4.1 Uniformity and rusticity
4.2 Serpentine masonry


5 Concrete block
6 Veneer masonry
7 Gabions
8 Passive fire protection (PFP)
9 Mechanical modeling of masonry structures
10 See also

10.1 Masonry Associations


11 References

11.1 General references


12 External links


Applications[edit]
Masonry is commonly used for walls and buildings. Brick and concrete block are the most common types of masonry in use in industrialized nations and may be either load-bearing or non-load-bearing. Concrete blocks, especially those with hollow cores, offer various possibilities in masonry construction. They generally provide great compressive strength and are best suited to structures with light transverse loading when the cores remain unfilled. Filling some or all of the cores with concrete or concrete with steel reinforcement (typically rebar) offers much greater tensile and lateral strength to structures. Masonry workers are typically paid hourly depending on their position.

Advantages[edit]
The use of materials such as bricks and stones can increase the thermal mass of a building.
Masonry is a non-combustible product and can protect the building from fire.
Masonry walls are more resistant to projectiles, such as debris from hurricanes or tornadoes.
Disadvantages[edit]
Extreme weather, under certain circumstances, can cause degradation of masonry due to expansion and contraction forces associated with freeze-thaw cycles.
Masonry tends to be heavy and must be built upon a strong foundation, such as reinforced concrete, to avoid settling and cracking.
Other than concrete, masonry construction does not lend itself well to mechanization, and requires more skilled labor than stick-framing.
Masonry consists of loose components and has a low tolerance to oscillation as compared to other materials such as reinforced concrete, plastics, wood, or metals.
Structural limitations[edit]
One problem with masonry walls is that they rely mainly on their weight to keep them in place; each block or brick is only loosely connected to the next via a thin layer of mortar. This is why they do not perform well in earthquakes, when entire buildings are shaken horizontally. Many collapses during earthquakes occur in buildings that have load-bearing masonry walls. Besides, heavier buildings having masonry suffer more damage.

Dry set masonry[edit]
 Dry set masonry supports a rustic log bridge, where it provides a well-drained support for the log (which will increase its service life).
See also: dry stone
The strength of a masonry wall is not entirely dependent on the bond between the building material and the mortar; the friction between the interlocking blocks of masonry is often strong enough to provide a great deal of strength on its own. The blocks sometimes have grooves or other surface features added to enhance this interlocking, and some dry set masonry structures forgo mortar altogether.

Stonework[edit]
 Stone Masonry
Stone blocks used in masonry can be dressed or rough, though in both examples: corners, door and window jambs, and similar areas are usually dressed.
Stonemasonry utilizing dressed stones is known as ashlar masonry, whereas masonry using irregularly shaped stones is known as rubble masonry. Both rubble and ashlar masonry can be laid in coursed rows of even height through the careful selection or cutting of stones, but a great deal of stone masonry is uncoursed.

Slipform stonemasonry produces a hybrid wall of reinforced concrete with a rubble stone face.
Natural stone veneers over CMU, cast-in-place, or tilt-up concrete walls are widely used to give the appearance of stone masonry.
Sometimes river rock of smooth oval-shaped stones is used as a veneer. This type of material is not favored for solid masonry as it requires a great amount of mortar and can lack intrinsic structural strength.
Manufactured-stone, or cultured stone, veneers are popular alternatives to natural stones.
Manufactured-stone veneers are typically made from concrete.
Natural stones from quarries around the world are sampled and recreated using molds, aggregate, and colorfast pigments.
To the casual observer there may be no visual difference between veneers of natural and manufactured stone.
Brick[edit]
Main article: Brickwork
 Brick Work
Solid brickwork is made of two or more wythes of bricks with the units running horizontally (called stretcher bricks) bound together with bricks running transverse to the wall (called "header" bricks). Each row of bricks is known as a course. The pattern of headers and stretchers employed gives rise to different 'bonds' such as the common bond (with every sixth course composed of headers), the English bond, and the Flemish bond (with alternating stretcher and header bricks present on every course). Bonds can differ in strength and in insulating ability. Vertically staggered bonds tend to be somewhat stronger and less prone to major cracking than a non-staggered bond.

Uniformity and rusticity[edit]
 Masonry repair work done to a brick wall.
The wide selection of brick styles and types generally available in industrialized nations allow much variety in the appearance of the final product. In buildings built during the 1950s-1970s, a high degree of uniformity of brick and accuracy in masonry was typical. In the period since then this style was thought to be too sterile, so attempts were made to emulate older, rougher work. Some brick surfaces are made to look particularly rustic by including burnt bricks, which have a darker color or an irregular shape. Others may use antique salvage bricks, or new bricks may be artificially aged by applying various surface treatments, such as tumbling. The attempts at rusticity of the late 20th century have been carried forward by masons specializing in a free, artistic style, where the courses are intentionally not straight, instead weaving to form more organic impressions.

Serpentine masonry[edit]
Main article: Crinkle crankle walls
A crinkle-crankle wall is a brick wall that follows a serpentine path, rather than a straight line. This type of wall is more resistant to toppling than a straight wall; so much so that it may be made of a single wythe of unreinforced brick and so despite its longer length may be more economical than a straight wall.

Concrete block[edit]
 Concrete masonry units (CMUs) or blocks in a basement wall before burial.
Blocks of cinder concrete (cinder blocks or breezeblocks), ordinary concrete (concrete blocks), or hollow tile are generically known as Concrete Masonry Units (CMUs). They usually are much larger than ordinary bricks and so are much faster to lay for a wall of a given size. Furthermore, cinder and concrete blocks typically have much lower water absorption rates than brick. They often are used as the structural core for veneered brick masonry or are used alone for the walls of factories, garages, and other industrial-style buildings where such appearance is acceptable or desirable. Such blocks often receive a stucco surface for decoration. Surface-bonding cement, which contains synthetic fibers for reinforcement, is sometimes used in this application and can impart extra strength to a block wall. Surface-bonding cement is often pre-colored and can be stained or painted thus resulting in a finished stucco-like surface.
The primary structural advantage of concrete blocks in comparison to smaller clay-based bricks is that a CMU wall can be reinforced by filling the block voids with concrete with or without steel rebar. Generally, certain voids are designated for filling and reinforcement, particularly at corners, wall-ends, and openings while other voids are left empty.  This increases wall strength and stability more economically than filling and reinforcing all voids. Typically, structures made of CMUs will have the top course of blocks in the walls filled with concrete and tied together with steel reinforcement to form a bond beam. Bond beams are often a requirement of modern building codes and controls. Another type of steel reinforcement referred to as ladder-reinforcement, can also be embedded in horizontal mortar joints of concrete block walls. The introduction of steel reinforcement generally results in a CMU wall having much greater lateral and tensile strength than unreinforced walls.
"Architectural masonry is the evolvement of standard concrete masonry blocks into aesthetically pleasing concrete masonry units (CMUs)".[1][failed verification] CMUs can be manufactured to provide a variety of surface appearances. They can be colored during manufacturing or stained or painted after installation. They can be split as part of the manufacturing process, giving the blocks a rough face replicating the appearance of natural stone, such as brownstone. CMUs may also be scored, ribbed, sandblasted, polished, striated (raked or brushed), include decorative aggregates, be allowed to slump in a controlled fashion during curing, or include several of these techniques in their manufacture to provide a decorative appearance.[2]
"Glazed concrete masonry units are manufactured by bonding a permanent colored facing (typically composed of polyester resins, silica sand and various other chemicals) to a concrete masonry unit, providing a smooth impervious surface."[3]
Glass block or glass brick are blocks made from glass and provide a translucent to clear vision through the block.

Veneer masonry[edit]
A masonry veneer wall consists of masonry units, usually clay-based bricks, installed on one or both sides of a structurally independent wall usually constructed of wood or masonry. In this context, the brick masonry is primarily decorative, not structural. The brick veneer is generally connected to the structural wall by brick ties (metal strips that are attached to the structural wall, as well as the mortar joints of the brick veneer). There is typically an air gap between the brick veneer and the structural wall. As clay-based brick is usually not completely waterproof, the structural wall will often have a water-resistant surface (usually tar paper) and weep holes can be left at the base of the brick veneer to drain moisture that accumulates inside the air gap. Concrete blocks, real and cultured stones, and veneer adobe are sometimes used in a very similar veneer fashion.
Most insulated buildings that utilize concrete block, brick, adobe, stone, veneers or some combination thereof feature interior insulation in the form of fiberglass batts between wooden wall studs or in the form of rigid insulation boards covered with plaster or drywall. In most climates this insulation is much more effective on the exterior of the wall, allowing the building interior to take advantage of the aforementioned thermal mass of the masonry. This technique does, however, require some sort of weather-resistant exterior surface over the insulation and, consequently, is generally more expensive.

Gabions[edit]
 Gabion Wall
Gabions are baskets, usually now of zinc-protected steel (galvanized steel) that are filled with fractured stone of medium size. These will act as a single unit and are stacked with setbacks to form a revetment or retaining wall. They have the advantage of being well drained, flexible, and resistant to flood, water flow from above, frost damage, and soil flow. Their expected useful life is only as long as the wire they are composed of and if used in severe climates (such as shore-side in a salt water environment) must be made of appropriate corrosion-resistant wire.  Most modern gabions are rectangular.
Earlier gabions were often cylindrical wicker baskets, open at both ends, used usually for temporary, often military, construction.
Similar work can be done with finer aggregates using cellular confinement.

Passive fire protection (PFP)[edit]
Masonry walls have an endothermic effect of its hydrates, as in chemically bound water, unbound moisture from the concrete block, and the poured concrete if the hollow cores inside the blocks are filled. Masonry can withstand temperatures up to 1,000 °F and it can withstand direct exposure to fire for up to 4 hours.[citation needed] In addition to that, concrete masonry keeps fires contained to their room of origin 93% of the time. For those reasons, concrete masonry units hold the highest fire class flame spread classification, a Class A.
Masonry buildings can also be built to increase safety by reducing fire damage, such as the use of fire cuts during construction.

Mechanical modeling of masonry structures[edit]
 A comparison (using transmission photoelasticity) between the stress diffusion in an elastic body (on the left) and a model of masonry (on the right). A highly localized stress percolation is visible on the right.
From the point of view of material modeling, masonry is a special material of extreme mechanical properties (with a very high ratio between strength in compression and in tension), so that the applied loads do not diffuse as they do in elastic bodies, but tend to percolate along lines of high stiffness.[4][5]

See also[edit]



Cast stone – Material simulating natural stone
Castle – Fortified residential structure of medieval Europe
Clay panel – Building material made of clay with some additives
TC 125 (European Union)
Defensive wall – Fortification used to protect an area from potential aggressors
Dry-stone wall
Fire protection – Measures that prevent or mitigate unwanted fire
Galleting




List of stone
Concrete finisher
NIST stone test wall
Passive fire protection – Component or system to passively prevent the spread of fire
Rubble masonry
Stone wall – Masonry structural division
Stonemasonry – Creation of buildings, structures, and sculpture using stone
Tuckpointing

Masonry Associations[edit]
International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers – North American AFL–CIO Craft Union
Mason Contractors Association of America
Operative Plasterers' and Cement Masons' International Association
Worshipful Company of Masons – Livery company of the City of London
References[edit]


^ "ARCHITECTURAL CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS". NCMA. Archived from the original on 2020-06-21. Retrieved 2020-06-18.

^ "Ground Face Units (Burnished, Honed)". Archived from the original on 2009-05-21. Retrieved 2009-11-21.

^ "Glazed (Prefaced) Units". Archived from the original on 2009-05-21. Retrieved 2009-11-21.

^ "Davide Bigoni". www.ing.unitn.it. Solid and Structural Mechanics Group – University of Trento. Archived from the original on 2020-08-18. Retrieved 2011-11-27.

^ "video". Archived from the original on 2012-05-01. Retrieved 2011-11-27.


General references[edit]
Atamturktur, Sezer; Laman, Jeffrey A. (2012). "Finite element model correlation and calibration of historic masonry monuments: review". The Structural Design of Tall and Special Buildings. 21 (2): 96–113. doi:10.1002/tal.577. S2CID 111060455.
Sarhosis, V.; Sheng, Y. (2014). "Identification of material parameters for low bond strength masonry". Engineering Structures. 60: 100–110. doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.2013.12.013.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Masonry (craft).

Mason Contractors Association of America
International Masonry Institute
National Concrete Masonry Association
Masonry Institute of America
Illustrated Glossary of Stone Industry Terms
vteStonemasonryTypes
Ashlar
Rustication
Carving
Dry stone
Letter cutting
Masonry
Monumental
Rubble
Sculpture
Slipform
Snecked
Materials
Artificial stone
Brick
Cast stone
Decorative stones
Dimension stone
Fieldstone
Flagstone
Gabion
Granite
Grout
Limestone
Marble
Types
Mortar
Sandstone
List
Slate
Stone veneer
Tools
Angle grinder
Bush hammer
Ceramic tile cutter
Chisel
Diamond blade
Lewis (lifting appliance)
Non-explosive demolition agents
Plug and feather
Stonemason's hammer
Straightedge
Trowel
Techniques
Brickwork
Flaming
Flushwork
Knapping
Polygonal masonry
Repointing
Scabbling
Tuckpointing
Veneer
Wythe
Products
Castle
Hardstone carving
Headstone (Footstone)
Mosaic
Sculpture
Stone wall
Machicolation
Organizations
International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers
Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland
Mason Contractors Association of America
Operative Plasterers' and Cement Masons' International Association
Worshipful Company of Masons

Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Masonry&oldid=1107152680"
Categories: MasonryStonemasonryBuilding materialsBuilding stoneHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from April 2012All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing translation from Russian WikipediaAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from January 2022All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2020Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia Commons




Languages


العربيةAsturianuবাংলাБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilgeGalego한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתKriyòl gwiyannenМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語پښتوPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийSicilianuSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 28 August 2022, at 12:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










