



Netherlands - Wikipedia










































Netherlands

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Country in Northwestern Europe with territories in the Caribbean
This article is about the country in Europe. For the sovereign state of which it is a part, see Kingdom of the Netherlands. For other uses, see Netherlands (disambiguation).
"Nederland" redirects here. For other uses, see Nederland (disambiguation).


This article's images may require adjustment of image placement, formatting, and size. Please see the picture tutorial and the image placement policy for further information. (September 2022)


Constituent country in the Kingdom of the NetherlandsNetherlandsNederland (Dutch)Constituent country in the Kingdom of the Netherlands

FlagCoat of armsMotto: Je maintiendrai (French)(English: "I will maintain")Anthem: Wilhelmus (Dutch)(English: "William of Nassau")The Netherlands on the globe centred on EuropeMetropolitan Netherlands in EuropeCaribbean municipalitiesLocation of Netherlands (dark green)– in Europe (green & dark grey)– in the European Union (green)Sovereign stateKingdom of the NetherlandsBefore independenceSpanish NetherlandsAct of Abjuration26 July 1581Peace of Münster30 January 1648Kingdom established16 March 1815Liberation Day5 May 1945Kingdom Charter15 December 1954Caribbean reorganisation10 October 2010Capitaland largest cityAmsterdam[a]52°22′N 4°53′E﻿ / ﻿52.367°N 4.883°E﻿ / 52.367; 4.883Government seatThe Hague[a]Official languagesDutchRegional languagesEnglishPapiamentoWest Frisian[b]Recognised languagesDutch Low SaxonDutch Sign LanguageLimburgishSinte RomaniYiddish[c]Ethnic groups  (2020)75.8% Dutch7.9% Other European[d]2.4% Turkish2.35% Moroccan2.1% Indonesian2.1% Surinamese0.9% Antillean0.6% Syrian6.0% Other[3]Religion  (2020)55.4%  No religion37.5% Christianity—19.8% Catholicism—14.4% Protestantism—3.3% Other Christian5.2% Islam1.1% Hinduism0.8% Others[4]Demonym(s)DutchGovernmentUnitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy• Monarch Willem-Alexander• Prime Minister Mark Rutte
LegislatureStates General• Upper houseSenate• Lower houseHouse of RepresentativesEuropean Parliament• Netherlands constituency26 seatsArea• Total41,865[5][6] km2 (16,164 sq mi) (131st)• Water (%)18.41[7]Highest elevation (Mount Scenery)887 m (2,910 ft)Population• 10 October 2022 estimate 17,751,600[8] (67th)• 2011 census16,655,799[9]• Density423/km2 (1,095.6/sq mi) (16th)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate• Total $1.2 trillion [10] (27th)• Per capita $68,572[10] (13th)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate• Total $1.01 trillion[10] (19th)• Per capita $57,836[10] (13th)Gini (2020) 28.2[11]lowHDI (2021) 0.941[12]very high · 10thCurrencyEuro (€) (EUR)United States dollar (US$) (USD)[e]Time zoneUTC+01:00 (CET)UTC−04:00 (AST)[f] • Summer (DST)UTC+02:00 (CEST)UTC−04:00 (AST)Date formatdd-mm-yyyyMains electricity230 V–50 HzCalling code+31, +599[g]ISO 3166 codeNLInternet TLD.nl, .bq[h]
The Netherlands (Dutch: Nederland [ˈneːdərlɑnt] (listen)), informally Holland,[14][15][16] is a country located in Northwestern Europe with overseas territories in the Caribbean. It is the largest of four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.[17][18][19] The Netherlands consists of twelve provinces; it borders Germany to the east, Belgium to the south, with a North Sea coastline to the north and west. It shares maritime borders with the United Kingdom, Germany and Belgium in the North Sea.[20] The country's official language is Dutch, with West Frisian as a secondary official language in the province of Friesland.[1] Dutch Low Saxon and Limburgish are recognised regional languages, while Dutch Sign Language, Sinte Romani and Yiddish are recognised non-territorial languages.[1][2] Dutch, English and Papiamento are official in the Caribbean territories.[1]
The four largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht.[21] Amsterdam is the country's most populous city and the nominal capital.[22] The Hague holds the seat of the States General, Cabinet and Supreme Court.[23] The Port of Rotterdam is the busiest seaport in Europe.[24] Schiphol is the busiest airport in the Netherlands, and the third busiest in Europe. The Netherlands is a founding member of the European Union, Eurozone, G10, NATO, OECD, and WTO, as well as a part of the Schengen Area and the trilateral Benelux Union. It hosts several intergovernmental organisations and international courts, many of which are centred in The Hague.[25]
Netherlands literally means "lower countries" in reference to its low elevation and flat topography, with only about 50% of its land exceeding 1 m (3.3 ft) above sea level, and nearly 26% falling below sea level.[26] Most of the areas below sea level, known as polders, are the result of land reclamation that began in the 14th century.[27] In the Republican period, which began in 1588, the Netherlands entered a unique era of political, economic, and cultural greatness, ranked among the most powerful and influential in Europe and the world; this period is known as the Dutch Golden Age.[28] During this time, its trading companies, the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company, established colonies and trading posts all over the world.[29][30]
With a population of 17.7 million people, all living within a total area of roughly 41,800 km2 (16,100 sq mi)—of which the land area is 33,500 km2 (12,900 sq mi)—the Netherlands is the 16th most densely populated country in the world and the second-most densely populated country in the European Union, with a density of 529 people per square kilometre (1,370 people/sq mi). Nevertheless, it is the world's second-largest exporter of food and agricultural products by value, owing to its fertile soil, mild climate, intensive agriculture, and inventiveness.[31][32][33]
The Netherlands has been a parliamentary constitutional monarchy with a unitary structure since 1848. The country has a tradition of pillarisation and a long record of social tolerance, having legalised abortion, prostitution and human euthanasia, along with maintaining a liberal drug policy. The Netherlands abolished the death penalty in Civil Law in 1870, though it was not completely removed until a new constitution was approved in 1983. The Netherlands allowed women's suffrage in 1919 and was the first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001. Its mixed-market advanced economy had the eleventh-highest per capita income globally.[34] The Netherlands ranks among the highest in international indices of press freedom,[35] economic freedom,[36] human development and quality of life, as well as happiness.[37][38]

Contents

1 Etymology

1.1 Netherlands and the Low Countries
1.2 Holland and Dutch


2 History

2.1 Prehistory (before 800 BC)
2.2 Celts, Germanic tribes and Romans (800 BC–410 AD)
2.3 Early Middle Ages (411–1000)
2.4 High Middle Ages (1000–1384)
2.5 Burgundian, Habsburg and Spanish Habsburg Netherlands (1384–1581)
2.6 Dutch Republic (1581–1795)
2.7 Batavian Republic and Kingdom (1795–1890)
2.8 World wars and beyond (1890–present)


3 Geography

3.1 Geology
3.2 Floods
3.3 Delta Works
3.4 Climate change
3.5 Nature
3.6 Caribbean islands


4 Government and politics

4.1 Political culture
4.2 Political parties
4.3 Government
4.4 Administrative divisions
4.5 Foreign relations
4.6 Military


5 Economy

5.1 Natural gas
5.2 Agriculture and natural resources


6 Demographics

6.1 Functional urban areas
6.2 Language
6.3 Religion
6.4 Education
6.5 Healthcare


7 Transport

7.1 Road transport
7.2 Public transport
7.3 Cycling
7.4 Water transport
7.5 Air transport


8 Culture

8.1 Art, architecture and philosophy
8.2 Dutch value system
8.3 Ecology
8.4 Music
8.5 Film and television
8.6 Sports
8.7 Cuisine


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links


Etymology
Main article: Terminology of the Low Countries
Netherlands and the Low Countries
The region called the Low Countries (comprising Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) have the same toponymy. Place names with Neder, Nieder, Nedre, Nether, Lage(r) or Low(er) (in Germanic languages) and Bas or Inferior (in Romance languages) are in use in low-lying places all over Europe. In the case of the Low Countries / Netherlands the geographical location of the lower region has been more or less downstream and near the sea. The Romans made a distinction between the Roman provinces of downstream Germania Inferior (nowadays part of Belgium and the Netherlands) and upstream Germania Superior. The designation 'Low' returned in the 10th-century Duchy of Lower Lorraine, that covered much of the Low Countries.[39][40]
The Dukes of Burgundy used the term les pays de par deçà ("the lands over here") for the Low Countries.[41] Under Habsburg rule, Les pays de par deçà developed in pays d'embas ("lands down-here").[42] This was translated as Neder-landen in contemporary Dutch official documents.[43] From a regional point of view, Niderlant was also the area between the Meuse and the lower Rhine in the late Middle Ages. From the mid-sixteenth century, the "Low Countries" and the "Netherlands" lost their original deictic meaning. The Eighty Years' War (1568–1648) divided the Low Countries into an independent northern Dutch Republic and a Spanish-controlled Southern Netherlands.[citation needed]
In most Romance languages, the term "Low Countries" is used as the name for the Netherlands. In other languages, it is sometimes used to describe the Benelux countries.[citation needed]

Holland and Dutch
The Netherlands is informally referred to as Holland in various languages, including Dutch and English. In many other languages, Holland is the formal name for the Netherlands. Holland can also refer to a region within the Netherlands that consists of North and South Holland. Formerly these were a single province, and earlier the County of Holland, a remnant of the dissolved Frisian Kingdom that also included parts of present-day Utrecht. Following the decline of the Duchy of Brabant and the County of Flanders, Holland became the most economically and politically important county in the Low Countries region. The emphasis on Holland during the formation of the Dutch Republic, the Eighty Years' War, and the Anglo-Dutch Wars in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, made Holland a pars pro toto for the entire country.[44][45]
The term Dutch is used as the demonymic and adjectival form of the Netherlands in the English language. The origins of the word go back to Proto-Germanic *þiudiskaz, Latinised into Theodiscus, meaning "popular" or "of the people"; akin to Old Dutch Dietsch, Old High German duitsch, and Old English þeodisc, all meaning "(of) the common (Germanic) people". At first, the English language used (the contemporary form of) Dutch to refer to any or all speakers of West Germanic languages. Gradually its meaning shifted to the West Germanic people they had most contact with, because of their geographical proximity and rivalry in trade and overseas territories. The derivative of the Proto-Germanic word *þiudiskaz in modern Dutch, Diets, can be found in Dutch literature as a poetic name for the Dutch people or language, and is considered archaic.[citation needed]

History
Main article: History of the Netherlands
Prehistory (before 800 BC)
Main articles: Paleolithic Europe, Neolithic Europe, and Bronze Age Europe
 Oak figurine found in Willemstad (4500 BC)
The prehistory of the area that is now the Netherlands was largely shaped by the sea and the rivers that constantly shifted the low-lying geography. The oldest human (Neanderthal) traces, believed to be about 250,000 years, were found in higher soils, near Maastricht.[46] At the end of the Ice Age, the nomadic late Upper Palaeolithic Hamburg culture (13,000–10,000 BC) hunted reindeer in the area, using spears. The later Ahrensburg culture (11,200–9,500 BC) used bow and arrow. From Mesolithic Maglemosian-like tribes (c. 8000 BC), world's oldest canoe was found in Drenthe.[47]
Indigenous late Mesolithic hunter-gatherers from the Swifterbant culture (c. 5600 BC), related to the southern Scandinavian Ertebølle culture, were strongly linked to rivers and open water.[48] Between 4800 and 4500 BC, the Swifterbant people started to adopt from the neighbouring Linear Pottery culture the practice of animal husbandry, and between 4300 and 4000 BC the practice of agriculture.[49] The Funnelbeaker culture (4300–2800 BC),related to the Swifterbant culture, erected the dolmens, large stone grave monuments found in Drenthe. There was a quick and smooth transition from the Funnelbeaker farming culture to the pan-European Corded Ware pastoralist culture (c. 2950 BC). In the southwest, the Seine-Oise-Marne culture — related to the Vlaardingen culture (c. 2600 BC), an apparently more primitive culture of hunter-gatherers — survived well into the Neolithic period, until it too was succeeded by the Corded Ware culture.

The Netherlands in 5500 BCBronze Age cultures in the Netherlands
The subsequent Bell Beaker culture (2700–2100 BC)[50] introduced metalwork in copper, gold and later bronze and opened international trade routes not seen before, reflected in copper artifacts. Finds of rare bronze objects suggest that Drenthe was a trading centre in the Bronze Age (2000–800 BC). The Bell Beaker culture developed locally into the Barbed-Wire Beaker culture (2100–1800 BC) and later the Elp culture (1800–800 BC),[51] a Middle Bronze Age archaeological culture with earthenware low-quality pottery as a marker. The initial phase of the Elp culture was characterised by tumuli (1800–1200 BC). The subsequent phase was that of cremating the dead and placing their ashes in urns which were then buried in fields, following the customs of the Urnfield culture (1200–800 BC). The southern region became dominated by the related Hilversum culture (1800–800 BC), with apparently cultural ties with Britain of the previous Barbed-Wire Beaker culture.

Celts, Germanic tribes and Romans (800 BC–410 AD)
Main articles: Iron Age Europe, Celts, Germanic peoples, and Netherlands in the Roman era
   Diachronic distribution of Celts from 500 BC  Expansion into the southern Low Countries by 270 BC
From 800 BC onwards, the Iron Age Celtic Hallstatt culture became influential, replacing the Hilversum culture. Iron ore brought a measure of prosperity and was available throughout the country, including bog iron. Smiths travelled from settlement to settlement with bronze and iron, fabricating tools on demand. The King's grave of Oss (700 BC) was found in a burial mound, the largest of its kind in western Europe and containing an iron sword with an inlay of gold and coral.
The deteriorating climate in Scandinavia around 850 BC further deteriorated around 650 BC and might have triggered migration of Germanic tribes from the North. By the time this migration was complete, around 250 BC, a few general cultural and linguistic groups had emerged.[52][53] The North Sea Germanic Ingaevones inhabited the northern part of the Low Countries. They would later develop into the Frisii and the early Saxons.[53] A second grouping, the Weser-Rhine Germanic (or Istvaeones), extended along the middle Rhine and Weser and inhabited the Low Countries south of the great rivers. This group consisted of tribes that would eventually develop into the Salian Franks.[53] Also the Celtic La Tène culture (c. 450 BC up to the Roman conquest) had expanded over a wide range, including the southern area of the Low Countries. Some scholars have speculated that even a third ethnic identity and language, neither Germanic nor Celtic, survived in the Netherlands until the Roman period, the Iron Age Nordwestblock culture,[54][55] that eventually was absorbed by the Celts to the south and the Germanic peoples from the east.

 The Rhine frontier around 70 AD
The first author to describe the coast of Holland and Flanders was the Greek geographer Pytheas, who noted in c. 325 BC that in these regions, "more people died in the struggle against water than in the struggle against men."[56] During the Gallic Wars, the area south and west of the Rhine was conquered by Roman forces under Julius Caesar from 57 BC to 53 BC.[55] Caesar describes two main Celtic tribes living in what is now the southern Netherlands: the Menapii and the Eburones. The Rhine became fixed as Rome's northern frontier around 12 AD. Notable towns would arise along the Limes Germanicus: Nijmegen and Voorburg. In the first part of Gallia Belgica, the area south of the Limes became part of the Roman province of Germania Inferior. The area to the north of the Rhine, inhabited by the Frisii, remained outside Roman rule (but not its presence and control), while the Germanic border tribes of the Batavi and Cananefates served in the Roman cavalry.[57] The Batavi rose against the Romans in the Batavian rebellion of 69 AD but were eventually defeated. The Batavi later merged with other tribes into the confederation of the Salian Franks, whose identity emerged at the first half of the third century.[58] Salian Franks appear in Roman texts as both allies and enemies. They were forced by the confederation of the Saxons from the east to move over the Rhine into Roman territory in the fourth century. From their new base in West Flanders and the Southwest Netherlands, they were raiding the English Channel. Roman forces pacified the region, but did not expel the Franks, who continued to be feared at least until the time of Julian the Apostate (358) when Salian Franks were allowed to settle as foederati in Texandria.[58] It has been postulated that after deteriorating climate conditions and the Romans' withdrawal, the Frisii disappeared as laeti in c. 296, leaving the coastal lands largely unpopulated for the next two centuries.[59] However, recent excavations in Kennemerland show clear indication of a permanent habitation.[60][61]

Early Middle Ages (411–1000)
Main articles: Frankish Kingdom and Frisian Kingdom
 Franks, Frisians and Saxons (710s AD) with Traiecturm and Dorestad in the middle
After Roman government in the area collapsed, the Franks expanded their territories in numerous kingdoms. By the 490s, Clovis I had conquered and united all these territories in the southern Netherlands in one Frankish kingdom, and from there continued his conquests into Gaul. During this expansion, Franks migrating to the south (modern territory of France and Walloon part of Belgium) eventually adopted the Vulgar Latin of the local population.[53] A widening cultural divide grew with the Franks remaining in their original homeland in the north (i.e. the southern Netherlands and Flanders), who kept on speaking Old Frankish, which by the ninth century had evolved into Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch.[53] A Dutch-French language boundary hence came into existence.[53][62]

 Frankish expansion (481 to 870 AD)
To the north of the Franks, climatic conditions improved, and during the Migration Period Saxons, the closely related Angles, Jutes and Frisii settled the coastal land.[63] Many moved on to England and came to be known as Anglo-Saxons, but those who stayed would be referred to as Frisians and their language as Frisian, named after the land that was once inhabited by Frisii.[63] Frisian was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast, and it is still the language most closely related to English among the living languages of continental Europe. By the seventh century a Frisian Kingdom (650–734) under King Aldegisel and King Redbad emerged with Traiectum (Utrecht) as its centre of power,[63][64] while Dorestad was a flourishing trading place.[65][66] Between 600 and around 719 the cities were often fought over between the Frisians and the Franks. In 734, at the Battle of the Boarn, the Frisians were defeated after a series of wars. With the approval of the Franks, the Anglo-Saxon missionary Willibrord converted the Frisian people to Christianity. He established the Archdiocese of Utrecht and became bishop of the Frisians. However, his successor Boniface was murdered by the Frisians in Dokkum, in 754.

 Rorik of Dorestad, Viking ruler of Friesland (romantic 1912 depiction)
The Frankish Carolingian empire modelled itself on the Roman Empire and controlled much of Western Europe. However, in 843, it was divided into three parts—East, Middle, and West Francia. Most of present-day Netherlands became part of Middle Francia, which was a weak kingdom and subject of numerous partitions and annexation attempts by its stronger neighbours. It comprised territories from Frisia in the north to the Kingdom of Italy in the south. Around 850, Lothair I of Middle Francia acknowledged the Viking Rorik of Dorestad as ruler of most of Frisia.[67] When the kingdom of Middle Francia was partitioned in 855, the lands north of the Alps passed to Lothair II and subsequently were named Lotharingia. After he died in 869, Lotharingia was partitioned, into Upper and Lower Lotharingia, the latter part comprising the Low Countries that technically became part of East Francia in 870, although it was effectively under the control of Vikings, who raided the largely defenceless Frisian and Frankish towns lying on the Frisian coast and along the rivers.[citation needed] Around 879, another Viking expedition led by Godfrid, Duke of Frisia, raided the Frisian lands. The Viking raids made the sway of French and German lords in the area weak. Resistance to the Vikings, if any, came from local nobles, who gained in stature as a result, and that laid the basis for the disintegration of Lower Lotharingia into semi-independent states. One of these local nobles was Gerolf of Holland, who assumed lordship in Frisia after he helped to assassinate Godfrid, and Viking rule came to an end.[citation needed]

High Middle Ages (1000–1384)
Main article: History of urban centres in the Low Countries
 A medieval tomb of the Brabantian knight Arnold van der Sluijs
The Holy Roman Empire (the successor state of East Francia and then Lotharingia) ruled much of the Low Countries in the 10th and 11th century but was not able to maintain political unity. Powerful local nobles turned their cities, counties and duchies into private kingdoms that felt little sense of obligation to the emperor.[citation needed] Holland, Hainaut, Flanders, Gelre, Brabant, and Utrecht were in a state of almost continual war or in paradoxically formed personal unions. The language and culture of most of the people who lived in the County of Holland were originally Frisian. As Frankish settlement progressed from Flanders and Brabant, the area quickly became Old Low Franconian (or Old Dutch). The rest of Frisia in the north (now Friesland and Groningen) continued to maintain its independence and had its own institutions (collectively called the "Frisian freedom"), which resented the imposition of the feudal system.[citation needed]
Around 1000 AD, due to several agricultural developments, the economy started to develop at a fast pace, and the higher productivity allowed workers to farm more land or to become tradesmen. Towns grew around monasteries and castles, and a mercantile middle class began to develop in these urban areas, especially in Flanders and later also Brabant. Wealthy cities started to buy certain privileges for themselves from the sovereign. In practice, this meant that Bruges and Antwerp became quasi-independent republics in their own right and would later develop into some of the most important cities and ports in Europe.[citation needed]
Around 1100 AD, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began draining and cultivating uninhabited swampy land in the western Netherlands, making the emergence of the County of Holland as the centre of power possible. The title of Count of Holland was fought over in the Hook and Cod Wars (Dutch: Hoekse en Kabeljauwse twisten) between 1350 and 1490. The Cod faction consisted of the more progressive cities, while the Hook faction consisted of the conservative noblemen. These noblemen invited the Duke Philip the Good of Burgundy — who was also Count of Flanders — to conquer Holland.[citation needed]

Burgundian, Habsburg and Spanish Habsburg Netherlands (1384–1581)
Main articles: Burgundian Netherlands, Habsburg Netherlands, and Spanish Netherlands
Spanish NetherlandsThe Four Days' Battle, 1–4 June 1666 (Second Anglo-Dutch War) by Pieter Cornelisz van SoestThe Low Countries in the late 14th centuryWilliam I, Prince of Orange, leader of the Dutch Revolt, by Adriaen Thomasz. Key
Most of the Imperial and French fiefs in what is now the Netherlands and Belgium were united in a personal union by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in 1433. The House of Valois-Burgundy and their Habsburg heirs would rule the Low Countries in the period from 1384 to 1581. Before the Burgundian union, the Dutch identified themselves by the town they lived in or their local duchy or county. The Burgundian period is when the road to nationhood began. The new rulers defended Dutch trading interests, which then developed rapidly. The fleets of the County of Holland defeated the fleets of the Hanseatic League several times. Amsterdam grew and in the 15th century became the primary trading port in Europe for grain from the Baltic region. Amsterdam distributed grain to the major cities of Belgium, Northern France and England. This trade was vital because Holland could no longer produce enough grain to feed itself. Land drainage had caused the peat of the former wetlands to reduce to a level that was too low for drainage to be maintained.[citation needed]
Under Habsburg Charles V, ruler of the Holy Roman Empire and King of Spain, all fiefs in the current Netherlands region were united into the Seventeen Provinces, which also included most of present-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and some adjacent land in what is now France and Germany. In 1568, under Phillip II, the Eighty Years' War between the Provinces and their Spanish ruler began. The level of ferocity exhibited by both sides can be gleaned from a Dutch chronicler's report:[68]

 On more than one occasion men were seen hanging their own brothers, who had been taken prisoners in the enemy's ranks... A Spaniard had ceased to be human in their eyes. On one occasion, a surgeon at Veer cut the heart from a Spanish prisoner, nailed it on a vessel's prow, and invited the townsmen to come and fasten their teeth in it, which many did with savage satisfaction. 
The Duke of Alba ruthlessly attempted to suppress the Protestant movement in the Netherlands. Netherlanders were "burned, strangled, beheaded, or buried alive" by his "Blood Council" and his Spanish soldiers. Severed heads and decapitated corpses were displayed along streets and roads to terrorise the population into submission. Alba boasted of having executed 18,600,[69][70] but this figure does not include those who perished by war and famine.[citation needed]
The first great siege was Alba's effort to capture Haarlem and thereby cut Holland in half. It dragged on from December 1572 to the next summer, when Haarlemers finally surrendered on 13 July upon the promise that the city would be spared from being sacked. It was a stipulation Don Fadrique was unable to honour, when his soldiers mutinied, angered over pay owed and the miserable conditions they endured during the long, cold months of the campaign.[71] On 4 November 1576, Spanish tercios seized Antwerp and subjected it to the worst pillage in the Netherlands' history. The citizens resisted, but were overcome; seven thousand of them were mowed down; a thousand buildings were torched; men, women, and children were slaughtered in a delirium of blood by soldiers crying, "Santiago! España! A sangre, a carne, a fuego, a sacco!" (Saint James! Spain! To blood, to the flesh, to fire, to sack!)[72]

 Map of the Habsburg dominions. From 1556 the dynasty's lands in the Low Countries were retained by the Spanish Habsburgs.
 The Spanish Fury at Maastricht, 1579
Following the sack of Antwerp, delegates from Catholic Brabant, Protestant Holland and Zeeland agreed, at Ghent, to join Utrecht and William the Silent in driving out all Spanish troops and forming a new government for the Netherlands. Don Juan of Austria, the new Spanish governor, was forced to concede initially, but within months returned to active hostilities. As the fighting restarted, the Dutch began to look for help from the Queen of England, but she initially stood by her commitments to the Spanish in the Treaty of Bristol of 1574. According to Gillespie Alexander the result was that when the next large-scale battle did occur at Gembloux in 1578, the Spanish forces easily won the day, killing at least 10,000 rebels, with the Spanish suffering few losses.[73][dubious  – discuss] In light of the defeat at Gembloux, the southern states of the Seventeen Provinces (today in northern France and Belgium) distanced themselves from the rebels in the north with the 1579 Union of Arras, which expressed their loyalty to Philip II of Spain. Opposing them, the northern half of the Seventeen Provinces forged the Union of Utrecht (also of 1579) in which they committed to support each other in their defence against the Spanish army.[74] The Union of Utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern Netherlands.[citation needed]
Spanish troops sacked Maastricht in 1579, killing over 10,000 civilians and thereby ensuring the rebellion continued.[75] In 1581, the northern provinces adopted the Act of Abjuration, the declaration of independence in which the provinces officially deposed Philip II as reigning monarch in the northern provinces.[76] Against the rebels Philip could draw on the resources of Spain, Spanish America, Spanish Italy and the Spanish Netherlands. The Protestant Queen Elizabeth I of England sympathised with the Dutch struggle against the Spanish and sent an army of 7,600 soldiers to aid the Dutch in their war with the Catholic Spanish.[77] English forces under the Earl of Leicester and then Lord Willoughby faced the Spanish in the Netherlands under the Duke of Parma in a series of largely indecisive actions that tied down significant numbers of Spanish troops and bought time for the Dutch to reorganise their defences.[78] The war continued until 1648, when Spain under King Philip IV finally recognised the independence of the seven north-western provinces in the Peace of Münster. Parts of the southern provinces became de facto colonies of the new republican-mercantile empire.[citation needed]

Dutch Republic (1581–1795)
Main articles: Dutch Republic and Evolution of the Dutch Empire
 Dutch East India Company factory in Hugli-Chuchura, Mughal Bengal by Hendrik van Schuylenburgh, 1665
After declaring their independence, the provinces of Holland, Zeeland, Groningen, Friesland, Utrecht, Overijssel, and Gelderland formed a confederation. All these duchies, lordships and counties were autonomous and had their own government, the States-Provincial. The States General, the confederal government, were seated in The Hague and consisted of representatives from each of the seven provinces. The sparsely populated region of Drenthe was part of the republic too, although it was not considered one of the provinces. Moreover, the Republic had come to occupy during the Eighty Years' War a number of so-called Generality Lands in Flanders, Brabant and Limburg. Their population was mainly Roman Catholic, and these areas did not have a governmental structure of their own, and were used as a buffer zone between the Republic and the Spanish-controlled Southern Netherlands.[79]

 Winter landscape with skaters near the city of Kampen by Hendrick Avercamp (1620s)
 Amsterdam's Dam Square in 1656
In the Dutch Golden Age, spanning much of the 17th century, the Dutch Empire grew to become one of the major seafaring and economic powers, alongside Portugal, Spain, France and England. Science, military and art (especially painting) were among the most acclaimed in the world. By 1650, the Dutch owned 16,000 merchant ships.[80] The Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company established colonies and trading posts all over the world, including ruling the western parts of Taiwan between 1624–1662 and 1664–1667. The Dutch settlement in North America began with the founding of New Amsterdam on the southern part of Manhattan in 1614. In South Africa, the Dutch settled the Cape Colony in 1652. Dutch colonies in South America were established along the many rivers in the fertile Guyana plains, among them Colony of Surinam (now Suriname). In Asia, the Dutch established the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia), and the only western trading post in Japan, Dejima.[citation needed]
During the period of Proto-industrialisation, the empire received 50% of textiles and 80% of silks import from the India's Mughal Empire, chiefly from its most developed region known as Bengal Subah.[81][82][83][84]
Many economic historians regard the Netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world. In early modern Europe, it had the wealthiest trading city (Amsterdam) and the first full-time stock exchange. The inventiveness of the traders led to insurance and retirement funds as well as phenomena such as the boom-bust cycle, the world's first asset-inflation bubble, the tulip mania of 1636–1637, and the world's first bear raider, Isaac le Maire, who forced prices down by dumping stock and then buying it back at a discount.[85] In 1672 – known in Dutch history as the Rampjaar (Disaster Year) – the Dutch Republic was at war with France, England and three German Bishoprics simultaneously. At sea, it could successfully prevent the English and French navy from entering the western shores. On land, however, it was almost taken over internally by the advancing French and German armies coming from the east. It managed to turn the tide by inundating parts of Holland but could never recover to its former glory again and went into a state of a general decline in the 18th century, with economic competition from England and long-standing rivalries between the two main factions in Dutch society, the republican Staatsgezinden and the supporters of the stadtholder the Prinsgezinden as main political factions.[86]

Batavian Republic and Kingdom (1795–1890)
Main articles: Batavian Republic, Kingdom of Holland, Sovereign Principality of the United Netherlands, United Kingdom of the Netherlands, and Kingdom of the Netherlands
With the armed support of revolutionary France, Dutch republicans proclaimed the Batavian Republic, modelled after the French Republic and rendering the Netherlands a unitary state on 19 January 1795. The stadtholder William V of Orange had fled to England. But from 1806 to 1810, the Kingdom of Holland was set up by Napoleon Bonaparte as a puppet kingdom governed by his brother Louis Bonaparte to control the Netherlands more effectively. However, King Louis Bonaparte tried to serve Dutch interests instead of his brother's, and he was forced to abdicate on 1 July 1810. The Emperor sent in an army and the Netherlands became part of the French Empire until the autumn of 1813 when Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of Leipzig.[citation needed]

 Map of the Dutch colonial empire. Light green: territories administered by or originating from territories administered by the Dutch East India Company; dark green: the Dutch West India Company. In yellow are the territories occupied later, during the 19th century.
William Frederick, son of the last stadtholder, returned to the Netherlands in 1813 and proclaimed himself Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands. Two years later, the Congress of Vienna added the southern Netherlands to the north to create a strong country on the northern border of France. William Frederick raised this United Netherlands to the status of a kingdom and proclaimed himself as King William I in 1815.[citation needed] In addition, William became hereditary Grand Duke of Luxembourg in exchange for his German possessions. However, the Southern Netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581, and rebelled. The south gained independence in 1830 as Belgium (recognised by the Northern Netherlands in 1839 as the Kingdom of the Netherlands was created by decree), while the personal union between Luxembourg and the Netherlands was severed in 1890, when William III died with no surviving male heirs. Ascendancy laws prevented his daughter Queen Wilhelmina from becoming the next Grand Duchess.[citation needed]
The Belgian Revolution at home and the Java War in the Dutch East Indies brought the Netherlands to the brink of bankruptcy. However, the Cultivation System was introduced in 1830; in the Dutch East Indies, 20% of village land had to be devoted to government crops for export. The policy brought the Dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient.[citation needed]
The Netherlands abolished slavery in its colonies in 1863.[87] Enslaved people in Suriname would be fully free only in 1873, since the law stipulated that there was to be a mandatory 10-year transition.[88]

World wars and beyond (1890–present)
Main articles: History of the Netherlands (1900–present), The Netherlands in World War I, and Netherlands in World War II
 Rotterdam after German air raids in 1940
The Netherlands was able to remain neutral during World War I, in part because the import of goods through the Netherlands proved essential to German survival until the blockade by the British Royal Navy in 1916.[89] That changed in World War II, when Nazi Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940. The Rotterdam Blitz forced the main element of the Dutch army to surrender four days later. During the occupation, over 100,000 Dutch Jews[90] were rounded up and transported to Nazi extermination camps; only a few of them survived. Dutch workers were conscripted for forced labour in Germany, civilians who resisted were killed in reprisal for attacks on German soldiers, and the countryside was plundered for food. Although there were thousands of Dutch who risked their lives by hiding Jews from the Germans, over 20,000 Dutch fascists joined the Waffen SS,[91] fighting on the Eastern Front.[92] Political collaborators were members of the fascist NSB, the only legal political party in the occupied Netherlands. On 8 December 1941, the Dutch government-in-exile in London declared war on Japan,[93] but could not prevent the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia).[94] In 1944–45, the First Canadian Army, which included Canadian, British and Polish troops, was responsible for liberating much of the Netherlands.[95] Soon after VE Day, the Dutch fought a colonial war against the new Republic of Indonesia.[citation needed]

 Former Prime Ministers Wim Kok, Dries van Agt, Piet de Jong, Ruud Lubbers and Jan Peter Balkenende with Prime Minister Mark Rutte, in 2011
In 1954, the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands reformed the political structure of the Netherlands, which was a result of international pressure to carry out decolonisation. The Dutch colonies of Surinam and Curaçao and Dependencies and the European country all became countries within the Kingdom, on a basis of equality. Indonesia had declared its independence in August 1945 (recognised in 1949), and thus was never part of the reformed Kingdom.[citation needed] Suriname followed in 1975. After the war, the Netherlands left behind an era of neutrality and gained closer ties with neighbouring states. The Netherlands was one of the founding members of the Benelux, the NATO, Euratom and the European Coal and Steel Community, which would evolve into the EEC (Common Market) and later the European Union.[citation needed]
Government-encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500,000 Dutch people to leave the country after the war.[96] The 1960s and 1970s were a time of great social and cultural change, such as rapid de-pillarisation characterised by the decay of the old divisions along political and religious lines. Youths, and students in particular, rejected traditional mores and pushed for change in matters such as women's rights, sexuality, disarmament and environmental issues. In 2002 the euro was introduced as fiat money, and in 2010 the Netherlands Antilles was dissolved. Referendums were held on each island to determine their future status. As a result, the islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (the BES islands) were to obtain closer ties with the Netherlands. This led to the incorporation of these three islands into the country of the Netherlands as special municipalities upon the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles. The special municipalities are collectively known as the Caribbean Netherlands.[citation needed]
In recent times, much of the Netherlands has seen a reclamation of land from what were once waterways.[citation needed]

Geography
Further information: Geography of the European Netherlands
See also: Low Countries
 Relief map of the European Netherlands
According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, the European Netherlands has a total area of 41,545 km2 (16,041 sq mi), including water bodies; and a land area of 33,481 km2 (12,927 sq mi). The Caribbean Netherlands has a total area of 328 km2 (127 sq mi)[97] It lies between latitudes 50° and 54° N, and longitudes 3° and 8° E.[citation needed]
The Netherlands is geographically very low relative to sea level and is considered a flat country, with about 26% of its area[26] and 21% of its population[98] located below sea level, and only about 50% of its land exceeding one metre above sea level.[citation needed] The European part of the country is for the most part flat, with the exception of foothills in the far southeast, up to a height of no more than 321 metres, and some low hill ranges in the central parts. Most of the areas below sea level are man-made, caused by peat extraction or achieved through land reclamation. Since the late 16th century, large polder areas are preserved through elaborate drainage systems that include dikes, canals and pumping stations. Nearly 17% of the country's land area is reclaimed from the sea and from lakes.[citation needed]
Much of the country was originally formed by the estuaries of three large European rivers: the Rhine (Rijn), the Meuse (Maas) and the Scheldt (Schelde), as well as their tributaries. The south-western part of the Netherlands is to this day a river delta of these three rivers, the Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta.[citation needed]
The European Netherlands is divided into north and south parts by the Rhine, the Waal, its main tributary branch, and the Meuse. In the past, these rivers functioned as a natural barrier between fiefdoms and hence historically created a cultural divide, as is evident in some phonetic traits that are recognisable on either side of what the Dutch call their "Great Rivers" (de Grote Rivieren). Another significant branch of the Rhine, the IJssel river, discharges into Lake IJssel, the former Zuiderzee ('southern sea'). Just like the previous, this river forms a linguistic divide: people to the northeast of this river speak Dutch Low Saxon dialects (except for the province of Friesland, which has its own language).[99]

Geology
Main article: Geology of the Netherlands
The modern Netherlands formed as a result of the interplay of the four main rivers (Rhine, Meuse, Schelde and IJssel) and the influence of the North Sea. The Netherlands is mostly composed of deltaic, coastal and eolian derived sediments during the Pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods.[citation needed]
Almost the entire west Netherlands is composed of the Rhine-Meuse river estuary, but human intervention greatly modified the natural processes at work. Most of the western Netherlands is below sea level due to the human process of turning standing bodies of water into usable land, a polder.[citation needed]
In the east of the Netherlands, remains are found of the last ice age, which ended approximately ten thousand years ago. As the continental ice sheet moved in from the north, it pushed moraine forward. The ice sheet halted as it covered the eastern half of the Netherlands. After the ice age ended, the moraine remained in the form of a long hill-line. The cities of Arnhem and Nijmegen are built upon these hills.[100]

Floods
Main articles: Flood control in the Netherlands, Floods in the Netherlands, North Sea flood of 1953, and Storm tides of the North Sea
 The Christmas flood of 1717 was the result of a northwesterly storm that resulted in the death of thousands.
Over the centuries, the Dutch coastline has changed considerably as a result of natural disasters and human intervention.
On 14 December 1287, St. Lucia's flood affected the Netherlands and Germany, killing more than 50,000 people in one of the most destructive floods in recorded history.[101] The St. Elizabeth flood of 1421 and the mismanagement in its aftermath destroyed a newly reclaimed polder, replacing it with the 72 km2 (28 sq mi) Biesbosch tidal floodplains in the south-centre. The huge North Sea flood of early February 1953 caused the collapse of several dikes in the south-west of the Netherlands; more than 1,800 people drowned in the flood. The Dutch government subsequently instituted a large-scale programme, the "Delta Works", to protect the country against future flooding, which was completed over a period of more than thirty years.[citation needed]

 Map illustrating areas of the Netherlands below sea level
The impact of disasters was, to an extent, increased through human activity. Relatively high-lying swampland was drained to be used as farmland. The drainage caused the fertile peat to contract and ground levels to drop, upon which groundwater levels were lowered to compensate for the drop in ground level, causing the underlying peat to contract further. Additionally, until the 19th-century peat was mined, dried, and used for fuel, further exacerbating the problem. Centuries of extensive and poorly controlled peat extraction lowered an already low land surface by several metres. Even in flooded areas, peat extraction continued through turf dredging.[citation needed]
Because of the flooding, farming was difficult, which encouraged foreign trade, the result of which was that the Dutch were involved in world affairs since the early 14th/15th century.[102]

 A polder at 5.53 metres below sea level
To guard against floods, a series of defences against the water were contrived. In the first millennium AD, villages and farmhouses were built on man-made hills called terps. Later, these terps were connected by dikes. In the 12th century, local government agencies called "waterschappen" ("water boards") or "hoogheemraadschappen" ("high home councils") started to appear, whose job it was to maintain the water level and to protect a region from floods; these agencies continue to exist. As the ground level dropped, the dikes by necessity grew and merged into an integrated system. By the 13th century windmills had come into use to pump water out of areas below sea level. The windmills were later used to drain lakes, creating the famous polders.[103]
In 1932 the Afsluitdijk ("Closure Dike") was completed, blocking the former Zuiderzee (Southern Sea) from the North Sea and thus creating the IJsselmeer (IJssel Lake). It became part of the larger Zuiderzee Works in which four polders totalling 2,500 square kilometres (965 sq mi) were reclaimed from the sea.[104][105]
The Netherlands is one of the countries that may suffer most from climate change. Not only is the rising sea a problem, but erratic weather patterns may cause the rivers to overflow.[106][107][108]

Delta Works
Main articles: Delta Works and Flood control in the Netherlands
 The Delta Works are located in the provinces of South Holland and Zeeland.
After the 1953 disaster, the Delta Works was constructed, which is a comprehensive set of civil works throughout the Dutch coast. The project started in 1958 and was largely completed in 1997 with the completion of the Maeslantkering. Since then, new projects have been periodically started to renovate and renew the Delta Works. The main goal of the Delta project was to reduce the risk of flooding in South Holland and Zeeland to once per 10,000 years (compared to once per 4000 years for the rest of the country). This was achieved by raising 3,000 km (1,900 mi) of outer sea-dikes and 10,000 km (6,200 mi) of the inner, canal, and river dikes, and by closing off the sea estuaries of the Zeeland province. New risk assessments occasionally show problems requiring additional Delta project dike reinforcements. The Delta project is considered by the American Society of Civil Engineers as one of the seven wonders of the modern world.[109]
It is anticipated that global warming in the 21st century will result in a rise in sea level. The Netherlands is actively preparing for a sea-level rise. A politically neutral Delta Commission has formulated an action plan to cope with a sea-level rise of 1.10 m (4 ft) and a simultaneous land height decline of 10 cm (4 in). The plan encompasses the reinforcement of the existing coastal defences like dikes and dunes with 1.30 m (4.3 ft) of additional flood protection. Climate change will not only threaten the Netherlands from the seaside but could also alter rainfall patterns and river run-off. To protect the country from river flooding, another programme is already being executed. The Room for the River plan grants more flow space to rivers, protects the major populated areas and allows for periodic flooding of indefensible lands. The few residents who lived in these so-called "overflow areas" have been moved to higher ground, with some of that ground having been raised above anticipated flood levels.[110]

Climate change
Main article: Climate change in the Netherlands

 CO2 emissions per capita in the European Union. (Our World in Data)
Climate change in the Netherlands is already affecting the country. The average temperature in the Netherlands rose by almost 2 degrees Celsius from 1906 to 2017.[111]

The Netherlands has the fourth largest CO2 emissions per capita of the European Union.[112] These changes have resulted in increased frequency of droughts and heatwaves. Because significant portions of the Netherlands have been reclaimed from the sea or otherwise are very near sea level, the Netherlands is very vulnerable to sea level rise. The Dutch government has set goals to lower emissions in the next few decades. The Dutch response to climate change is driven by a number of unique factors, including larger green recovery plans by the European Union in the face of the COVID-19 and a climate change litigation case, State of the Netherlands v. Urgenda Foundation, which created mandatory climate change mitigation through emissions reductions 25% below 1990 levels.[113][114] At the end of 2018 CO2 emissions were down 15% compared to 1990 levels.[115] The goal of the Dutch government is to reduce emissions in 2030 by 49%.
Nature
Further information: List of national parks of the Netherlands and List of extinct animals of the Netherlands
The Netherlands has 20 national parks and hundreds of other nature reserves, that include lakes, heathland, woods, dunes, and other habitats. Most of these are owned by Staatsbosbeheer, the national department for forestry and nature conservation and Natuurmonumenten (literally 'Natures monuments'), a private organisation that buys, protects and manages nature reserves. The Dutch part of the Wadden Sea in the north, with its tidal flats and wetlands, is rich in biological diversity, and was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Nature Site in 2009.[citation needed]

 Common seals on Terschelling, a Wadden Sea island
The Oosterschelde, formerly the northeast estuary of the river Scheldt was designated a national park in 2002, thereby making it the largest national park in the Netherlands at an area of 370 km2 (140 sq mi). It consists primarily of the salt waters of the Oosterschelde but also includes mudflats, meadows, and shoals. Because of the large variety of sea life, including unique regional species, the park is popular with Scuba divers. Other activities include sailing, fishing, cycling, and bird watching.[citation needed]
Phytogeographically, the European Netherlands is shared between the Atlantic European and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the European territory of the Netherlands belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests.[116] In 1871, the last old original natural woods were cut down,[117] and most woods today are planted monocultures of trees like Scots pine and trees that are not native to the Netherlands.[citation needed] These woods were planted on anthropogenic heaths and sand-drifts (overgrazed heaths) (Veluwe). The Netherlands had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 0.6/10, ranking it 169th globally out of 172 countries.[118]
The number of flying insects in the Netherlands has dropped by 75% since the 1990s.[119]

Caribbean islands
Main articles: Bonaire, Saba (island), and Sint Eustatius
In the Lesser Antilles islands of the Caribbean, the territories of Curaçao, Aruba and Sint Maarten have a constituent country status within the wider Kingdom of the Netherlands. Another three territories which make up the Caribbean Netherlands are designated as special municipalities of the Netherlands. The Caribbean Netherlands have maritime borders with Anguilla, Curaçao, France (Saint Barthélemy), Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sint Maarten, the U.S. Virgin Islands and Venezuela.[120]

 Underwater life of Klein Bonaire
Within this island group:

Bonaire is part of the ABC islands within the Leeward Antilles island chain off the Venezuelan coast. The Leeward Antilles have a mixed volcanic and coral origin.
Saba and Sint Eustatius are part of the SSS islands. They are located east of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Although in the English language they are considered part of the Leeward Islands, French, Spanish, Dutch and the English spoken locally consider them part of the Windward Islands. The Windward Islands are all of volcanic origin and hilly, leaving little ground suitable for agriculture. The highest point is Mount Scenery, 887 m (2,910 ft), on Saba. This is the highest point in the country and is also the highest point of the entire Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The islands of the Caribbean Netherlands enjoy a tropical climate with warm weather all year round. The Leeward Antilles are warmer and drier than the Windward islands. In summer, the Windward Islands can be subject to hurricanes.[citation needed]

Government and politics
 The Binnenhof, where the lower and upper houses of the States General meet
The Netherlands has been a constitutional monarchy since 1815, and due to the efforts of Johan Rudolph Thorbecke[121] became a parliamentary democracy in 1848. The Netherlands is described as a consociational state. Dutch politics and governance are characterised by an effort to achieve broad consensus on important issues, within both the political community and society as a whole. In 2017, The Economist ranked the Netherlands as the 11th most democratic country in the world.[citation needed]
The monarch is the head of state, at present King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands. Constitutionally, the position is equipped with limited powers. By law, the King has the right to be periodically briefed and consulted on government affairs. Depending on the personalities and relationships of the King and the ministers, the monarch might have influence beyond the power granted by the Constitution of the Netherlands.[citation needed]

Willem-AlexanderKing since 2013Mark Rutte Prime Ministersince 2010
The executive power is formed by the Council of Ministers, the deliberative organ of the Dutch cabinet. The cabinet usually consists of 13 to 16 ministers and a varying number of state secretaries. One to three ministers are ministers without portfolio. The head of government is the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, who often is the leader of the largest party of the coalition. The Prime Minister is a primus inter pares, with no explicit powers beyond those of the other ministers. Mark Rutte has been Prime Minister since October 2010; the Prime Minister had been the leader of the largest party of the governing coalition continuously since 1973.[citation needed]
The cabinet is responsible to the bicameral parliament, the States General, which also has legislative powers. The 150 members of the House of Representatives, the lower house, are elected in direct elections on the basis of party-list proportional representation. These are held every four years, or sooner in case the cabinet falls (for example: when one of the chambers carries a motion of no confidence, the cabinet offers its resignation to the monarch). The States-Provincial are directly elected every four years as well. The members of the provincial assemblies elect the 75 members of the Senate, the upper house, which has the power to reject laws, but not propose or amend them. Both houses send members to the Benelux Parliament, a consultative council.[citation needed]

Political culture
De Wallen, Amsterdam's red-light district offers activities such as legal prostitution, symbolizing the Dutch political culture and tradition of tolerance.The Netherlands is known for its progressive attitude towards LGBT rights. Here we can see two men marrying in 2001, one month after the Netherlands became the first country to legalize such marriages.Many recreational drugs are legal in the Netherlands, thanks to its progressive drug policy. Coffeeshops, the Dutch term for a store which sells  marijuana (and sometimes food and drink), can be found across the country.
Both trade unions and employers organisations are consulted beforehand in policymaking in the financial, economic and social areas. They meet regularly with the government in the Social-Economic Council. This body advises government and its advice cannot be put aside easily.[citation needed]
The Netherlands has a tradition of social tolerance.[122] In the 18th century, while the Dutch Reformed Church was the state religion, Catholicism, other forms of Protestantism, such as Baptists and Lutherans, as well as Judaism were tolerated but discriminated against.[123]
In the late 19th century this Dutch tradition of religious tolerance transformed into a system of pillarisation, in which religious groups coexisted separately and only interacted at the level of government.[124] This tradition of tolerance influences Dutch criminal justice policies on recreational drugs, prostitution, LGBT rights, euthanasia, and abortion, which are among the most liberal in the world.[citation needed]

Political parties
Main articles: Political parties of the Netherlands and Politics of the Netherlands
 The Netherlands has a culture of respectful and friendly debate. From left to right, members of the House of Representatives Sander de Rouwe (CDA), Ineke van Gent (GL), Han ten Broeke (VVD), Kees Verhoeven (D66) and Farshad Bashir (SP), 2010
No single party has held a majority in parliament since the 19th century, and as a result, coalition cabinets had to be formed. Since suffrage became universal in 1917, the Dutch political system has been dominated by three families of political parties: Christian Democrats (currently the CDA), Social Democrats (currently the PvdA), and Liberals (currently the VVD).
These parties co-operated in coalition cabinets in which the Christian Democrats had always been a partner: so either a centre-left coalition of the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats was ruling or a centre-right coalition of Christian Democrats and Liberals. In the 1970s, the party system became more volatile: the Christian Democratic parties lost seats, while new parties became successful, such as the radical democrat and progressive liberal Democrats 66 (D66) or the ecologist party GroenLinks (GL).[citation needed]
In the 1994 election, the CDA lost its dominant position. A "purple" cabinet was formed by the VVD, D66, and PvdA. In the 2002 elections, this cabinet lost its majority, because of an increased support for the CDA and the rise of the right-wing LPF, a new political party, around Pim Fortuyn, who was assassinated a week before the elections. A short-lived cabinet was formed by CDA, VVD, and LPF, which was led by the CDA Leader Jan Peter Balkenende. After the 2003 elections, in which the LPF lost most of its seats, a cabinet was formed by the CDA, VVD, and D66. The cabinet initiated an ambitious programme of reforming the welfare state, the healthcare system, and immigration policy.[citation needed]
In June 2006, the cabinet fell after D66 voted in favour of a motion of no confidence against the Minister of Immigration and Integration, Rita Verdonk, who had instigated an investigation of the asylum procedure of Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a VVD MP. A caretaker cabinet was formed by the CDA and VVD, and general elections were held on 22 November 2006. In these elections, the CDA remained the largest party and the Socialist Party made the largest gains. The formation of a new cabinet took three months, resulting in a coalition of CDA, PvdA, and Christian Union.[citation needed]
On 20 February 2010, the cabinet fell when the PvdA refused to prolong the involvement of the Dutch Army in Uruzgan, Afghanistan.[125] Snap elections were held on 9 June 2010, with devastating results for the previously largest party, the CDA, which lost about half of its seats, resulting in 21 seats. The VVD became the largest party with 31 seats, closely followed by the PvdA with 30 seats. The big winner of the 2010 elections was Geert Wilders, whose right wing PVV,[126][127] the ideological successor to the LPF, more than doubled its number of seats.[128] Negotiation talks for a new government resulted in a minority government, led by VVD (a first) in coalition with CDA, which was sworn in on 14 October 2010. This unprecedented minority government was supported by PVV, but proved ultimately to be unstable,[129] when on 21 April 2012, Wilders, leader of PVV, unexpectedly 'torpedoed seven weeks of austerity talks' on new austerity measures, paving the way for early elections.[130][131][132]
VVD and PvdA won a majority in the House of Representatives during the 2012 general election. On 5 November 2012 they formed the second Rutte cabinet. After the 2017 general election, VVD, Christian Democratic Appeal, Democrats 66 and ChristenUnie formed the third Rutte cabinet. This cabinet resigned in January 2021, two months before the general election, after a child welfare fraud scandal.[133] In March 2021, centre-right VVD of Prime Minister Mark Rutte was the winner of the elections, securing 34 out of 150 seats. The second biggest party was the centre-left D66 with 24 seats. Geert Wilders' far-right party lost support. Prime Minister Mark Rutte, in power since 2010, formed his fourth coalition government, the Fourth Rutte cabinet, consisting of the same parties as the previous one.[134]

Government
Main article: Government of the Netherlands
Administrative divisions
Main articles: Administrative divisions of the Netherlands and Public body (Netherlands)
 Provinces and territories of the Netherlands
The Netherlands is divided into twelve provinces, each under a King's Commissioner (Commissaris van de Koning). Informally in Limburg province this position is named Governor (Gouverneur). All provinces are divided into municipalities (gemeenten), of which there are 344 (2022).[135][136]
The country is also subdivided into 21 water districts, governed by a water board (waterschap or hoogheemraadschap), each having authority in matters concerning water management.[137][138] The creation of water boards actually pre-dates that of the nation itself, the first appearing in 1196. The Dutch water boards are among the oldest democratic entities in the world still in existence. Direct elections of the water boards take place every four years.
The administrative structure on the three BES islands, collectively known as the Caribbean Netherlands, is outside the twelve provinces. These islands have the status of openbare lichamen (public bodies).[139] In the Netherlands these administrative units are often referred to as special municipalities.
Within the Dutch town of Baarle-Nassau, are 22 Belgian exclaves[140] and within those are 8 Dutch enclaves.






Flag

Province

Capital

Largest city

Total area[5]

Land area

Population[141] (November 2019)

Density



Drenthe
Assen
Emmen
2,680 km2 (1,030 sq mi)
2,634 km2 (1,017 sq mi)
493,449
188/km2 (490/sq mi)



Flevoland
Lelystad
Almere
2,413 km2 (932 sq mi)
1,413 km2 (546 sq mi)
422,202
299/km2 (770/sq mi)



Friesland
Leeuwarden
5,749 km2 (2,220 sq mi)
3,324 km2 (1,283 sq mi)
649,988
196/km2 (510/sq mi)



Gelderland
Arnhem
Nijmegen
5,136 km2 (1,983 sq mi)
4,967 km2 (1,918 sq mi)
2,084,478
420/km2 (1,100/sq mi)



Groningen
Groningen
2,960 km2 (1,140 sq mi)
2,325 km2 (898 sq mi)
585,881
252/km2 (650/sq mi)



Limburg
Maastricht
2,210 km2 (850 sq mi)
2,148 km2 (829 sq mi)
1,118,223
521/km2 (1,350/sq mi)



North Brabant
's-Hertogenbosch
Eindhoven
5,082 km2 (1,962 sq mi)
4,908 km2 (1,895 sq mi)
2,562,566
523/km2 (1,350/sq mi)



North Holland
Haarlem
Amsterdam
4,092 km2 (1,580 sq mi)
2,662 km2 (1,028 sq mi)
2,877,909
1,082/km2 (2,800/sq mi)



Overijssel
Zwolle
Enschede
3,421 km2 (1,321 sq mi)
3,323 km2 (1,283 sq mi)
1,162,215
350/km2 (910/sq mi)



South Holland
The Hague
Rotterdam
3,419 km2 (1,320 sq mi)
2,814 km2 (1,086 sq mi)
3,705,625
1,317/km2 (3,410/sq mi)



Utrecht
Utrecht
1,449 km2 (559 sq mi)
1,380 km2 (530 sq mi)
1,353,596
981/km2 (2,540/sq mi)



Zeeland
Middelburg
2,934 km2 (1,133 sq mi)
1,783 km2 (688 sq mi)
383,689
216/km2 (560/sq mi)


Total

41,545 km2 (16,041 sq mi)

33,481 km2 (12,927 sq mi)

17,399,821

521/km2 (1,350/sq mi)







Flag

Name

Capital

Area[142]

Population[142] (January 2019)

Density



Bonaire
Kralendijk
294 km2 (114 sq mi)
20,104
69/km2 (180/sq mi)



Saba
The Bottom
13 km2 (5.0 sq mi)
1,915
148/km2 (380/sq mi)



Sint Eustatius
Oranjestad
21 km2 (8.1 sq mi)
3,138
150/km2 (390/sq mi)


Total

328 km2 (127 sq mi)

25,157

77/km2 (200/sq mi)


Foreign relations
Main articles: Foreign relations of the Netherlands and List of diplomatic missions of the Netherlands
 The Peace Palace (Vredespaleis), in The Hague
The history of Dutch foreign policy has been characterised by its neutrality. Since World War II, the Netherlands has become a member of a large number of international organisations, most prominently the UN, NATO and the EU. The Dutch economy is very open and relies strongly on international trade.[citation needed]
The foreign policy of the Netherlands is based on four basic commitments: to Atlantic co-operation, to European integration, to international development and to international law. One of the more controversial international issues surrounding the Netherlands is its liberal policy towards soft drugs.[citation needed]
During and after the Dutch Golden Age, the Dutch people built up a commercial and colonial empire. The most important colonies were present-day Suriname and Indonesia. Indonesia became independent after the Indonesian National Revolution in the 1940s following a war of independence, international pressure and several United Nations Security Council resolutions. Suriname became independent in 1975. The historical ties inherited from its colonial past still influence the foreign relations of the Netherlands. In addition, many people from these countries are living permanently in the Netherlands.[citation needed]

Military
Main article: Armed forces of the Netherlands
 General Onno Eichelsheim is the current Chief of Defence.
The Netherlands has one of the oldest standing armies in Europe; it was first established as such by Maurice of Nassau in the late 1500s. The Dutch army was used throughout the Dutch Empire. After the defeat of Napoleon, the Dutch army was transformed into a conscription army. The army was unsuccessfully deployed during the Belgian Revolution in 1830. After 1830, it was deployed mainly in the Dutch colonies, as the Netherlands remained neutral in European wars (including the First World War), until the Netherlands was invaded in World War II and defeated by the Wehrmacht in May 1940.[citation needed]

 Zr. Ms. Holland, a Royal Netherlands Navy offshore patrol vessel
The Netherlands abandoned its neutrality in 1948 when it signed the Treaty of Brussels, and became a founding member of NATO in 1949. The Dutch military was therefore part of the NATO strength in Cold War Europe, deploying its army to several bases in Germany. More than 3,000 Dutch soldiers were assigned to the 2nd Infantry Division of the United States Army during the Korean War. In 1996 conscription was suspended, and the Dutch army was once again transformed into a professional army. Since the 1990s the Dutch army has been involved in the Bosnian War and the Kosovo War, it held a province in Iraq after the defeat of Saddam Hussein, and it was engaged in Afghanistan.[citation needed]
The military is composed of four branches, all of which carry the prefix Koninklijke (Royal):

Koninklijke Marine (KM), the Royal Netherlands Navy, including the Naval Air Service and Marine Corps;
Koninklijke Landmacht (KL), the Royal Netherlands Army;
Koninklijke Luchtmacht (KLu), the Royal Netherlands Air Force;
Koninklijke Marechaussee (KMar), the Royal Marechaussee (Military Police), tasks include military police and border control.
The submarine service opened to women on 1 January 2017. The Korps Commandotroepen, the Special Operations Force of the Netherlands Army, is open to women, but because of the extremely high physical demands for initial training, it is almost impossible for a woman to become a commando.[143] The Dutch Ministry of Defence employs more than 70,000 personnel, including over 20,000 civilians and over 50,000 military personnel.[144] In April 2011 the government announced a major reduction in its military because of a cut in government expenditure, including a decrease in the number of tanks, fighter aircraft, naval ships and senior officials.[145]
The Netherlands has ratified many international conventions concerning war law. The Netherlands decided not to sign the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.[146]

Economy
Main article: Economy of the Netherlands
 Historical GDP per capita development (Our World in Data)
 A proportional representation of Netherlands exports, 2019
The Netherlands has a developed economy and has been playing a special role in the European economy for many centuries. Since the 16th century, shipping, fishing, agriculture, trade, and banking have been leading sectors of the Dutch economy. The Netherlands has a high level of economic freedom. The Netherlands is one of the top countries in the Global Enabling Trade Report (2nd in 2016), and was ranked the fifth most competitive economy in the world by the Swiss International Institute for Management Development in 2017.[147] In addition, the country was ranked the 6th most innovative nation in the world in the 2021 Global Innovation Index down from 2nd in 2018.[148][149]
As of 2020[update], the key trading partners of the Netherlands were Germany, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Italy, China and Russia.[150] The Netherlands is one of the world's 10 leading exporting countries. Foodstuffs form the largest industrial sector. Other major industries include chemicals, metallurgy, machinery, electrical goods, trade, services and tourism. Examples of international Dutch companies operating in Netherlands include Randstad, Unilever, Heineken, KLM, financial services (ING, ABN AMRO, Rabobank), chemicals (DSM, AKZO), petroleum refining (Royal Dutch Shell), electronic machinery (Philips, ASML), and satellite navigation (TomTom).
The Netherlands has the 17th-largest economy in the world, and ranks 11th in GDP (nominal) per capita. Between 1997 and 2000 annual economic growth (GDP) averaged nearly 4%, well above the European average. Growth slowed considerably from 2001 to 2005 with the global economic slowdown, but accelerated to 4.1% in the third quarter of 2007. In May 2013, inflation was at 2.8% per year.[151] In April 2013, unemployment was at 8.2% (or 6.7% following the ILO definition) of the labour force.[152] In February 2019, this was reduced to 3.4%.[153]
In Q3 and Q4 2011, the Dutch economy contracted by 0.4% and 0.7%, respectively, because of European Debt Crisis, while in Q4 the Eurozone economy shrunk by 0.3%.[154] The Netherlands also has a relatively low GINI coefficient of 0.326. Despite ranking 11th in GDP per capita, UNICEF ranked the Netherlands 1st in child well-being in rich countries, both in 2007 and in 2013.[155][156][157] On the Index of Economic Freedom Netherlands is the 14th most free market capitalist economy out of 180 surveyed countries.
Amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the Netherlands.[158] The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), part of Euronext, is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses. It is situated near Dam Square in the city's centre. As a founding member of the euro, the Netherlands replaced (for accounting purposes) its former currency, the "gulden" (guilder), on 1 January 1999, along with 15 other adopters of the euro. Actual euro coins and banknotes followed on 1 January 2002. One euro was equivalent to 2.20371 Dutch guilders. In the Caribbean Netherlands, the United States dollar is used instead of the euro.[citation needed]

 The Netherlands is part of a monetary union, the Eurozone (dark blue), and the EU single market.
The Dutch location gives it prime access to markets in the UK and Germany, with the Port of Rotterdam being the largest port in Europe. Other important parts of the economy are international trade (Dutch colonialism started with co-operative private enterprises such as the Dutch East India Company), banking and transport. The Netherlands successfully addressed the issue of public finances and stagnating job growth long before its European partners. Amsterdam is the 5th-busiest tourist destination in Europe with more than 4.2 million international visitors.[159] Since the enlargement of the EU large numbers of migrant workers have arrived in the Netherlands from Central and Eastern Europe.[160]
The Netherlands continues to be one of the leading European nations for attracting foreign direct investment and is one of the five largest investors in the United States. The economy experienced a slowdown in 2005, but in 2006 recovered to the fastest pace in six years on the back of increased exports and strong investment. The pace of job growth reached 10-year highs in 2007. The Netherlands is the fourth-most competitive economy in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report.[161]

Natural gas
 Natural gas concessions in the Netherlands. Today the Netherlands accounts for more than 25% of all natural gas reserves in the EU.
Beginning in the 1950s, the Netherlands discovered huge natural gas resources. The sale of natural gas generated enormous revenues for the Netherlands for decades, adding, over sixty years, hundreds of billions of euros to the government's budget.[162] However, the unforeseen consequences of the country's huge energy wealth impacted the competitiveness of other sectors of the economy, leading to the theory of Dutch disease.[162]

 The Groningen gas field whose discovery in 1959 transformed the Dutch economy, generating €159 billion in revenue since the mid-1970s
Apart from coal and gas, the country has no mining resources. The last coal mine was closed in 1974. The Groningen gas field, one of the largest natural-gas fields in the world, is situated near Slochteren. The exploitation of this field has resulted in €159 billion in accumulated revenue since the mid-1970s.[163] The field is operated by government-owned Gasunie and output is jointly exploited by the government, Royal Dutch Shell, and Exxon Mobil through NAM (Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij). "Gas extraction has resulted in increasingly strong earth tremors, some measuring as much as 3.6 on the Richter magnitude scale. The cost of damage repairs, structural improvements to buildings, and compensation for home value decreases has been estimated at €6.5 billion. Around 35,000 homes are said to be affected."[164] The Netherlands has an estimated 25% of natural gas reserves in the EU.[165] The total energy sector accounted for almost 11% of the GDP in 2014.[166] Netherlands' economy, mainly due to the large shares of natural gas reserves, is considered to have "very high" energy intensity rating.[167]
The Netherlands is faced with future challenges as the energy supply is forecasted to fall short of the demand by 2025 in the gas sector. This is attributed to the depletion of the Netherlands' major gas field, Groningen, and the earthquakes that have hit the Groningen region.[168] In addition, there is ambiguity surrounding the feasibility of producing unconventional gas. The Netherlands relies heavily on natural gas to provide energy. Gas is the main source of heating for households in the Netherlands[165] and represented 35% of the energy mix in 2014.[169] Furthermore, The European Union 2020 package (20% reduction in GHG emissions, 20% renewables in the energy mix and 20% improvement in energy efficiency) enacted in 2009 has influenced the domestic energy politics of Netherlands and pressured non-state actors to give consent to more aggressive energy reforms that would reduce reliance on natural resources as a source of income to the economy.[170] Therefore, a transition towards renewable energy has been a key objective by Netherlands in order to safeguard the energy security of the country from natural resources depletion, mainly gas.[165] Netherlands has set a 14% renewable energy target of the total energy mix by 2020.[171] However, the continuation of providing tax breaks to electricity generated by coal and gas, and to the exploration and extraction of gas from fields that are "insufficiently" profitable,[172] renders a successful transition towards renewable energy more difficult to achieve due to inconsistencies in the policy mix. In 2011, it was estimated that the renewable energy sector received 31% (EUR 743MM), while the conventional energy sector received 69% (EUR 1.6B), of the total energy subsidies by the government.[172] Furthermore, the energy market in the Netherlands remains to be dominated by few major corporations Nuon, RWE, E.ON, Eneco, and Delta that have significant influence over the energy policy.[173] Renewable energy share in the energy mix is estimated to reach 12.4% by 2020, falling 1.6% short of the 14% target.[171][needs update]

Agriculture and natural resources
 Cows near the city of Arnhem
From a biological resource perspective, the Netherlands has a low endowment: the Netherlands’ biocapacity totals only 0.8 global hectares per person in 2016, 0.2 of which are dedicated to agriculture.[174] The Dutch biocapacity per person is just about half of the 1.6 global hectares of biocapacity per person available worldwide.[175] In contrast, in 2016, the Dutch used on average 4.8 global hectares of biocapacity - their ecological footprint of consumption. This means the Dutch required nearly six times as much biocapacity as the Netherlands contains. As a result, the Netherlands was running a biocapacity deficit of 4.0 global hectares per person in 2016.[174]
The Dutch agricultural sector is highly mechanised, and has a strong focus on international exports. It employs about 4% of the Dutch labour force but produces large surpluses in the food-processing industry and accounts for 21% of the Dutch total export value.[176] The Dutch rank first in the European Union and second worldwide in value of agricultural exports, behind only the United States,[177] with agricultural exports earning €80.7 billion in 2014,[178] up from €75.4 billion in 2012.[32] In 2019 agricultural exports were worth €94.5 billion.[179] In an effort to reduce agricultural pollution, the Dutch government is imposing strict limits on the productivity of the farming sector, triggering Dutch farmers' protests, who fear for their livelihoods.[180]
One-third of the world's exports of chilis, tomatoes, and cucumbers go through the country. The Netherlands also exports one-fifteenth of the world's apples.[181]
A significant portion of Dutch agricultural exports consists of fresh-cut plants, flowers, and flower bulbs, with the Netherlands exporting two-thirds of the world's total.[181]

Demographics
Main articles: Demography of the Netherlands and Dutch people
 Population of the Netherlands from 1900 to 2000
The Netherlands had an estimated population of 17,493,969 as of 30 April 2021.[141] It is the 5th most densely populated country in Europe, and except for Malta and very small city-states like Monaco, Vatican City and San Marino, it is the most densely populated country in Europe. And it is the 16th most densely populated country in the world with a density of 424 per square kilometre (1,100/sq mi). It is the 67th most populous country in the world. Between 1900 and 1950, the country's population almost doubled from 5.1 to 10 million. From 1950 to 2000, the population further increased, to 15.9 million, though this represented a lower rate of population growth.[182] The estimated growth rate in 2013[update] is 0.44%.[183]

 Population pyramid of the Netherlands in 2017
The fertility rate in the Netherlands is 1.78 children per woman (2018 estimate),[183] which is high compared with many other European countries, but below the rate of 2.1 children per woman required for natural population replacement, it remains considerably below the high of 5.39 children born per woman in 1879.[184] Netherlands subsequently has one of the oldest populations in the world, with the average age of 42.7 years.[183] Life expectancy is high in the Netherlands: 84.3 years for newborn girls and 79.7 for boys (2020 estimate).[183] The country has a migration rate of 1.9 migrants per 1,000 inhabitants per year.[183] The majority of the population of the Netherlands is ethnically Dutch. According to a 2005 estimate, the population was 80.9% Dutch, 2.4% Indonesian, 2.4% German, 2.2% Turkish, 2.0% Surinamese, 1.9% Moroccan, 0.8% Antillean and Aruban, and 7.4% others.[185] Some 150,000 to 200,000 people living in the Netherlands are expatriates, mostly concentrated in and around Amsterdam and The Hague, now constituting almost 10% of the population of these cities.[186][187]
The Dutch are the tallest people in the world, by nationality,[188] with an average height of 1.81 metres (5 ft 11.3 in) for adult males and 1.67 metres (5 ft 5.7 in) for adult females in 2009.[189] The average height of young males in the Netherlands increased from 5 feet, 4 inches to approximately 6 feet between the 1850s until the early 2000s.[190] People in the south are on average about 2 cm (0.8 inches) shorter than those in the north.[citation needed]

 In Rotterdam almost half the population has an immigrant background.
According to Eurostat, in 2010 there were 1.8 million foreign-born residents in the Netherlands, corresponding to 11.1% of the total population. Of these, 1.4 million (8.5%) were born outside the EU and 0.43 million (2.6%) were born in another EU Member State.[191] On 21 November 2016, there were 3.8 million residents in the Netherlands with at least one foreign-born parent ("migration background").[192] On 1 January 2016, 26,2% of persons aged 0–50 had at least one parent born in a foreign country. 11,4% of persons aged 0–50 'of Dutch background' belonged to the 'third generation'. Of these 739,000 had western grandparents, 120,000 non-western. The third generation constitutes from persons born from two second generation immigrants or one second generation immigrant and one person with a Dutch background. First and second generation immigrants and the third generation were 34,5% of the population aged 0–50.[193] Over half the young people in Amsterdam and Rotterdam have a non-western background.[194] Dutch people, or descendants of Dutch people, are also found in migrant communities worldwide, notably in Canada, Australia, South Africa and the United States. According to the United States Census Bureau (2006), more than 5 million Americans claim total or partial Dutch ancestry.[195] There are close to 3 million Dutch-descended Afrikaners living in South Africa.[196] In 1940, there were 290,000 Europeans and Eurasians in Indonesia,[197] but most have since left the country.[198]
The Randstad is the country's largest conurbation located in the west of the country and contains the four largest cities: Amsterdam in the province North Holland, Rotterdam and The Hague in the province South Holland, and Utrecht in the province Utrecht. The Randstad has a population of about 8.2 million inhabitants[199] and is the 5th largest metropolitan area in Europe. According to Dutch Central Statistics Bureau, in 2015, 28 per cent of the Dutch population had a spendable income above 45,000 euros (which does not include spending on health care or education).[200]




 vte Largest municipalities in the NetherlandsStatistics Netherlands[201]



Rank

Name

Province

Pop.

Rank

Name

Province

Pop.



AmsterdamRotterdam

1
Amsterdam
North Holland
905,234
11
Apeldoorn
Gelderland
165,648

The HagueUtrecht


2
Rotterdam
South Holland
656,050
12
Arnhem
Gelderland
164,096


3
The Hague
South Holland
552,995
13
Haarlem
North Holland
162,914


4
Utrecht
Utrecht
361,924
14
Enschede
Overijssel
160,383


5
Eindhoven
North Brabant
238,478
15
Haarlemmermeer
North Holland
159,346


6
Groningen
Groningen
234,649
16
Amersfoort
Utrecht
158,712


7
Tilburg
North Brabant
224,702
17
Zaanstad
North Holland
157,215


8
Almere
Flevoland
218,096
18
's-Hertogenbosch
North Brabant
156,599


9
Breda
North Brabant
184,716
19
Zwolle
Overijssel
130,872


10
Nijmegen
Gelderland
179,073
20
Zoetermeer
South Holland
125,867


Functional urban areas
 Population density in the Netherlands by municipality. The largest urban area, the Randstad is clearly visible along the west coast.
"Functional urban areas"[202] are a type of urban areas with large populations where commuters from nearby areas work in the core area. There are several functional urban areas officially identified in the Netherlands. The largest ones (with populations over 300,000) are listed below, which count the populations of the core city and their "commuting zones".[203]



Functional urban areas

Population (2015)


Amsterdam-Haarlem-Almere

2,751,000


Rotterdam-Dordrecht

1,805,000


The Hague-Delft

1,052,000


Utrecht

875,000


Eindhoven

736,000


Groningen

474,000


Arnhem

420,000


Enschede

401,000


Breda

367,000


Zwolle

350,000


Leiden

339,000


Nijmegen

322,000


Tilburg

310,000

Language
Main article: Languages of the Netherlands
 Knowledge of foreign languages in the Netherlands, among population 15 and older, in 2006[204]
The official language is Dutch, which is spoken by the vast majority of the inhabitants. The dialects most spoken in the Netherlands are the Brabantian-Hollandic dialects.[205]
Besides Dutch, West Frisian is recognised as a second official language in the northern province of Friesland (Fryslân in West Frisian).[206] West Frisian has a formal status for government correspondence in that province. In the European part of the kingdom two other regional languages are recognised under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.[207]
The first of these recognised regional languages is Low Saxon (Nedersaksisch in Dutch). Low Saxon consists of several dialects of the Low German language spoken in the north and east of the Netherlands, like Tweants in the region of Twente, and Drents in the province of Drenthe.
Secondly, Limburgish is also recognised as a regional language. It consists of Dutch varieties of Meuse-Rhenish Franconian languages and is spoken in the south-eastern province of Limburg.[99] Ripuarian language, which is spoken in Kerkrade and Vaals in the form of, respectively, the Kerkrade dialect and the Vaals dialect[208][209] are legally treated as Limburgish as well - see Southeast Limburgish dialect.[citation needed]
English has a formal status in the special municipalities of Saba and Sint Eustatius. It is widely spoken on these islands. Papiamento has a formal status in the special municipality of Bonaire. Yiddish and the Romani language were recognised in 1996 as non-territorial languages.[210]
The Netherlands has a long tradition of learning foreign languages, formalised in Dutch education laws. Some 90% of the total population indicate they are able to converse in English, 70% in German, and 29% in French.[211] English is a mandatory course in all secondary schools.[212] In most lower level secondary school educations (vmbo), one additional modern foreign language is mandatory during the first two years.[213] In higher level secondary schools (HAVO and VWO), the acquisition of two additional modern foreign language skills is mandatory during the first three years. Only during the last three years in VWO one foreign language is mandatory. Besides English, the standard modern languages are French and German, although schools can replace one of these modern languages with Chinese, Spanish, Russian, Italian, Turkish or Arabic.[214] Additionally, schools in Friesland teach and have exams in West Frisian, and schools across the country teach and have exams in Ancient Greek and Latin for secondary school (called Gymnasium or VWO+).[citation needed]

Religion
Main article: Religion in the Netherlands













Religious identification in the Netherlands (2019)[215]

  Irreligious (54.1%)  Catholic (20.1%)  Protestant (14.8%)  Muslim (5.0%)  Other (5.9%)


The population of the Netherlands was predominantly Christian until the late 20th century, divided into a number of denominations. Although significant religious diversity remains, there has been a decline of religious adherence. The Netherlands is now one of the most secular societies in the world.[citation needed]
In 2019, Statistics Netherlands found that 54.1% of the total population declared itself to be non-religious. Groups that represent the non-religious in the Netherlands include Humanistisch Verbond. Catholics comprised 20.1% of the total population, Protestants (14.8%). Muslims comprised 5.0% of the total population and followers of other Christian denominations and other religions (like Judaism, Buddhism and Hinduism) comprised the remaining 5.9%.[215] A 2015 survey from another source found that Protestants outnumbered Catholics.[216]
The southern provinces of North Brabant and Limburg have historically been strongly Catholic, and some residents consider the Catholic Church as a base for their cultural identity. Protestantism in the Netherlands consists of a number of churches within various traditions. The largest of these is the Protestant Church in the Netherlands (PKN), a united church which is Calvinist and Lutheran in orientation.[217] It was formed in 2004 as a merger of the Dutch Reformed Church, the Reformed Churches in the Netherlands and a smaller Lutheran Church. Several orthodox Calvinist and liberal churches did not merge into the PKN. Although in the Netherlands as a whole Christianity has become a minority, the Netherlands contains a Bible Belt from Zeeland to the northern parts of the province Overijssel, in which Protestant (particularly Calvinist) beliefs remain strong, and even has majorities in municipal councils[citation needed].
Islam is the second largest religion in the state. In 2012, there were about 825,000 Muslims in the Netherlands (5% of the population).[218] The Muslim population increased from the 1960 as a result of large numbers of migrant workers. This included migrant workers from Turkey and Morocco, as well as migrants from former Dutch colonies, such as Surinam and Indonesia. During the 1990s, Muslim refugees arrived from countries like Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iran, Iraq, Somalia, and Afghanistan.[219]
Another religion practised is Hinduism, with around 215,000 adherents (slightly over 1% of the population). Most of these are Indo-Surinamese. There are also sizeable populations of Hindu immigrants from India and Sri Lanka, and some Western adherents of Hinduism-orientated new religious movements such as Hare Krishnas. The Netherlands has an estimated 250,000 Buddhists or people strongly attracted to this religion, mainly ethnic Dutch people. In addition, there are about 45,000 Jews in the Netherlands.[citation needed]
The Constitution of the Netherlands guarantees freedom of education, which means that all schools that adhere to general quality criteria receive the same government funding. This includes schools based on religious principles by religious groups (especially Catholic and various Protestant). Three political parties in the Dutch parliament, (CDA, and two small parties, ChristianUnion and SGP) are based upon the Christian belief. Several Christian religious holidays are national holidays (Christmas, Easter, Pentecost and the Ascension of Jesus).[220]
Upon the country's independence, Protestants were predominant in most of the country, while Roman Catholics were dominant in the south, especially North Brabant and Limburg. In the late 19th century, secularism, atheism and pillarisation gained adherents. By 1960, Catholics equalled Protestants in number; thereafter, both Christian branches began to decline. Conversely, Islam grew considerably as the result of immigration. Since 2000 there has been raised awareness of religion, mainly due to Muslim extremism.[221]
The Dutch royal family has been traditionally associated with Calvinism, specifically the Dutch Reformed Church, which has merged into the Protestant Church in the Netherlands. The Dutch Reformed Church was the only major Protestant church in the Netherlands from the Reformation until the 19th century. Denominational splits in 1834 and in 1886 diversified Dutch Calvinism. In 2013, a Catholic became Queen consort.[citation needed]
A survey in December 2014 concluded that for the first time there were more atheists (25%) than theists (17%) in the Netherlands, while the remainder of the population was agnostic (31%) or ietsistic (27%).[222] In 2015, a vast majority of the inhabitants of the Netherlands (82%) said they had never or almost never visited a church, and 59% stated that they had never been to a church of any kind. Of all the people questioned, 24% saw themselves as atheist, an increase of 11% compared to the previous study done in 2006.[223] The expected rise of spirituality (ietsism) has come to a halt according to research in 2015. In 2006, 40% of respondents considered themselves spiritual; in 2015 this has dropped to 31%. The number who believed in the existence of a higher power fell from 36% to 28% over the same period.[224]

Education
Main articles: Education in the Netherlands and Universities in the Netherlands
 An international primary school in The Hague
Education in the Netherlands is compulsory between the ages of 5 and 16. If a child does not have a "starting qualification" (HAVO, VWO or MBO 2+ degree) they are still forced to attend classes until they achieve such a qualification or reach the age of 18.[225]
All children in the Netherlands usually attend elementary school from (on average) ages 4 to 12. It comprises eight grades, the first of which is facultative. Based on an aptitude test, the eighth grade teacher's recommendation and the opinion of the pupil's parents or caretakers, a choice is made for one of the three main streams of secondary education. After completing a particular stream, a pupil may still continue in the penultimate year of the next stream.[citation needed]

 View on the Utrecht Science Park of Utrecht University. The building in the centre is the library.
The VMBO has four grades and is subdivided over several levels. Successfully completing the VMBO results in a low-level vocational degree that grants access to the MBO. The MBO (middle-level applied education) is a form of education that primarily focuses on teaching a practical trade or a vocational degree. With the MBO certification, a student can apply for the HBO. The HAVO has 5 grades and allows for admission to the HBO. The HBO (higher professional education) are universities of professional education (applied sciences) that award professional bachelor's degrees; similar to polytechnic degrees. An HBO degree gives access to the university system. The VWO (comprising atheneum and gymnasium) has 6 grades and prepares for studying at a research university. Universities offer a three-year bachelor's degree, followed by a one or two-year master's degree, which in turn can be followed by a four or five-year doctoral degree programme. Netherlands was ranked 5th in the Global Innovation Index in 2020, down from 4th in 2019.[226][227][228][229]
Doctoral candidates in the Netherlands are generally non-tenured employees of a university. All Dutch schools and universities are publicly funded and managed with the exception of religious schools that are publicly funded but not managed by the state even though requirements are necessary for the funding to be authorised. Dutch universities have a tuition fee of about 2,000 euros a year for students from the Netherlands and the European Union. The amount is about 10,000 euros for non-EU students.[citation needed]

Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in the Netherlands
 Portrait of Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723), known as "the father of microbiology"
 A public hospital in Amersfoort
In 2016, the Netherlands maintained its number one position at the top of the annual Euro health consumer index (EHCI), which compares healthcare systems in Europe, scoring 916 of a maximum 1,000 points. The Netherlands has been among the top three countries in each report published since 2005. On 48 indicators such as patient rights and information, accessibility, prevention and outcomes, the Netherlands secured its top position among 37 European countries for six years in a row.[230]
The Netherlands was ranked first in a study in 2009 comparing the health care systems of the United States, Australia, Canada, Germany and New Zealand.[231][232]
Ever since a major reform of the health care system in 2006, the Dutch system received more points in the Index each year. According to the HCP (Health Consumer Powerhouse), the Netherlands has 'a chaos system', meaning patients have a great degree of freedom from where to buy their health insurance, to where they get their healthcare service. The difference between the Netherlands and other countries is that the chaos is managed. Healthcare decisions are being made in a dialogue between the patients and healthcare professionals.[233]
Health insurance in the Netherlands is mandatory. Healthcare in the Netherlands is covered by two statutory forms of insurance:

Zorgverzekeringswet (ZVW), often called "basic insurance", covers common medical care.
Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten (AWBZ) covers long-term nursing and care.
While Dutch residents are automatically insured by the government for AWBZ, everyone has to take out their own basic healthcare insurance (basisverzekering), except those under 18 who are automatically covered under their parents' premium. If a person decides not to carry out an insurance coverage, the person may be fined. Insurers have to offer a universal package for everyone over the age of 18 years, regardless of age or state of health – it's illegal to refuse an application or impose special conditions. In contrast to many other European systems, the Dutch government is responsible for the accessibility and quality of the healthcare system in the Netherlands, but not in charge of its management.[citation needed]
Healthcare in the Netherlands can be divided in several ways: three echelons, in somatic and mental health care and in 'cure' (short term) and 'care' (long term). Home doctors (huisartsen, comparable to general practitioners) form the largest part of the first echelon. Being referenced by a member of the first echelon is mandatory for access to the second and third echelon.[234] The health care system is in comparison to other Western countries quite effective but not the most cost-effective.[235]
Healthcare in the Netherlands is financed by a dual system that came into effect in January 2006. Long-term treatments, especially those that involve semi-permanent hospitalisation, and also disability costs such as wheelchairs, are covered by a state-controlled mandatory insurance. This is laid down in the Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten ("General Law on Exceptional Healthcare Costs") which first came into effect in 1968. In 2009 this insurance covered 27% of all health care expenses.[236]
For all regular (short-term) medical treatment, there is a system of obligatory health insurance, with private health insurance companies. These insurance companies are obliged to provide a package with a defined set of insured treatments.[237] This insurance covers 41% of all health care expenses.[236]
Other sources of health care payment are taxes (14%), out of pocket payments (9%), additional optional health insurance packages (4%) and a range of other sources (4%).[236] Affordability is guaranteed through a system of income-related allowances and individual and employer-paid income-related premiums.[citation needed]
A key feature of the Dutch system is that premiums may not be related to health status or age. Risk variances between private health insurance companies due to the different risks presented by individual policy holders are compensated through risk equalisation and a common risk pool. The funding burden for all short-term health care coverage is carried 50% by employers, 45% by the insured person and 5% by the government. Children under 18 are covered for free. Those on low incomes receive compensation to help them pay their insurance. Premiums paid by the insured are about €100 per month (about US$127 in August 2010 and €150 or US$196 in 2012), with variation of about 5% between the various competing insurers, and a yearly deductible of €220 (US$288).[citation needed]

Transport
Main article: Transport in the Netherlands
Mobility on Dutch roads has grown continuously since the 1950s and now exceeds 200 billion km travelled per year,[238] three quarters of which are done by car.[239] Around half of all trips in the Netherlands are made by car, 25% by bicycle, 20% walking, and 5% by public transport.[239]

Road transport
 A1 motorway, in Gelderland
With a total road network of 139,295 km, which includes 2,758 km of expressways,[240] the Netherlands has one of the densest road networks in the world—much denser than Germany and France, but still not as dense as Belgium.[241]
As part of its commitment to environmental sustainability, the Government of the Netherlands initiated a plan to establish over 200 recharging stations for electric vehicles across the country. The rollout will be undertaken by Switzerland-based power and automation company ABB and Dutch startup Fastned, and will aim to provide at least one station within a 50-kilometre (30 mi) radius of every home in the Netherlands.[242] Currently, the Netherlands alone hosts approximately 30% of all recharging stations in the European Union.[243] Moreover, newly sold cars in the Netherlands have on average the lowest CO2 emissions in the EU.[244]

Public transport
 A regional train operated by Nederlandse Spoorwegen (NS)
About 13% of all distance is travelled by public transport, the majority of which by train.[239] Like in many other European countries, the Dutch rail network of 3,013 km route is also rather dense.[245] The network is mostly focused on passenger rail services and connects all major towns and cities, with over 400 stations. Trains are frequent, with two trains per hour on lesser lines,[i] two to four trains per hour on average, and up to eight trains an hour on the busiest lines.[246] The Dutch national train network also includes the HSL-Zuid, a high-speed line between the Amsterdam metropolitan area and the Belgian border for trains running from Paris and London to the Netherlands.[citation needed]

Cycling
Main article: Cycling in the Netherlands
 Bike passage at Rotterdam Centraal station
Cycling is a ubiquitous mode of transport in the Netherlands. Almost as many kilometres are covered by bicycle as by train.[239] The Dutch are estimated to have at least 18 million bicycles,[247][248] which makes more than one per capita, and twice as many as the circa 9 million motor vehicles on the road.[249] In 2013, the European Cyclists' Federation ranked both the Netherlands and Denmark as the most bike-friendly countries in Europe,[250] but more of the Dutch (36%) than of the Danes (23%) list the bike as their most frequent mode of transport on a typical day.[251][j] Cycling infrastructure is comprehensive. Busy roads have received some 35,000 km of dedicated cycle tracks, physically segregated from motorised traffic.[254] Busy junctions are often equipped with bicycle-specific traffic lights. There are large bicycle parking facilities, particularly in city centres and at train stations.[citation needed]

Water transport
Until the introduction of trains, ships were the primary mode of transport in the Netherlands. And shipping has remained crucial afterwards. The Port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe and the largest port in the world outside East-Asia, with the rivers Meuse and Rhine providing excellent access to the hinterland upstream reaching to Basel, Switzerland, and into Germany and France. As of 2013[update], Rotterdam was the world's eighth largest container port handling 440.5 million metric tonnes of cargo annually.[255] The port's main activities are petrochemical industries and general cargo handling and transshipment. The harbour functions as an important transit point for bulk materials and between the European continent and overseas. From Rotterdam goods are transported by ship, river barge, train or road. The Volkeraksluizen between Rotterdam and Antwerp are the biggest sluices for inland navigation in the world in terms of tonnage passing through them. In 2007, the Betuweroute, a new fast freight railway from Rotterdam to Germany, was completed. The Netherlands also hosts Europe's 4th largest port in Amsterdam. The inland shipping fleet of the Netherlands is the largest in Europe.[256] The Netherlands also has the largest fleet of active historical ships in the world.[257] Boats are used for passenger travel as well, such as the Watertaxies in Rotterdam. The ferry network in Amsterdam and the Waterbus network in Rotterdam are part of the public transport system.[citation needed]

Air transport
Schiphol Airport, just southwest of Amsterdam, is the main international airport in the Netherlands, and the third busiest airport in Europe by number of passengers. Schiphol is the main hub for KLM, the nation's flag carrier and the world's oldest airline.[258] In 2016, the Royal Schiphol Group airports handled 70 million passengers.[259] All air traffic is international and Schiphol Airport is connected to over 300 destinations worldwide, more than any other European airport.[260] The airport is a major freight hub as well, processing 1.44 million tonnes of cargo in 2020.[261] Smaller international airports are located in or near Eindhoven, Rotterdam, Maastricht and Groningen. Air transport is of vital significance for the Caribbean part of the Netherlands, with all islands having their own airport. This includes the shortest runway in the world on Saba.[262]

Culture
Main article: Culture of the Netherlands
 Some symbols and icons of Dutch art
Art, architecture and philosophy
Main articles: Dutch art, Architecture of the Netherlands, and Dutch literature
The Tower of Babel by Brabantine artist Pieter Bruegel the ElderWater Mill at Kollen Near Nuenen by Brabantine artist Vincent van GoghThe Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam
The Netherlands has had many well-known painters. In the Middle Ages Hieronymus Bosch and Pieter Bruegel the Elder were leading Dutch pioneers. During the Dutch Golden Age, the Dutch Republic was prosperous and witnessed a flourishing artistic movement. The "Dutch Masters" , spanning this 17th century era, included Rembrandt van Rijn, Johannes Vermeer, Jan Steen, and Jacob van Ruisdael. Famous Dutch painters of the 19th and 20th century included Vincent van Gogh and Piet Mondrian. M. C. Escher is a well-known graphic artist.[citation needed]
Literature flourished as well during the Dutch Golden Age, with Joost van den Vondel and P. C. Hooft as the most famous writers. In the 19th century, Multatuli wrote about the poor treatment of the natives in the Dutch colony. Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank is the most translated book from Dutch. Other important 20th century authors include Harry Mulisch, Jan Wolkers, Hella S. Haasse, Willem Frederik Hermans, Cees Nooteboom and Gerard Reve. Janwillem van de Wetering wrote successful detectives,  Dick Bruna (doubling as illustrator) and Annie M. G. Schmidt children's books.[citation needed]
Various architectural styles can be distinguished in the Netherlands. The Romanesque architecture was built between the years 950 and 1250. This architectural style is most concentrated in the provinces of Gelderland and Limburg. The Gothic architecture was used in the Netherlands from about 1230. Gothic buildings had large windows, pointed arches and were richly decorated. Brabantine Gothic originated with the rise of the Duchy of Brabant and spread throughout the Burgundian provinces. Dutch Baroque architecture (1525 – 1630) and classicism (1630 – 1700) is especially evident in the west of the Netherlands. Other common architectural styles are Style Louis XIV, Art Nouveau, Rationalism, Neoclassicism, Expressionism, De Stijl, Traditionalism and Brutalism.[citation needed]
Erasmus and Spinoza were famous Dutch philosophers. The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) discovered Saturn's moon Titan, argued that light travelled as waves, invented the pendulum clock, and was the first physicist to use mathematical formulae. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek was the first to observe and describe single-celled organisms with a microscope.
Windmills, tulips, wooden shoes, cheese, Delftware pottery, and cannabis have grown to symbolize the Netherlands, especially among tourists.[citation needed]

Dutch value system
Main article: Dutch customs and etiquette
Dutch society is egalitarian and modern. The Dutch have an aversion to the non-essential.[263] Ostentatious behaviour is to be avoided. The Dutch are proud of their cultural heritage, rich history in art and involvement in international affairs.[263]

 Dutch people in orange celebrating King's Day in Amsterdam, 2017
Dutch manners are open and direct with a no-nonsense attitude—informality combined with adherence to basic behaviour. According to a humorous source on Dutch culture, "Their directness gives many the impression that they are rude and crude—attributes they prefer to call openness."[263] A well known more serious source on Dutch etiquette is "Dealing with the Dutch" by Jacob Vossestein: "Dutch egalitarianism is the idea that people are equal, especially from a moral point of view, and accordingly, causes the somewhat ambiguous stance the Dutch have towards hierarchy and status."[264] As always, manners differ between groups. Asking about basic rules will not be considered impolite. "What may strike you as being blatantly blunt topics and comments are no more embarrassing or unusual to the Dutch than discussing the weather."[263]
The Netherlands is one of the most secular countries of Europe, and religion in the Netherlands is generally considered as a personal matter which is not supposed to be propagated in public, although it often remains a discussion subject. For only 17% of the population religion is important and 14% goes to church weekly.[265]
The Netherlands has a long history of social tolerance and today is regarded as a liberal country, considering its drug policy and its legalisation of euthanasia. On 1 April 2001, the Netherlands became the first nation to legalise same-sex marriage.[266]

Ecology
As of 2018, the Netherlands had one of the highest rates of carbon dioxide emissions per capita in the European Union.[267] In addition, the Dutch waste more food than any other EU citizen, at over three times the EU average [268] On the upside, in 2015, Amsterdam and Rotterdam were ranked fourth and fifth, respectively, on the Arcadis Sustainable Cities Index.[269][270]
The goal of the Dutch Government is to have a sustainable, reliable and affordable energy system, by 2050, in which CO2 emissions have been halved and 40 per cent of electricity is derived from sustainable sources.[271] To this end, the government is investing billions of euros in energy efficiency, sustainable energy and CO2 reduction. The Kingdom also encourages Dutch companies to build sustainable business/projects/facilities, with financial aids from the state to the companies or individuals who are active in making the country more sustainable.[271]

Music
Main articles: Music of the Netherlands and Music of the former Netherlands Antilles
 Pop singer Anouk in 2013
The Netherlands has multiple music traditions. Traditional Dutch music is a genre known as "Levenslied", meaning Song of life, to an extent comparable to a French Chanson or a German Schlager. These songs typically have a simple melody and rhythm, and a straightforward structure of verses and choruses. Themes can be light, but are often sentimental and include love, death and loneliness. Traditional musical instruments such as the accordion and the barrel organ are a staple of levenslied music, though in recent years many artists also use synthesisers and guitars. Artists in this genre include Jan Smit, Frans Bauer and André Hazes.[citation needed]
Contemporary Dutch rock and pop music (Nederpop) originated in the 1960s, heavily influenced by popular music from the United States and Britain. In the 1960s and 1970s the lyrics were mostly in English, and some tracks were instrumental. Bands such as Shocking Blue, Golden Earring, Tee Set, George Baker Selection and Focus enjoyed international success. From the 1980s, more and more pop musicians started working in the Dutch language, partly inspired by the huge success of the band Doe Maar. Today Dutch rock and pop music thrives in both languages, with some artists recording in both.[citation needed]

 Johan Cruyff Arena, the largest Dutch concert venue
Current symphonic metal bands Epica, Delain, ReVamp, The Gathering, Asrai, Autumn, Ayreon and Within Temptation as well as jazz and pop singer Caro Emerald are having international success. Also, metal bands like Hail of Bullets, God Dethroned, Izegrim, Asphyx, Textures, Present Danger, Heidevolk and Slechtvalk are popular guests at the biggest metal festivals in Europe. Contemporary local stars include pop singer Anouk, country pop singer Ilse DeLange, South Guelderish and Limburgish dialect singing folk band Rowwen Hèze, rock band BLØF and duo Nick & Simon. Trijntje Oosterhuis, one of the country's most well known and versatile singers, has made multiple albums with famous American composers Vince Mendoza and Burt Bacharach.[citation needed]
Early 1990s Dutch and Belgian house music came together in Eurodance project 2 Unlimited. Selling 18 million records,[272] the two singers in the band are the most successful Dutch music artists to this day. Tracks like "Get Ready for This" are still popular themes of U.S. sports events, like the NHL. In the mid-1990s Dutch language rap and hip hop (Nederhop) also came to fruition and has become popular in the Netherlands and Belgium. Artists with North African, Caribbean or Middle Eastern origins have strongly influenced this genre.[citation needed]
Since the 1990s, Dutch electronic dance music (EDM) gained widespread popularity in the world in many forms, from trance, techno and gabber to hardstyle. Some of the world's best known dance music DJs hail from the Netherlands, including Armin van Buuren, Tiësto, Hardwell, Martin Garrix, Dash Berlin, Julian Jordan, Nicky Romero, W&W, Don Diablo, Ummet Ozcan, Headhunterz, Sander van Doorn and Afrojack; the first four of which have been ranked as best in the world by DJ Mag Top 100 DJs. The Amsterdam Dance Event (ADE) is the world's leading electronic music conference and the biggest club festival for the many electronic subgenres on the planet.[273][274] These DJs also contribute to the world's mainstream pop music, as they frequently collaborate and produce for high-profile international artists.[citation needed]
The Netherlands has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since its first edition in 1956, and has won five times.[citation needed]
In classical music, Jan Sweelinck ranks as the most famous Dutch composer, with Louis Andriessen amongst the best known contemporary Dutch classical composers. Ton Koopman is a Dutch conductor, organist and harpsichordist. Notable violinists are Janine Jansen and André Rieu. The latter, together with his Johann Strauss Orchestra, has taken classical and waltz music on worldwide concert tours, the size and revenue of which are otherwise only seen from the world's biggest rock and pop music acts.

Film and television
Main articles: Cinema of the Netherlands and Television in the Netherlands
Some Dutch films – mainly by director Paul Verhoeven – have received international distribution and recognition, such as Turkish Delight ("Turks Fruit", 1973), Soldier of Orange ("Soldaat van Oranje", 1977), Spetters (1980) and The Fourth Man ("De Vierde Man", 1983). Verhoeven then went on to direct big Hollywood movies like RoboCop (1987), Total Recall (1990) and Basic Instinct (1992), and returned with Dutch film Black Book ("Zwartboek", 2006).[citation needed]
Other well-known Dutch film directors are Jan de Bont (Speed), Anton Corbijn (A Most wanted Man), Dick Maas (De Lift), Fons Rademakers (The Assault), and documentary makers Bert Haanstra and Joris Ivens. Film director Theo van Gogh achieved international notoriety in 2004 when he was murdered by Mohammed Bouyeri in the streets of Amsterdam after directing the short film Submission.[citation needed]
Internationally, successful directors of photography from the Netherlands are Hoyte van Hoytema (Interstellar, Spectre, Dunkirk) and Theo van de Sande (Wayne's World and Blade). Van Hoytema went to the National Film School in Łódź (Poland) and Van de Sande went to the Netherlands Film Academy. Internationally successful Dutch actors include Famke Janssen (X-Men), Carice van Houten (Game of Thrones), Michiel Huisman (Game of Thrones), Rutger Hauer (Blade Runner), Jeroen Krabbé (The Living Daylights) and Derek de Lint (Three Men and a Baby).[citation needed]
The Netherlands has a well developed television market, with both multiple commercial and public broadcasters. Imported TV programmes, as well as interviews with responses in a foreign language, are virtually always shown with the original sound and subtitled. Only foreign shows for children are dubbed.[275]
TV exports from the Netherlands mostly take the form of specific formats and franchises, most notably through internationally active TV production conglomerate Endemol, founded by Dutch media tycoons John de Mol and Joop van den Ende. Headquartered in Amsterdam, Endemol has around 90 companies in over 30 countries. Endemol and its subsidiaries create and run reality, talent, and game show franchises worldwide, including Big Brother and Deal or No Deal. John de Mol later started his own company Talpa which created show franchises like The Voice and Utopia.[citation needed]

Sports
Main article: Sports in the Netherlands
 Dutch star football players Arjen Robben and Robin van Persie during a game with the Netherlands against Denmark at Euro 2012
Approximately 4.5 million of the 16.8 million people in the Netherlands are registered in one of the 35,000 sports clubs in the country. About two-thirds of the population between 15 and 75 participate in sports weekly.[276] Football is the most popular team sport in the Netherlands, followed by field hockey and volleyball. Tennis, gymnastics and golf are the three most widely engaged in individual sports.[277] Organisation of sports began at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. Federations for sports were established, rules were unified and sports clubs came into existence. A Dutch National Olympic Committee was established in 1912.
The national football team was runner-up in the World Cup of 1974, 1978, and 2010, and won the European Championship of 1988. Of SI's 50 greatest footballers of all time, Johan Cruyff (#5), Marco van Basten (#19), Ruud Gullit (#25), and Johan Neeskens (#36) are Dutch.[278] The women's national team was runner-up in 2019 World Cup and won the European Championship of 2017. The Netherlands women's field hockey team won 9 out of 15 World Cups. The Netherlands baseball team have won the European championship 24 times out of 33 events. The volleyball national women's team won the European Championship in 1995 and the World Grand Prix in 2007.
The Netherlands has won 266 medals at the Summer Olympic Games and another 110 medals at the Winter Olympic Games. Joop Zoetemelk won the 1979 Vuelta a Espana, the 1980 Tour de France, and the 1985 UCI World Championship. Jan Janssen won the 1968 Tour de France, Tom Dumoulin the 2017 Giro d'Italia. Max Verstappen, the youngest Formula 1 driver to make his debut and to win a race, was the first Dutchman to win a Grand Prix and a Formula One World Drivers Championship. Dutch K-1 kickboxers have won the K-1 World Grand Prix 15 times out of 19 tournaments.

Cuisine
Main article: Dutch cuisine
This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Hutspot with meat on plate
Originally, the country's cuisine was shaped by the practices of fishing and farming, including the cultivation of the soil for growing crops and raising domesticated animals. Dutch cuisine is simple and straightforward, and contains many dairy products. Breakfast and lunch are typically bread with toppings, with cereal for breakfast as an alternative. Traditionally, dinner consists of potatoes, a portion of meat, and (seasonal) vegetables.[citation needed] The Dutch diet was relatively high in carbohydrates and fat, reflecting the dietary needs of the labourers whose culture moulded the country. Without many refinements, it is best described as rustic, though many holidays are still celebrated with special foods. In the course of the twentieth century this diet changed and became much more cosmopolitan, with most global cuisines being represented in the major cities.[citation needed]
Modern culinary writers distinguish between three general regional forms of Dutch cuisine. The regions in the northeast of the Netherlands, roughly the provinces of Groningen, Friesland, Drenthe, Overijssel and Gelderland north of the great rivers are the least populated areas of the Netherlands. The late (18th century) introduction of large scale agriculture means that the cuisine is generally known for its many kinds of meats. The relative lack of farms allowed for an abundance of game and husbandry, though dishes near the coastal regions of Friesland, Groningen and the parts of Overijssel bordering the IJsselmeer also include a large amount of fish. The various dried sausages, belonging to the metworst-family of Dutch sausages are found throughout this region and are highly prized for their often very strong taste. Also smoked sausages are common, of which (Gelderse) rookworst is the most renowned. The sausage contains a lot of fat and is very juicy. Larger sausages are often eaten alongside stamppot, hutspot or zuurkool (sauerkraut); whereas smaller ones are often eaten as a street food. The provinces are also home to hard textured rye bread, pastries and cookies, the latter heavily spiced with ginger or succade or containing small bits of meat. Various kinds of Kruidkoek (such as Groninger koek), Fryske dúmkes and spekdikken (small savoury pancakes cooked in a waffle iron) are considered typical. A notable characteristic of Fries roggebrood (Frisian rye bread) is its long baking time (up to 20 hours), resulting in a sweet taste and a deep dark colour.[279] In terms of alcoholic beverages, the region is renowned for its many bitters (such as Beerenburg) and other high-proof liquors rather than beer, which is, apart from Jenever, typical for the rest of the country. As a coastal region, Friesland is home to low-lying grasslands, and thus has a cheese production in common with the Western cuisine. Friese Nagelkaas (Friesian Clove) is a notable example.  The oliebol (in its modern form) and Zeeuwse bolus are good examples. Cookies are also produced in great number and tend to contain a lot of butter and sugar, like stroopwafel, as well as a filling of some kind, mostly almond, like gevulde koek. The traditional alcoholic beverages of this region are beer (strong pale lager) and Jenever, a high proof juniper-flavoured spirit, that came to be known in England as gin. A noted exception within the traditional Dutch alcoholic landscape, Advocaat, a rich and creamy liqueur made from eggs, sugar and brandy, is also native to this region.[citation needed]
The provinces of North Holland, South Holland, Zeeland, and Utrecht and the Gelderlandic area of Betuwe make up the region in which western Dutch cuisine is found. Because of the abundance of water and flat grasslands that are found here, the area is known for its many dairy products, which include prominent cheeses such as Gouda, Leyden (spiced cheese with cumin), and Edam (traditionally in small spheres) as well as Leerdammer and Beemster, while the adjacent Zaanstreek in North Holland has since the 16th century been known for its mayonnaise, typical whole-grain mustards,[280] and chocolate industry. Zeeland and South Holland produce a lot of butter, which contains a larger amount of milkfat than most other European butter varieties.[citation needed] A by-product of the butter-making process, karnemelk (buttermilk), is also considered typical for this region. Seafood such as soused herring, mussels (called Zeeuwse Mossels, since all Dutch mussels for consumption are cleaned in Zeeland's Oosterschelde), eels, oysters and shrimps are widely available and typical for the region. Kibbeling, once a local delicacy consisting of small chunks of battered white fish, has become a national fast food, just as lekkerbek.[citation needed] Pastries in this area tend to be quite doughy, and often contain large amounts of sugar; either caramelised, powdered or crystallised.[citation needed]
The Southern Dutch cuisine consists of the cuisines of the Dutch provinces of North Brabant and Limburg and the Flemish Region in Belgium. It is renowned for its many rich pastries, soups, stews and vegetable dishes and is often called Burgundian which is a Dutch idiom invoking the rich Burgundian court which ruled the Low Countries in the Middle Ages, renowned for its splendour and great feasts. It is the only Dutch culinary region that developed an haute cuisine. Pastries are abundant, often with rich fillings of cream, custard or fruits. Cakes, such as the Vlaai from Limburg and the Moorkop and Bossche Bol from Brabant, are typical pastries. Savoury pastries also occur, with the worstenbroodje (a roll with a sausage of ground beef, literally translates into sausage bread) being the most popular. The traditional alcoholic beverage of the region is beer. There are many local brands, ranging from Trappist to Kriek. 5 of the 10 International Trappist Association recognised breweries in the world, are located in the Southern Dutch cultural area. Beer, like wine in French cuisine, is also used in cooking; often in stews.[citation needed]
In early 2014, Oxfam ranked the Netherlands as the country with the most nutritious, plentiful and healthy food, in a comparison of 125 countries.[281][282]

See also


Netherlands portal
Outline of the Netherlands
Notes


^ a b Amsterdam is the constitutional capital, while the government and the royal family are seated in The Hague.

^ Apart from Dutch, English is an official language in the special municipalities of Saba and Sint Eustatius, Papiamentu is an official language in the special municipality of Bonaire, and West Frisian is an official language in the province of Friesland.[1]

^ Having ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in 1996, the Dutch government recognises Dutch Low Saxon, Limburgish, Sinte Romani and Yiddish as regional or non-territorial minority languages.[1] On 1 July 2021, Dutch Sign Language received the status of recognised language.[2]

^ Excluding people with a Turkish background, who are included separately in this table.

^ The euro is used in the European part of the Netherlands and replaced the Dutch guilder in 2002. The United States dollar is used in the Caribbean Netherlands and replaced the Netherlands Antillean guilder in 2011.[13]

^ CET and CEST are used in the European Netherlands, and AST is used in the Caribbean Netherlands.

^ +599 was the country code designated for the now dissolved Netherlands Antilles. The Caribbean Netherlands still use +599 7 (for Bonaire), +599 3 (for Sint Eustatius), and +599 4 (for Saba).

^ .nl is the common internet top level domain name for the Netherlands. The .eu domain is also used, as it is shared with other European Union member states. .bq is designated, but not in use, for the Caribbean Netherlands.

^ Only 11 stations are served less than twice an hour during weekdays.

^ Up from 31% vs. 19% naming the bike their main mode of transport for daily activities in 2011.[252][253]


References


^ a b c d e "Welke erkende talen heeft Nederland?" (in Dutch). Rijksoverheid. 11 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2017.

^ a b "Besluit van 24 juni 2021 tot vaststelling van het tijdstip van inwerkingtreding van de Wet erkenning Nederlandse Gebarentaal" (PDF). Staatsblad van Het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden. 2021. ISSN 0920-2064. Retrieved 1 July 2021.

^ "CBS Statline". opendata.cbs.nl. Retrieved 2 April 2021.

^ CBS. "What are the major religions?". www.cbs.nl. Retrieved 15 September 2022.

^ a b "Oppervlakte".

^ Zaken, Ministerie van Algemene (19 May 2015). "Waaruit bestaat het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden? – Rijksoverheid.nl". onderwerpen.

^ "CIA factbook Netherlands". CIA. Retrieved 26 July 2021.

^ "Bevolkingsteller". Statistics Netherlands (in Dutch). Retrieved 9 June 2021.

^ "Dutch Census 2011 Analysis and Methodology" (PDF). Statistics Netherlands. 19 November 2014. p. 9. Retrieved 9 June 2021.

^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2022". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022.

^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income – EU-SILC survey". ec.europa.eu. Eurostat. Retrieved 21 June 2022.

^ "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022.

^ "Wet geldstelsel BES". Dutch government. 30 September 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2014.

^ "Dutch government ditches Holland to rebrand as the Netherlands". the Guardian. 4 October 2019. Retrieved 1 June 2022.

^ "Netherlands vs. Holland". Netherlands Bureau for Tourism and Congresses. 18 October 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ "Holland". WorldAtlas. worldatlas.com. 13 April 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021.

^ "Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden" [Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands]. Government of the Netherlands (in Dutch). 17 November 2017. Retrieved 11 July 2020.

^ "What are the different parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands?". Government of the Netherlands. 16 October 2019. Retrieved 14 February 2021.

^ "Living in the EU". European Union. 12 January 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2021.

^ "Netherlands boundaries in the North Sea". Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.

^ "Gemeentegrootte en stedelijkheid" (in Dutch). CBS. Retrieved 16 December 2019.

^ Dutch Wikisource. "Grondwet voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden" [Constitution for the Kingdom of the Netherlands] (in Dutch). Chapter 2, Article 32. Retrieved 3 July 2013. ... de hoofdstad Amsterdam ...

^ Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the UN. "General Information". Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2013.

^ "Rotterdam: the largest freight port in the EU", European Commission, 2 April 2020, retrieved 25 November 2021

^ van Krieken, Peter J.; David McKay (2005). The Hague: Legal Capital of the World. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-90-6704-185-0., specifically, "In the 1990s, during his term as United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali started calling The Hague the world's legal capital."

^ a b Schiermeier, Quirin (5 July 2010). "Few fishy facts found in climate report". Nature. 466 (170): 170. doi:10.1038/466170a. PMID 20613812.

^ How it Works: Science and Technology. Marshall Cavendish. 2003. p. 1208. ISBN 978-0-7614-7323-7.

^ "Netherlands - Dutch civilization in the Golden Age (1609–1713)". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 10 November 2021.

^ "Dutch Republic | History & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 10 November 2021.

^ "HISTORY OF THE DUTCH EMPIRE". www.historyworld.net. Retrieved 10 November 2021.

^ "Netherlands: Agricultural exports top 80 billion Euros". Archived from the original on 22 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015.

^ a b (RVO), Netherlands Enterprise Agency (17 July 2015). "Agriculture and food". hollandtrade.com. Retrieved 26 August 2016.

^ "How the Netherlands Feeds the World". National Geographic Society. September 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2020.

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2019". World Economic Outlook. International Monetary Fund. October 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2020.

^ "2016 World Press Freedom Index – RSF". Rsf.org. 1 February 2017. Archived from the original on 1 February 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ "Netherlands". Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link), Index of Economic Freedom. heritage.org.

^ Human Development Report 2021 (PDF). New York: United Nations Development Programme. 2021. p. 24. Retrieved 28 April 2021.

^ "World Happiness Report". worldhappiness.report. Retrieved 28 April 2021.

^ "Franks". Columbia Encyclopedia. Columbia University Press. 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2014.

^ "Lotharingia / Lorraine (Lothringen)". 5 September 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2014.

^ Wim Blockmans; Walter Prevenier (3 August 2010). The Promised Lands: The Low Countries Under Burgundian Rule, 1369–1530. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 85–. ISBN 978-0-8122-0070-6.

^ Elton, Geoffrey Rudolph (1990). The New Cambridge Modern History: Volume 2, The Reformation, 1520–1559. ISBN 978-0-521-34536-1.

^ Van der Lem, Anton. "De Opstand in de Nederlanden 1555–1609;De landen van herwaarts over". Retrieved 11 March 2013.

^ "Telegraph style book: places and peoples". The Daily Telegraph. London. 12 April 2008. Retrieved 31 March 2014.

^ "The BBC News Styleguide" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2014.

^ Roebroeks, Wil; Sier, Mark J.; Nielsen, Trine Kellberg; Loecker, Dimitri De; Parés, Josep Maria; Arps, Charles E. S.; Mücher, Herman J. (7 February 2012). "Use of red ochre by early Neandertals". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109 (6): 1889–1894. Bibcode:2012PNAS..109.1889R. doi:10.1073/pnas.1112261109. PMC 3277516. PMID 22308348.

^ Van Zeist, W. (1957), "De steentijd van Nederland", Nieuwe Drentse Volksalmanak, 75: 4–11

^ Louwe Kooijmans, L.P., "Trijntje van de Betuweroute, Jachtkampen uit de Steentijd te Hardinxveld-Giessendam", 1998, Spiegel Historiael 33, pp. 423–428

^ Volkskrant 24 August 2007 "Prehistoric agricultural field found in Swifterbant, 4300–4000 BC Archived 19 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine"

^ Fokkens, Harry; Nicolis, Franco, eds. (2012). Background to beakers : inquiries in regional cultural backgrounds to the Bell Beaker complex. Leiden: Sidestone. p. 131. ISBN 978-90-8890-084-6.

^ Fokkens, Harry. "The Periodisation of the Dutch Bronze Age: a Critical Review" (PDF). Open Access Leiden University. Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2017.

^ The New Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th edition, 22:641–642

^ a b c d e f de Vries, Jan W., Roland Willemyns and Peter Burger, Het verhaal van een taal, Amsterdam: Prometheus, 2003, pp. 12, 21–27

^ Hachmann, Rolf, Georg Kossack and Hans Kuhn, Völker zwischen Germanen und Kelten, 1986, pp. 183–212

^ a b Lendering, Jona, "Germania Inferior" Archived 27 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Livius.org. Retrieved 6 October 2011.

^ Lendering, Jona. "The Edges of the Earth (3) – Livius". www.livius.org. Retrieved 28 February 2019.

^ Roymans, Nico, Ethnic Identity and Imperial Power: The Batavians in the Early Roman Empire, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2005, pp 226–227

^ a b Previté-Orton, Charles, The Shorter Cambridge Medieval History, vol. I, pp. 51–52, 151

^ Grane, Thomas (2007), "From Gallienus to Probus – Three decades of turmoil and recovery", The Roman Empire and Southern Scandinavia–a Northern Connection! (PhD thesis), Copenhagen: University of Copenhagen, p. 109

^ De Koning, Jan (2003). Why did they leave? Why did they stay? On continuity versus discontinuity from Roman times to Early Middle Ages in the western coastal area of the Netherlands. In: Kontinuität und Diskontinuität: Germania inferior am Beginn und am Ende der römischen Herrschaft; Beiträge des deutsch-niederländischen Kolloquiums in der Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen, (27. bis 30.6.2001). Walter de Gruyter. pp. 53–83. ISBN 978-3-11-017688-9.

^ Vaan, Michiel de (15 December 2017). The Dawn of Dutch: Language contact in the Western Low Countries before 1200. John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 42–44. ISBN 978-90-272-6450-3.

^ Blom, J. C. H. (30 June 2006). History of the Low Countries. Berghahn Books. pp. 6–18. ISBN 978-1-84545-272-8.

^ a b c Bazelmans, Jos (2009), "The early-medieval use of ethnic names from classical antiquity: The case of the Frisians",  in Derks, Ton; Roymans, Nico (eds.), Ethnic Constructs in Antiquity: The Role of Power and Tradition, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University, pp. 321–337, ISBN 978-90-8964-078-9, archived from the original on 30 August 2017, retrieved 3 June 2017

^ Frisii en Frisiaevones, 25–08–02 (Dutch) Archived 3 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Bertsgeschiedenissite.nl. Retrieved 6 October 2011

^ Willemsen, A. (2009), Dorestad. Een wereldstad in de middeleeuwen, Walburg Pers, Zutphen, pp. 23–27, ISBN 978-90-5730-627-3

^ MacKay, Angus; David Ditchburn (1997). Atlas of Medieval Europe. Routledge. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-415-01923-1.

^ Baldwin, Stewart, "Danish Haralds in 9th Century Frisia". Retrieved 9 October 2011.

^ Motley, John (1859). The Rise of the Dutch Republic, Volume 2. pp. 25. On more than one occasion men were seen hanging their own brothers, who had been taken prisoners in the enemy's ranks... A Spaniard had ceased to be human in their eyes. On one occasion, a surgeon at Veer cut the heart from a Spanish prisoner, nailed it on a vessel's prow, and invited the townsmen to come and fasten their teeth in it, which many did with savage satisfaction.

^ "Twentieth Century Atlas – Historical Body Count". necrometrics.com.

^ Clodfelter, Micheal (9 May 2017). Warfare and Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Encyclopedia of Casualty and Other Figures, 1492-2015, 4th ed. McFarland. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-7864-7470-7. Retrieved 11 November 2020.

^ Arnade, Peter J. Beggars, Iconoclasts, and Civic Patriots: The Political Culture of the Dutch Revolt. p. 237.

^ Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel. The Age of Reason Begins: A History of European Civilization in the Period of Shakespeare, Bacon, Montaigne, Rembrandt, Galileo, and Descartes: 1558–1648. p. 451.

^ Gillespie, Alexander (2017). The Causes of War: Volume III: 1400 CE to 1650 CE. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 131.

^ Motley, John Lothrop (1855). The Rise of the Dutch Republic Vol. III, Harper Bros.: New York, p. 411.

^ Nolan, Cathal J. (2006). The Age of Wars of Religion, 1000–1650: An Encyclopedia of Global Warfare and Civilization, Volume 1. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 247.

^ Motley, John Lothrop (1855). The Rise of the Dutch Republic Vol. III, Harper Bros.: New York, p. 508.

^ Willson, David Harris (1972). History of England, Holt, Rinehart & Winston: New York, p. 294.

^ Ground Warfare: An International Encyclopedia, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. 2002. p. 45.

^ Prak, Maarten (22 September 2005). The Dutch Republic in the Seventeenth Century: The Golden Age. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-34248-0. p. 66

^ "The Middle Colonies: New York". Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2012. Digital History.

^ Junie T. Tong (2016). Finance and Society in 21st Century China: Chinese Culture Versus Western Markets. CRC Press. p. 151. ISBN 978-1-317-13522-7.

^ John L. Esposito, ed. (2004). The Islamic World: Past and Present. Vol. 1: Abba - Hist. Oxford University Press. p. 174. ISBN 978-0-19-516520-3.

^ Nanda, J. N (2005). Bengal: the unique state. Concept Publishing Company. p. 10. 2005. ISBN 978-81-8069-149-2. Bengal [...] was rich in the production and export of grain, salt, fruit, liquors and wines, precious metals and ornaments besides the output of its handlooms in silk and cotton. Europe referred to Bengal as the richest country to trade with.

^ Om Prakash, "Empire, Mughal", History of World Trade Since 1450, edited by John J. McCusker, vol. 1, Macmillan Reference USA, 2006, pp. 237–240, World History in Context. Retrieved 3 August 2017

^ Sayle, Murray (5 April 2001). "Japan Goes Dutch". London Review of Books. Vol. 23, no. 7. pp. 3–7.

^ Koopmans, Joop W. (5 November 2015). Historical Dictionary of the Netherlands. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 233. ISBN 978-1-4422-5593-7.

^ Finkelman and Miller, Macmillan Encyclopedia of World Slavery 2:637

^ "Dutch involvement in the transatlantic slave trade and abolition". ascleiden.nl. 24 June 2013.

^ Abbenhuis, Maartje M. (2006) The Art of Staying Neutral. Amsterdam University Press, ISBN 978-90-5356-818-7.

^ "93 trains". Archived from the original on 7 December 2004. Retrieved 7 December 2004.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). kampwesterbork.nl

^ "Nederlanders in de Waffen-SS". www.waffen-ss.nl. Archived from the original on 2 December 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015.

^ MOOXE from Close Combat Series. "Indonesian SS Volunteers". Closecombatseries.net. Retrieved 28 October 2011.

^ "The Kingdom of the Netherlands declares war with Japan". ibiblio. Retrieved 2 October 2009.

^ Library of Congress, 1992, "Indonesia: World War II and the Struggle For Independence, 1942–50; The Japanese Occupation, 1942–45" Access date: 9 February 2007.

^ Video: Allies Set For Offensive. Universal Newsreel. 1944. Retrieved 21 February 2012.

^ "Netherlands". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 8 September 2012.

^ Central Bureau of Statistics (2009), "Land – en tuinbouwcijfers, 2009" (PDF), Land- en Tuinbouwcijfers (in Dutch), Government of the Netherlands, Department of Publication and Information: 14, ISSN 1386-9566, retrieved 6 January 2018

^ "Milieurekeningen 2008" (PDF). Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 4 February 2010.

^ a b Welschen, Ad: Course Dutch Society and Culture, International School for Humanities and Social Studies ISHSS, Universiteit van Amsterdam, 2000–2005.

^ Wong, Th.E.; Batjes, D.A.J.; Jager, J. de (2007). Geology of the Netherlands. KNAW. ISBN 978-90-6984-481-7.

^ Zuiderzee floods (Netherlands history). Britannica Online Encyclopedia.

^ Duplessis, Robert S. (1997) Transitions to Capitalism in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-39773-5

^ "Windmills in Dutch History". Let.rug.nl. Rijks Universiteit Groningen. Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2017.

^ "Kerngegevens gemeente Wieringermeer". sdu.nl. Archived from the original on 6 January 2008. Retrieved 21 January 2008.

^ "Kerngegevens procincie Flevoland". sdu.nl. Archived from the original on 26 December 2007. Retrieved 21 January 2008.

^ Nickerson, Colin (5 December 2005). "Netherlands relinquishes some of itself to the waters". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 30 June 2006. Retrieved 10 October 2007.

^ Olsthoorn, A.A.; Richard S.J. Tol (February 2001). Floods, flood management and climate change in The Netherlands. Institute for Environmental Studies, Vrije Universiteit. OCLC 150386158. Archived from the original on 22 October 2007. Retrieved 10 October 2007.

^ Tol, Richard S. J.; van der Grijp, Nicolien; Olsthoorn, Alexander A.; van der Werff, Peter E. (2003). "Adapting to Climate: A Case Study on Riverine Flood Risks in the Netherlands" (PDF). Risk Analysis. 23 (3): 575–583. doi:10.1111/1539-6924.00338. hdl:1871/31872. PMID 12836850. S2CID 1054016.

^ Seven Wonders Archived 2 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Asce.org (19 July 2010). Retrieved on 21 August 2012.

^ Kimmelman, Michael (13 February 2013). "Going With the Flow". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013.

^ "klimaatverandering". Milieu centraal (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 31 January 2015.

^ "Per capita CO₂ emissions". Our World in Data. Retrieved 1 January 2021.

^ "Netherlands climate change: Court orders bigger cuts in emissions". BBC. 20 December 2019.

^ "Activists cheer victory in landmark Dutch climate case". Associated Press. 20 December 2019.

^ "Lagere broeikasgasuitstoot". Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek (in Dutch). Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Retrieved 23 February 2021.

^ Dinerstein, Eric;  et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869.

^ "Beekbergerwoud - Natuurgebied". Natuurmonumenten (in Dutch). Retrieved 13 June 2022.

^ Grantham, H. S.;  et al. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity - Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.

^ Malo, Paul (18 November 2019). "Les insectes sont bel et bien en train de disparaître" [Insects are well and truly disappearing]. www.consoglobe.com (in French).

^ "Maritime boundaries of the Caribbean part of the Kingdom". Ministry of Defence. 15 November 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2020.

^ Stevens, Harm (13 March 1998). "Een stijf Hollands heertje". NRC Handelsblad (in Dutch). Retrieved 11 November 2018.

^ Buruma, Ybo (2007). "Dutch Tolerance: On Drugs, Prostitution, and Euthanasia". Crime and Justice. 35 (1): 73–113. doi:10.1086/650185. ISSN 0192-3234. JSTOR 10.1086/650185. S2CID 144295342.

^ Israel, Jonathan (1995). The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness and Fall, 1477–1806. Oxford History of Early Modern Europe. ISBN 0-19-873072-1.

^ Kaplan, Benjamin J. (5 September 2019). "Dutch" Religious Tolerance: Celebration and Revision. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-35395-4.

^ Dirks, Bart & Koelé, Theo (20 February 2010). "Kabinet valt over Uruzgan-besluit". De Volkskrant (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 23 February 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2010.

^ "Dutch Parliamentary Elections: Will Far-Right Freedom Party Defy Polls Again?". International Business Times. 12 September 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2013.

^ Castle, Stephen; Erlanger, Steven. "Times Topics: Geert Wilders". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 March 2013.

^ "Lengthy coalition talks loom after far-right gain in Dutch elections". France24. 10 June 2010. Retrieved 12 June 2010.

^ "Neue niederländische Regierung formiert sich". Der Spiegel (in German). 8 October 2010.

^ Corder, Mike (21 April 2012). "Dutch prime minister says government austerity talks collapse". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012.

^ Wearden, Graeme (23 April 2012). "Dutch prime minister lays blame squarely with Geert Wilders". The Guardian. London.

^ "Dutch prime minister says austerity talks collapse". NWADG. The Associated Press. 21 April 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2017.

^ "Dutch government resigns over child benefits scandal". Financial Times. 16 January 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2021.

^ "Dutch election: PM Mark Rutte claims victory and fourth term". BBC News. 18 March 2021.

^ "Gemeentelijke indeling op 1 januari 2021" [Municipalities on 1 January 2021]. CBS Classifications (in Dutch). CBS. Retrieved 23 March 2021.

^ "Gemeentelijke indeling op 1 januari 2019" [Municipalities on 1 January 2019]. CBS Classifications (in Dutch). CBS. 1 January 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2020.

^ "De waterschappen" (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2013.

^ "Mijn waterschap" (in Dutch). Retrieved 6 May 2021.

^ "31.954, Wet openbare lichamen Bonaire, Sint Eustatius en Saba" (in Dutch). Eerste kamer der Staten-Generaal. Retrieved 15 October 2010. De openbare lichamen vallen rechtstreeks onder het Rijk omdat zij geen deel uitmaken van een provincie. "Through the establishment of the BES islands as public bodies, rather than communities, the BES islands' rules may deviate from the rules in the European part of the Netherlands. The Dutch legislation will be introduced gradually. The public bodies fall directly under the central government because they are not part of a province."

^ "Baarle-Hertog and Baarle Nassau". Exclave.eu. Retrieved 21 November 2016.

^ a b "Bevolkingsontwikkeling; regio per maand". Statistics Netherlands (in Dutch). Retrieved 9 June 2021.

^ a b Ministerie van Algemene Zaken (19 May 2015). "Waaruit bestaat het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden?". Rijksoverheid.

^ KCT. Official website of the Dutch Commando Foundation Archived 5 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Korpscommandotroepen.nl (14 April 2010). Retrieved on 21 August 2012.

^ "Ministerie van defensie – Werken bij Defensie". Mindef.nl. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2010.

^ "Defensie hard getroffen door bezuinigingen". Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 26 April 2011.

^ "Red Cross urges Netherlands to sign UN nuclear weapons ban". NL Times. 11 February 2019.

^ "The 2017 IMD World Competitiveness Ranking" (PDF). 4 June 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Global Innovation Index 2021". World Intellectual Property Organization. United Nations. Retrieved 5 March 2022.

^ Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO (2018): The Global Innovation Index 2018: Energizing the World with Innovation. Ithaca, Fontainebleau and Geneva

^ Netherlands. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.

^ "Inflation up to 2.8 percent". Statistics Netherlands. 6 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013.

^ "Unemployment further up". Statistics Netherlands. 15 May 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2013.

^ "More employed in February". 21 February 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019.

^ "Eurozone economy shrinks 0.3% in Q4". channelnewsasia.com. 15 February 2012. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2012.

^ Chai, Barbara. "This is why Dutch kids are much happier than American children". Marketwatch.com. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Child Poverty in Perspective: An overview of child well-being in rich countries" (PDF). unicef.org. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2007.

^ "Child well-being in rich countries — UNICEF, 2013" (PDF). Unicef-irc.org. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Amsterdam – Economische Zaken" (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. Retrieved 22 May 2008.

^ "Amsterdam en de wereld: Toerisme en congreswezen". Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 15 February 2009.. ez.amsterdam.nl

^ Kreijger, Gilbert (10 February 2012). "Dutch allow Wilders' anti-Pole website, EU critical". Reuters.

^ "Global Competitiveness Report 2012–2013". World Economic Forum. 5 September 2012. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2013.

^ a b The Dutch curse: how billions from natural gas went up in smoke Archived 21 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine LEES MEER, 17 June 2009

^ "The Groningen Gas Field". GEO ExPro Magazine. 2009. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013.

^ UPDATE 2-Dutch gas field earthquake dangers ignored for decades -Safety Board Wed 18 February 2015, By Anthony Deutsch,18 Feb (Reuters)

^ a b c "The hunt for gas and oil reserves that are more difficult to extract". EBN. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015.

^ "Energy Policies of IEA Countries" (PDF). International Energy Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2019.

^ "The Agreement on Energy for Sustainable Growth". SER.

^ "Energy Policies" (PDF). IEA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2019.

^ "Netherlands Energy System Overview" (PDF). IEA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2017. Retrieved 23 March 2019.

^ "Energy Agreement for Sustainable Growth". International Energy Agency.[permanent dead link]

^ a b "National Energy Outlook 2017" (PDF). Energy Research Center of the Netherlands.

^ a b "Energy support measures and their impact on innovation". European Environmental Agency.

^ "European Energy Market Reform" (PDF). Deloitte.

^ a b "Country Trends". Global Footprint Network. Retrieved 15 November 2019.

^ Lin, David; Hanscom, Laurel; Murthy, Adeline; Galli, Alessandro; Evans, Mikel; Neill, Evan; Mancini, Maria Serena; Martindill, Jon; Medouar, Fatime-Zahra; Huang, Shiyu; Wackernagel, Mathis (2018). "Ecological Footprint Accounting for Countries: Updates and Results of the National Footprint Accounts, 2012–2018". Resources. 7 (3): 58. doi:10.3390/resources7030058.

^ "Factsheet Agri-food: Holland is a world-leading supplier of sustainable, healthy, agri-food products". Hollandalumni.nl. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Farming in the Netherlands: Polder and wiser". The Economist. Sevenum. 23 August 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014.

^ "Dutch agricultural exports top 80 billion Euros". 16 January 2015.

^ Ministerie van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit (17 January 2020). "Dutch agricultural exports worth €94.5 billion in 2019 – News item – Government.nl". www.government.nl.

^ Corder, Mike (8 July 2022). "Why are Dutch farmers protesting over emissions?". The Journal. Retrieved 8 July 2022.

^ a b "Netherlands: Agricultural situation" (PDF). USDA Foreign Agriculture Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2007.

^ CBS Statline – Population; history. Statistics Netherlands. Retrieved on 8 March 2009.

^ a b c d e "The World Factbook – Netherlands". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 2 February 2021.

^ Max Roser (2014), "Total Fertility Rate around the world over the last centuries", Our World In Data, Gapminder Foundation, archived from the original on 7 August 2018, retrieved 7 May 2019

^ Garssen, Joop; Han Nicolaas; Arno Sprangers (2005). "Demografie van de allochtonen in Nederland" (PDF). Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek (in Dutch). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2011.

^ "Expats in Nederland". Archived from the original on 19 October 2014.

^ "Feiten en cijfers over immigratie – Pagina 5". Ons Amsterdam.

^ Enserink, Martin (7 April 2015). "Did natural selection make the Dutch the tallest people on the planet?". Science. Amsterdam. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ "Reported health and lifestyle". Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Retrieved 12 August 2012.

^ Fogel, Robert (2004). The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700—2100. Cambridge University Press. p. 41.

^ Vasileva, Katya (2011) 6.5% of the EU population are foreigners and 9.4% are born abroad Archived 28 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Eurostat, Statistics in focus vol. 34.

^ "Migration background still plays a role". Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek (CBS). 21 November 2016.

^ Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek, [Wie zijn de derde generatie?. https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/nieuws/2016/47/wie-zijn-de-derde-generatie-] Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek.

^ "Half of young big-city dwellers have non-western background". Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek (CBS). 1 August 2006.

^ American FactFinder, United States Census Bureau. "Census 2006 ACS Ancestry estimates". Factfinder.census.gov. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2010.

^ South Africa – Afrikaans Speakers. Library of Congress.

^ A Hidden Language – Dutch in Indonesia (PDF). Institute of European Studies (University of California, Berkeley).

^ Dutch colonialism, migration and cultural heritage Archived 28 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine (PDF). Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asia and Caribbean Studies.

^ "CBS Statline". opendata.cbs.nl.

^ "CBS – Income distribution – Extra". www.cbs.nl. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2015.

^ "CBS Statline". opendata.cbs.nl.

^ "CBS Statline". opendata.cbs.nl.

^ https://www.oecd.org/cfe/regionaldevelopment/Netherlands.pdf[bare URL PDF]

^ Data taken from an EU survey. ebs_243_en.pdf (europa.eu)

^ "Hoeveel dialecten heeft het Nederlands? | Taalcanon". Taalcanon.nl. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Talen in Nederland – Erkende talen". rijksoverheid.nl. Retrieved 12 August 2014.

^ "CIA World Factbook: Official languages per country". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 23 December 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2011.

^ "Gemeente Kerkrade | Kirchröadsj Plat". Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 10 June 2015.

^ "Cittaslow Vaals: verrassend, veelzijdig, veelkleurig". Retrieved 9 September 2015. The PDF file can be accessed at the bottom of the page. The relevant citation is on the page 13: "De enige taal waarin Vaals echt te beschrijven en te bezingen valt is natuurlijk het Völser dialect. Dit dialect valt onder het zogenaamde Ripuarisch."

^ "The Kingdom of the Netherlands further declares that the principles enumerated in Part II of the Charter will be applied to the Lower-Saxon languages used in the Netherlands, and, in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 5, to Yiddish and the Romanes languages." Netherlands: Declaration contained in the instrument of acceptance, deposited on 2 May 1996 – Or. Engl., List of declarations made with respect to treaty No. 148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages

^ "European Union survey" (PDF). Ec.europa.eu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 January 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Foreign languages in secondary education". Wat is het aanbod aan vreemde talen in de onderbouw van het voortgezet onderwijs (vo)? (in Dutch). Rijksoverheid. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 3 May 2010.

^ Schedule of the Central Exams of 2009, Examenblad

^ Examenblad talen, vwo in 2019, Examenblad

^ a b CBS (18 December 2020). "Meerderheid Nederlandse bevolking behoort niet tot religieuze groep". www.cbs.nl (in Dutch). Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ De Groot, Kees (2019). "The Challenge of a Church Going into Liquidation". Irish Theological Quarterly. 84 (4): 409–423. doi:10.1177/0021140019872340. S2CID 220161067.

^ "Kerkelijke gezindte en kerkbezoek; vanaf 1849; 18 jaar of ouder". 15 October 2010.

^ "Een op de zes bezoekt regelmatig kerk of moskee". Central Bureau of Statistics, Netherlands. 2012. Retrieved 30 March 2014.

^ "Godsdienstige veranderingen in Nederland" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2007. Retrieved 17 May 2010.

^ "Feestdagen Nederland". Beleven.org. Retrieved 27 January 2010.

^ Knippenberg, Hans "The Changing Religious Landscape of Europe" edited by Knippenberg published by Het Spinhuis, Amsterdam 2005 ISBN 978-90-5589-248-8, pages 102–104

^ van Beek, Marije (16 January 2015). "Ongelovigen halen de gelovigen in". Dossier Relige. der Verdieping Trouw. Retrieved 21 April 2015.

^ Bernts, Tom; Berghuijs, Joantine (2016). God in Nederland 1966–2015. Ten Have. ISBN 978-90-259-0524-8.

^ "Hoe God (bijna) verdween uit Nederland". NOS. 13 March 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016.

^ "Leerplicht en kwalificatieplicht". Rijksoverheid.nl. 10 July 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2021.

^ "Release of the Global Innovation Index 2020: Who Will Finance Innovation?". World Intellectual Property Organization. Retrieved 2 September 2021.

^ "Global Innovation Index 2019". World Intellectual Property Organization. Retrieved 2 September 2021.

^ "RTD - Item". ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 2 September 2021.

^ "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2021.

^ "Health Consumer Powerhouse". healthpowerhouse.com. Retrieved 26 August 2016.

^ "U.S. scores dead last again in healthcare study". Reuters. 23 June 2010.

^ "Toward Higher-Performance Health Systems: Adults' Health Care Experiences In Seven Countries, 2007". Archived from the original on 10 January 2012.

^ "Health Consumer Powerhouse – Health Care System's Indexes and reports".

^ J.M. Boot, 'De Nederlandse Gezondheidszorg', Bohn Stafleu van Loghum 2011

^ Boston Consulting Group, 'Zorg voor Waarde', 2011.

^ a b c "Zorgrekeningen; uitgaven (in lopende en constante prijzen) en financiering" (in Dutch). Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek: StatLine. 20 May 2010. Retrieved 16 May 2011.

^ Sport, Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en (18 February 2010). "Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport". minvws.nl. Retrieved 26 August 2016.

^ "SWOV Fact sheet | Mobility on Dutch roads" (PDF) (Press release). Leidschendam, the Netherlands: SWOV – Dutch Institute for Road Safety Research. July 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ a b c d Waard, Jan van der; Jorritsma, Peter; Immers, Ben (October 2012). New Drivers in Mobility: What Moves the Dutch in 2012 and Beyond? (PDF) (Report). Delft, the Netherlands: OECD International Transport Forum. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ "CIA World Factbook | Field listing: Roadways". Cia.gov. U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. 2012. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ "Road density (km of road per 100 sq. km of land area) | Data | Table". data.worldbank.org. The World Bank Group. 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ Toor, Amar (10 July 2013). "Every Dutch citizen will live within 31 miles of an electric vehicle charging station by 2015". The Verge. Vox Media, Inc. Retrieved 11 July 2013.

^ "Een kwart van de laadpalen in de EU staat in Nederland" [A quarter of the recharging stations in the EU is in the Netherlands]. Fd.nl (in Dutch). 4 November 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ "Making the transition to zero-emission mobility: 2019 progress report" (PDF). ACEA. September 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ "CIA World Factbook | Field listing: Railways". Cia.gov. U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. 2012. Archived from the original on 13 May 2009. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ "NS to up frequency of Amsterdam to Eindhoven trains to six an hour – DutchNews.nl". DutchNews.nl. 21 June 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017.

^ (RVO), Netherlands Enterprise Agency (17 July 2015). "Holland Publications". hollandtrade.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 26 August 2016.

^ "Cycling in the Netherlands". www.iamexpat.nl.

^ "CBS Statline". opendata.cbs.nl.

^ "European Cyclists' Federation – The first EU wide ECF Cycling Barometer launched". Archived from the original on 14 July 2014.

^ Quality of Transport report (PDF) (Report). European Commission. December 2014. p. 11. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2016.

^ "Why is cycling so popular in the Netherlands?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014.

^ Future of Transport report (PDF) (Report). European Commission. March 2011. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 11 July 2015.

^ "CROW Fietsberaad". Fietsberaad.nl. Archived from the original on 17 July 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "Port of Rotterdam Statistics 2013". Port of Rotterdam. Archived from the original on 15 August 2014. Retrieved 1 June 2014.

^ "Nederland heeft grootste binnenvaartvloot van Europa" [The Netherlands has largest inland shipping fleet of Europe]. Seaport Magazine (in Dutch). Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ "'Dit is belangrijk Nederlands erfgoed': door corona kan de grootste, varende historische vloot ter wereld het water niet meer op" ['This is important Dutch heritage': due to corona, the largest, active historic fleet in the world can't hit the waters again] (in Dutch). 8 June 2020. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ Kirkliauskaite, Kristina (19 July 2020). "What is the oldest airline in the world?". AeroTime. Retrieved 22 December 2020.

^ "Bijna 64 miljoen—zo veel passagiers zag Schiphol nog nooit – NOS" [Almost 64 million—Schiphol never saw so many passengers – NOS]. NOS.nl (in Dutch). Nederlandse Omroep Stichting. 9 January 2017. Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2017.

^ "What you would like to know". Schiphol. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ "71% of cargo tonnage transported by full freighters". Schiphol. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ "Saba Island Airport". 25 February 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2021.

^ a b c d Colin White & Laurie Boucke (1995). The UnDutchables: An observation of the Netherlands, its culture and its inhabitants (3rd Ed.). White-Boucke Publishing.

^ J. Vossenstein, Dealing with the Dutch, 9789460220791.

^ Becker, De Hart, Jos, Joep. "Godsdienstige veranderingen in Nederland, Verschuivingen in de binding met de kerken en de christelijke traditie". SCP. Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau Den Haag. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2017.

^ "Same-Sex Marriage Legalized in Amsterdam". CNN. 1 April 2001. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016.

^ "Fossil CO2 emissions of all world countries – 2018 Report". EU Science Hub. 2018. Retrieved 21 October 2019.

^ "Food waste: the problem in the EU in numbers". EU parliament. 2017. Retrieved 18 January 2021.

^ "Arcadis Sustainable Cities Index Report" (PDF). 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2016.

^ "Arcadis Sustainable Cities Index". Sustainablecitiesindex.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2016.

^ a b "Sustainable enterprise | RVO.nl". english.rvo.nl. Retrieved 15 June 2016.

^ "2 Unlimited | Biography | AllMusic". AllMusic. Retrieved 30 June 2014.

^ "Amsterdam Dance Event". local-life.com.

^ "The international Dance industry assembles in Amsterdam next week". Dutch Daily News. 12 October 2012.

^ Webcasting Worldwide: Business Models of an Emerging Global Medium. Routledge; 2013. ISBN 978-1-135-24977-9. p. 101–103.

^ "Sport in Nederland" (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 25 September 2008. Retrieved 21 August 2012.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) . ned.univie.ac.at

^ "Ledental sportbonden opnieuw gestegen". sport.nl (in Dutch). 24 July 2006. Archived from the original on 12 August 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2016.

^ "The 50 Greatest Footballers of All Time". Sports Illustrated. 21 May 2019.

^ "Graansoorten". Warenkennis.nl. Retrieved 3 August 2017.

^ "De geschiedenis van de mosterd – Smulweb Blog". 5 May 2000.

^ Reaney, Patricia (14 January 2014). "Netherlands is country with most plentiful, healthy food: Oxfam". New York: Reuters U.S. Retrieved 1 September 2014.

^ "Good Enough to Eat – Media Briefing" (PDF) (Press release). Boston, MA: Oxfam America. 14 January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 1 September 2014.


Further reading
Geography and environment

Burke, Gerald L. The making of Dutch towns: A study in urban development from the 10th–17th centuries (1960)
Lambert, Audrey M. The Making of the Dutch Landscape: An Historical Geography of the Netherlands (1985); focus on the history of land reclamation
Meijer, Henk. Compact geography of the Netherlands (1985)
Riley, R. C., and G. J. Ashworth. Benelux: An Economic Geography of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg (1975) online

History

Paul Arblaster. A History of the Low Countries. Palgrave Essential Histories Series New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. 298 pp. ISBN 978-1-4039-4828-1.
J. C. H. Blom and E. Lamberts, eds. History of the Low Countries (1998)
Jonathan Israel. The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall 1477–1806 (1995)
J. A. Kossmann-Putto and E. H. Kossmann. The Low Countries: History of the Northern and Southern Netherlands (1987)
Amry Vandenbosch, Dutch Foreign Policy since 1815 (1959).

Economic indicators

Holland Compared 2nd edition 2017 – 95 page booklet by Holland's commercial website, with facts and figures about the Netherlands, comparing the country's economic indicators with those of other countries.

External links


Netherlands  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity

Articles
"Netherlands profiles – Overview". BBC News. 3 March 2010. Retrieved 4 February 2018.
"U.S. Relations With the Netherlands". United States Department of State. Retrieved 4 February 2018.
General information
Netherlands. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Netherlands from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Netherlands at Curlie
Edmundson, George (1911). "Netherlands" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 19 (11th ed.). pp. 413–421.
I am Expat – General information about the Netherlands
Netherlands: Map, History, Government, Culture & Facts | Infoplease.com
Netherlands profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Netherlands
 Geographic data related to Netherlands at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for the Netherlands from International Futures
Government
Overheid.nl – official Dutch government portal
Government.nl – official Dutch government web site
Statistics Netherlands (CBS) – Key figures from the Dutch bureau of statistics
"Provinces of Netherlands". Statoids.
Travel
Holland.com – English website of the Netherlands tourist office
nbtc.nl Archived 17 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine – Organisation responsible for promoting the Netherlands nationally and internationally
Photographs
An album of photos of Holland (Netherlands) in 1935 and 1958
vteNetherlands articlesPart of the Kingdom of the NetherlandsHistory
Germanic tribes
Roman Era
Frisii, Chamavi, Batavi, Cananefates
Migration Period
Saxons, Frisians, Franks
Dorestad, Utrecht
Development urban centers
Frisian Kingdom
Frankish Kingdom
Middle Francia
Lower Lorraine
Flanders, Holland, Frisian Freedom
Brabant, Guelders
Holy Roman Empire
Burgundian Netherlands
Habsburg Netherlands
Renaissance
Seventeen Provinces
Spanish Netherlands
Eighty Years' War
Dutch Republic
Golden Age
Batavian Revolution
Batavian Republic
Kingdom of Holland
First French Empire
Principality
United Kingdom
Netherlands since 1900
World War II
Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands
Geography
Birds
Cities
Delta Works
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Flood control
Gas field
Islands
Lakes
Mammals
Mountains and hills
Regions
Rivers
Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta
Volcanoes
World Heritage Sites
Zuiderzee Works
Politics
Cabinet
Constitution
Corruption
Demographics
Drug policy
Immigration
Education
Elections
Health care
Foreign relations
Human rights
LGBT
Law
Enforcement
Law Firms
Monarch
Municipalities
Provinces
Republicanism
Parliament
Political parties
Prime Minister
Military
Water boards
Economy
AEX index
Central bank
Energy
Euronext
Polder model
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport
Culture
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural icons
Customs and etiquette
Decorations and medals
Languages
Literature
Media
Music
Orders of knighthood
People
Pornography
Public holidays
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Anthem
Coat of arms
Flag
Lion
Terminology
Outline
Category
Portal
Links to related articles
vteCountries and dependencies of EuropeSovereign states
Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan2
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia2
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland3
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia1
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria
DependentterritoriesDenmark
Faroe Islands3
autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark
United Kingdom
Akrotiri and Dhekelia2 (Sovereign Base Areas)
Gibraltar (British Overseas Territory)
Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Alderney
Guernsey
Sark
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
Special areasof internalsovereigntyFinland
Åland (autonomous region subject to the Åland convention of 1921)
Norway
Svalbard (unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty)
United Kingdom
Northern Ireland (country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement)
1 Spans the conventional boundary between Europe and another continent.2 Considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons but is geographically in Western Asia.3 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.
 Category
 Europe portal
vteMember states of the European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
See also: Potential enlargement and Former members
vteMembers of the European Economic Area (EEA)EFTA member states
Iceland (EU relations)
Liechtenstein (EU relations)
Norway (EU relations)
EU member states
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia (provisional member)
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
See also: UK membership, CH–EU relations, and UK–EU relations
vteCouncil of EuropeInstitutions
Secretary General
Committee of  Ministers
Parliamentary  Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance
Venice Commission
Members
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Observers
Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
EU relations
Former members
Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Russia (1996–2022)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)
Serbia and Montenegro (2003–2006)

vteOECD membersMember states
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Applicants
Argentina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Croatia
Malta
Peru
Romania
Ukraine

vteBenelux countriesCountries
Belgium
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Dependencies
Aruba
Sint Maarten
Curaçao

Comparison of the Benelux countries
Benelux Parliament
Flag of Benelux
Subdivisions of the Benelux countries

vteDutch Language UnionMembers
Belgium (Flanders)
Netherlands
Suriname
Candidates
Aruba (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Curaçao (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Sint Maarten (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Partners
Indonesia
South Africa
Related
Dutch language
Dutch orthography
Dutch dictionary
Flemish language
Dutch Empire
Afrikaans

Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Sweden
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
1
İslâm Ansiklopedisi





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Netherlands&oldid=1114809897"
Categories: NetherlandsMember states of the Council of EuropeDutch-speaking countries and territoriesGermanic countries and territoriesKingdom of the NetherlandsNorthwestern European countriesCountries in EuropeMember states of NATOStates and territories established in 1815Transcontinental countriesHidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)CS1 maint: url-statusCS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownWebarchive template wayback linksCS1: long volume valueCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 German-language sources (de)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2021Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles with bare URLs for citationsArticles with bare URLs for citations from September 2022Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citationsArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles needing cleanup from September 2022All pages needing cleanupUse British English from January 2022Use dmy dates from May 2022Short description is different from WikidataPages using infobox settlement with bad settlement typeArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2022Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from May 2022Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021Articles with excerptsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2021All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2013Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from March 2022All articles that are excessively detailedWikipedia articles with style issues from March 2022All articles with style issuesPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataPages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with Curlie linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with ICCU identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with SELIBR identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with MusicBrainz area identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with TDVİA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage




Languages


AcèhАдыгэбзэAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛAnarâškielâÆngliscАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐԱրեւմտահայերէնArmãneashtiAsturianuअवधीAvañe'ẽАварAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa BaliবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralBislamaБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChamoruChavacano de ZamboangaChi-ChewaChiShonaChiTumbukaCorsuCymraegDanskالدارجةDavvisámegiellaDeitschDeutschދިވެހިބަސްDiné bizaadDolnoserbskiडोटेलीཇོང་ཁEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraEʋegbeفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskFulfuldeFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGagauzGàidhligGalegoГӀалгӀай贛語Gĩkũyũગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni客家語/Hak-kâ-ngîХальмг한국어HausaHawaiʻiՀայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiBahasa HulontaloIdoIgboIlokanoবিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরীBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueИронIsiXhosaIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekIkinyarwandaKiswahiliКомиKongoKotavaKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаLadinLadinoЛаккуລາວLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLi NihaLigureLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLa .lojban.LombardMagyarMadhurâМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiMāoriमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیBahasa Melayuꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄МокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlDorerin NaoeroNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNordfriiskNorfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandNovialOccitanОлык марийOromooOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀपालिPälzischPangasinanPangcahپنجابیPapiamentuپښتوPatoisПерем комиភាសាខ្មែរPicardPiemontèisTok PisinPlattdüütschPolskiΠοντιακάPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaQırımtatarcaRipoarischRomânăRomani čhibRumantschRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаSakizayaGagana Samoaसंस्कृतम्ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤSarduScotsSeediqSeelterskSesothoSesotho sa LeboaShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSiSwatiSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟSoomaaligaکوردیSranantongoСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitTarandíneТатарча/tatarçaၽႃႇသႃႇတႆး TayalతెలుగుTetunไทยትግርኛТоҷикӣLea faka-TongaᏣᎳᎩTsetsêhestâheseTürkçeTürkmençeTwiУдмуртᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWalon文言West-VlamsWinarayWolof吴语XitsongaייִדישYorùbá粵語ZazakiZeêuwsŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 11:02 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










