



Plastic - Wikipedia









































Plastic

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Material of a wide range of synthetic or semi-synthetic organic solids
For other uses, see Plastic (disambiguation).


 Household items made of various types of plastic
Plastics are a wide range of synthetic or semi-synthetic materials that use polymers as a main ingredient. Their plasticity makes it possible for plastics to be moulded, extruded or pressed into solid objects of various shapes. This adaptability, plus a wide range of other properties, such as being lightweight, durable, flexible, and inexpensive to produce, has led to its widespread use. Plastics typically are made through human industrial systems. Most modern plastics are derived from fossil fuel-based chemicals like natural gas or petroleum; however, recent industrial methods use variants made from renewable materials, such as corn or cotton derivatives.[1]
9.2 billion tonnes of plastic are estimated to have been made between 1950 and 2017. More than half this plastic has been produced since 2004. In 2020, 400 million tonnes of plastic were produced.[2] If global trends on plastic demand continue, it is estimated that by 2050 annual global plastic production will reach over 1,100 million tonnes.
The success and dominance of plastics starting in the early 20th century has caused widespread environmental problems,[3] due to their slow decomposition rate in natural ecosystems. Toward the end of the 20th century, the plastics industry promoted recycling in order to ease environmental concerns while continuing to produce virgin plastic and to push the responsibility of plastic pollution onto the consumer. The main companies producing plastics doubted the economic viability of recycling at the time, and the economic viability has never improved. Plastic collection and recycling is largely ineffective because of failures of contemporary complexity required in cleaning and sorting post-consumer plastics for effective reuse. Most plastic produced has not been reused, either being captured in landfills or persisting in the environment as plastic pollution. Plastic pollution can be found in all the world's major water bodies, for example, creating garbage patches in all of the world's oceans and contaminating terrestrial ecosystems. Of all the plastic discarded so far, some 14% has been incinerated and less than 10% has been recycled.[2]
In developed economies, about a third of plastic is used in packaging and roughly the same in buildings in applications such as piping, plumbing or vinyl siding.[4] Other uses include automobiles (up to 20% plastic[4]), furniture, and toys.[4] In the developing world, the applications of plastic may differ; 42% of India's consumption is used in packaging.[4] In the medical field, polymer implants and other medical devices are derived at least partially from plastic. Worldwide, about 50 kg of plastic is produced annually per person, with production doubling every ten years.
The world's first fully synthetic plastic was Bakelite, invented in New York in 1907, by Leo Baekeland,[5] who coined the term "plastics".[6] Dozens of different types of plastics are produced today, such as polyethylene, which is widely used in product packaging, and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), used in construction and pipes because of its strength and durability. Many chemists have contributed to the materials science of plastics, including Nobel laureate Hermann Staudinger, who has been called "the father of polymer chemistry" and Herman Mark, known as "the father of polymer physics".[7]

Contents

1 Etymology
2 Structure
3 Properties and classifications

3.1 Thermoplastics and thermosetting polymers
3.2 Amorphous plastics and crystalline plastics
3.3 Conductive polymers
3.4 Biodegradable plastics and bioplastics

3.4.1 Biodegradable plastics
3.4.2 Bioplastics




4 Plastic industry

4.1 Production
4.2 Compounding
4.3 Converting


5 Types of plastics

5.1 Commodity plastics
5.2 Engineering plastics
5.3 High-performance plastics


6 Gallery
7 Applications
8 Additives

8.1 Leaching
8.2 Recycling
8.3 Health effects
8.4 Types of additive


9 Toxicity

9.1 Bisphenol A (BPA)


10 Environmental effects

10.1 Microplastics
10.2 Decomposition of plastics
10.3 Recycling
10.4 Climate change
10.5 Production of plastics
10.6 Incineration of plastics
10.7 Pyrolytic disposal


11 History
12 Policy
13 See also
14 References
15 Sources
16 External links


Etymology
The word plastic derives from the Greek πλαστικός (plastikos) meaning "capable of being shaped or molded," and in turn from πλαστός (plastos) meaning "molded."[8] As a noun the word most commonly refers to the solid products of petrochemical-derived manufacturing.[9]
The noun plasticity refers specifically here to the deformability of the materials used in the manufacture of plastics. Plasticity allows molding, extrusion or compression into a variety of shapes: films, fibers, plates, tubes, bottles and boxes, among many others. Plasticity also has a technical definition in materials science outside the scope of this article referring to the non-reversible change in form of solid substances.

Structure
See also: PolymerMost plastics contain organic polymers.[10] The vast majority of these polymers are formed from chains of carbon atoms, with or without the attachment of oxygen, nitrogen or sulfur atoms. These chains comprise many repeating units formed from monomers. Each polymer chain consists of several thousand repeating units. The backbone is the part of the chain that is on the main path, linking together a large number of repeat units. To customize the properties of a plastic, different molecular groups called side chains hang from this backbone; they are usually hung from the monomers before the monomers themselves are linked together to form the polymer chain. The structure of these side chains influences the properties of the polymer.
Properties and classifications
Plastics are usually classified by the chemical structure of the polymer's backbone and side chains. Important groups classified in this way include the acrylics, polyesters, silicones, polyurethanes, and halogenated plastics. Plastics can be classified by the chemical process used in their synthesis, such as condensation, polyaddition, and cross-linking.[11] They can also be classified by their physical properties, including hardness, density, tensile strength, thermal resistance, and glass transition temperature. Plastics can additionally be classified by their resistance and reactions to various substances and processes, such as exposure to organic solvents, oxidation, and ionizing radiation.[12] Other classifications of plastics are based on qualities relevant to manufacturing or product design for a particular purpose. Examples include thermoplastics, thermosets, conductive polymers, biodegradable plastics, engineering plastics and elastomers.

Thermoplastics and thermosetting polymers
 This plastic handle from a kitchen utensil has been deformed by heat and partially melted
One important classification of plastics is the degree to which the chemical processes used to make them are reversible or not.
Thermoplastics do not undergo chemical change in their composition when heated and thus can be molded repeatedly. Examples include polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene (PS), and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).[13]
Thermosets, or thermosetting polymers, can melt and take shape only once: after they have solidified, they stay solid.[14] If reheated, thermosets decompose rather than melt. In the thermosetting process, an irreversible chemical reaction occurs. The vulcanization of rubber is an example of this process. Before heating in the presence of sulfur, natural rubber (polyisoprene) is a sticky, slightly runny material; after vulcanization, the product is dry and rigid.

Amorphous plastics and crystalline plastics
Many plastics are completely amorphous (without a highly ordered molecular structure),[15] including thermosets, polystyrene, and methyl methacrylate (PMMA). Crystalline plastics exhibit a pattern of more regularly spaced atoms, such as high-density polyethylene (HDPE), polybutylene terephthalate (PBT), and polyether ether ketone (PEEK). However, some plastics are partially amorphous and partially crystalline in molecular structure, giving them both a melting point and one or more glass transitions (the temperature above which the extent of localized molecular flexibility is substantially increased). These so-called semi-crystalline plastics include polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, polyamides (nylons), polyesters and some polyurethanes.

Conductive polymers
Main article: Conductive polymer
Intrinsically Conducting Polymers (ICP) are organic polymers that conduct electricity. While a conductivity of up to 80 kS/cm in stretch-oriented polyacetylene,[16] has been achieved, it does not approach that of most metals. For example, copper has a conductivity of several hundred kS/cm.[17]

Biodegradable plastics and bioplastics
Biodegradable plastics
Main article: Biodegradable plastic
Biodegradable plastics are plastics that degrade (break down) upon exposure to sunlight or ultra-violet radiation; water or dampness; bacteria; enzymes; or wind abrasion. Attack by insects, such as waxworms and mealworms, can also be considered as forms of biodegradation. Aerobic degradation requires that the plastic be exposed at the surface, whereas anaerobic degradation would be effective in landfill or composting systems. Some companies produce biodegradable additives to enhance biodegradation. Although starch powder can be added as a filler to allow some plastics to degrade more easily, such treatment does not lead to complete breakdown. Some researchers have genetically engineered bacteria to synthesize completely biodegradable plastics, such as polyhydroxy butyrate (PHB); however, these are relatively costly as of 2021.[18]

Bioplastics
Main article: Bioplastic
While most plastics are produced from petrochemicals, bioplastics are made substantially from renewable plant materials like cellulose and starch.[19] Due both to the finite limits of fossil fuel reserves and to rising levels of greenhouse gases caused primarily by the burning of those fuels, the development of bioplastics is a growing field.[20][21] Global production capacity for bio-based plastics is estimated at 327,000 tonnes per year. In contrast, global production of polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP), the world's leading petrochemical-derived polyolefins, was estimated at over 150 million tonnes in 2015.[22]

Plastic industry
The plastic industry includes the global production, compounding, conversion and sale of plastic products. Although the Middle East and Russia produce most of the required petrochemical raw materials; the production of plastic is concentrated in the global East and West. The plastic industry comprises a huge number of companies and can be divided into several sectors:

Production
9.2 billion tonnes of plastic are estimated to have been made between 1950 and 2017, with more than half this having been produced since 2004. Since the birth of the plastic industry in the 1950s, global production has increased enormously, reaching 400 million tonnes in 2021 up from 381 million metric tonnes in 2015 (excluding additives).[2][23] From the 1950s rapid growth occurred in the use of plastics for packaging, in building and construction, and in other sectors.[2] If global trends on plastic demand continue, it is estimated that by 2050 annual global plastic production will reach over 1,100 million tonnes.[2]

Polypropylene plantsA Slovnaft facility in Bratislava, SlovakiaA SOCAR Polymer polypropylene plant in Sumgayit, Azerbaijan

Annual global plastic production 1950–2015.[23] Vertical lines denote the 1973–1975 recession and the financial crisis of 2007–2008 which caused brief reductions in plastic production.

Plastics are produced in chemical plants by the polymerization of their starting materials (monomers); which are almost always petrochemical in nature. Such facilities are normally large and are visually similar to oil refineries, with sprawling pipework running throughout. The large size of these plants allows them to exploit economies of scale. Despite this, plastic production  is not particularly monopolized, with about 100 companies accounting for 90% of global production.[24] This includes a mixture of private and state-owned enterprises. Roughly half of all production takes place in East Asia, with China being the largest single producer. Major international producers include:


Dow Chemical
LyondellBasell
Exxonmobil
SABIC
BASF
Sibur
Shin-Etsu Chemical
Indorama Ventures
Sinopec
Braskem


Global plastic production (2020)[25]


Region
Global production


China
31%


Japan
3%


Rest of Asia
17%


NAFTA
19%


Latin America
4%


Europe
16%


CIS
3%


Middle East & Africa
7%

Historically, Europe and North America have dominated global plastics production. However, since 2010 Asia has emerged as a significant producer, with China accounting for 31% of total plastic resin production in 2020.[25] Regional differences in the volume of plastics production are driven by user demand, the price of fossil fuel feedstocks, and investments made in the petrochemical industry. For example, since 2010 over US$200 billion has been invested in the United States in new plastic and chemical plants, stimulated by the low cost of raw materials. In the European Union (EU), too, heavy investments have been made in the plastics industry, which employs over 1.6 million people with a turnover of more than 360 billion euros per year. In China in 2016 there were over 15,000 plastic manufacturing companies, generating more than US$366 billion in revenue.[2]
In 2017 the global plastics market was dominated by thermoplastics– polymers that can be melted and recast. Thermoplastics include polyethylene (PE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene (PS) and synthetic fibres, which together represent 86% of all plastics.[2]

Compounding
 Plastic compounding scheme for a thermosoftening material
Plastic is not sold as a pure unadulterated substance, but is instead mixed with various chemicals and other materials, which are collectively known as additives. These are added during the compounding stage and include substances such as stabilizers, plasticizers and dyes, which are intended to improve the lifespan, workability or appearance of the final item. In some cases, this can involve mixing different types of plastic together to form a polymer blend, such as high impact polystyrene. Large companies may do their own compounding prior to production, but some producers have it done by a third party. Companies that specialize in this work are known as Compounders.
The compounding of thermosetting plastic is relatively straightforward; as it remains liquid until it is cured into its final form. For thermosoftening materials, which are used to make the majority of products, it is necessary to melt the plastic in order to mix-in the additives. This involves heating it to anywhere between 150–320 °C (300–610 °F). Molten plastic is viscous and exhibits laminar flow, leading to poor mixing. Compounding is therefore done using extrusion equipment, which is able to supply the necessary heat and mixing to give a properly dispersed product.
The concentrations of most additives are usually quite low, however high levels can be added to create Masterbatch products. The additives in these are concentrated but still properly dispersed in the host resin. Masterbatch granules can be mixed with cheaper bulk polymer and will release their additives during processing to give a homogeneous final product. This can be cheaper than working with a fully compounded material and is particularly common for the introduction of colour.

Converting
Short video on injection molding (9 min 37 s)Blow molding a plastic drinks bottle
Companies that produce finished goods are known as converters (sometimes processors). The vast majority of plastics produced worldwide are thermosoftening and must be heated until molten in order to be molded. Various sorts of extrusion equipment exist which can then form the plastic into almost any shape.

Film blowing - Plastic films (carrier bags, sheeting)
Blow molding - Thin-walled hollow objects in large quantities (drinks bottles, toys)
Rotational molding - Thick-walled hollow objects (IBC tanks)
Injection molding - Solid objects (phone cases, keyboards)
Spinning - Produces fibers (nylon, spandex etc.)
For thermosetting materials the process is slightly different, as the plastics are liquid to begin with and but must be cured to give solid products, but much of the equipment is broadly similar.
The most commonly produced plastic consumer products include packaging made from LDPE (e.g. bags, containers, food packaging film), containers made from HDPE (e.g. milk bottles, shampoo bottles, ice cream tubs), and PET (e.g. bottles for water and other drinks). Together these products account for around 36% of plastics use in the world. Most of them (e.g. disposable cups, plates, cutlery, takeaway containers, carrier bags) are used for only a short period, many for less than a day. The use of plastics in building and construction, textiles, transportation and electrical equipment also accounts for a substantial share of the plastics market. Plastic items used for such purposes generally have longer life spans than. They may be in use for periods ranging from around five years (e.g. textiles and electrical equipment) to more than 20 years (e.g. construction materials, industrial machinery).[2]

Plastic consumption differs among countries and communities, with some form of plastic having made its way into most people's lives. North America (i.e. the North American Free Trade Agreement or NAFTA region) accounts for 21% of global plastic consumption, closely followed by China (20%) and Western Europe (18%). In North America and Europe there is high per capita plastic consumption (94 kg and 85 kg/capita/year, respectively). In China there is lower per capita consumption (58 kg/capita/year), but high consumption nationally because of its large population.[2]
Types of plastics
Commodity plastics
 Chemical structures and uses of some common plastics
Around 70% of global production is concentrated in six major polymer types, the so-called commodity plastics. Unlike most other plastics these can often be identified by their resin identification code (RIC):

 Polyethylene terephthalate (PET or PETE)
 High-density polyethylene (HDPE or PE-HD)
 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC or V)
 Low-density polyethylene (LDPE or PE-LD),
 Polypropylene (PP)
 Polystyrene (PS)
Polyurethanes (PUR) and PP&A fibres[26] are often also included as major commodity classes, although they usually lack RICs, as they are chemically quite diverse groups. These materials are inexpensive, versatile and easy to work with, making them the preferred choice for the mass production everyday objects. Their biggest single application is in packaging, with some 146 million tonnes being used this way in 2015, equivalent to 36% of global production. Due to their dominance; many of the properties and problems commonly associated with plastics, such as pollution stemming from their poor biodegradability, are ultimately attributable to commodity plastics.
A huge number of plastics exist beyond the commodity plastics, with many having exceptional properties.





Global plastic production by polymer type (2015)[23]


Polymer
Production (Mt)
Percentage of all plastics
Polymer type
Thermal character


Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)
64
15.7%
Polyolefin
Thermoplastic


High-density polyethylene (HDPE)
52
12.8%
Polyolefin
Thermoplastic


polypropylene (PP)
68
16.7%
Polyolefin
Thermoplastic


Polystyrene (PS)
25
6.1%
Unsaturated polyolefin
Thermoplastic


Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
38
9.3%
Halogenated
Thermoplastic


Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
33
8.1%
Condensation
Thermoplastic


Polyurethane (PUR)
27
6.6%
Condensation
Thermoset[27]


PP&A Fibers[26]
59
14.5%
Condensation
Thermoplastic


All Others
16
3.9%
Various
Varies


Additives
25
6.1%
-
-


Total
407
100%
-
-


Engineering plastics
Engineering plastics are more robust and are used to make  products such as vehicle parts, building and construction materials, and some machine parts. In some cases they are polymer blends formed by mixing different plastics together (ABS, HIPS etc.). Engineering plastics can replace metals in vehicles, reducing their weight, with a 10% reduction improving fuel efficiency by 6-8%. Roughly 50% of the volume of modern cars is made of plastic but this only accounts for 12-17% of the vehicle weight.[28]

Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS): electronic equipment cases (e.g. computer monitors, printers, keyboards) and drainage pipe
High impact polystyrene (HIPS): refrigerator liners, food packaging and vending cups
Polycarbonate (PC): compact discs, eyeglasses, riot shields, security windows, traffic lights, and lenses
Polycarbonate + acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (PC + ABS): a blend of PC and ABS that creates a stronger plastic used in car interior and exterior parts, and in mobile phone bodies
Polyethylene + acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (PE + ABS): a slippery blend of PE and ABS used in low-duty dry bearings
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) (acrylic): contact lenses (of the original "hard" variety), glazing (best known in this form by its various trade names around the world; e.g. Perspex, Plexiglas, and Oroglas), fluorescent-light diffusers, and rear light covers for vehicles. It also forms the basis of artistic and commercial acrylic paints, when suspended in water with the use of other agents.
Silicones (polysiloxanes): heat-resistant resins used mainly as sealants but also used for high-temperature cooking utensils and as a base resin for industrial paints
Urea-formaldehyde (UF): one of the aminoplasts used as a multi-colorable alternative to phenolics: used as a wood adhesive (for plywood, chipboard, hardboard) and electrical switch housings
High-performance plastics
High-performance plastics are usually expensive, with their use limited to specialised applications which make use of their superior properties.

Aramids: best known for their use in making body armor, this class of heat-resistant and strong synthetic fibers are also used in aerospace and military applications, includes Kevlar and Nomex, and Twaron.
Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylenes
Polyetheretherketone (PEEK): strong, chemical- and heat-resistant thermoplastic; its biocompatibility allows for use in medical implant applications and aerospace moldings. It is one of the most expensive commercial polymers.
Polyetherimide (PEI) (Ultem): a high-temperature, chemically stable polymer that does not crystallize
Polyimide: a high-temperature plastic used in materials such as Kapton tape
Polysulfone: high-temperature melt-processable resin used in membranes, filtration media, water heater dip tubes and other high-temperature applications
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), or Teflon: heat-resistant, low-friction coatings used in non-stick surfaces for frying pans, plumber's tape and water slides
Polyamide-imide (PAI): High-performance engineering plastic extensively used in high performance gears, switches, transmission and other automotive components, and aerospace parts.[29]
Gallery




PET water bottle






High density polythene (HDPE) is used for making sturdy containers; Transparent ones may be made of PET






Disposable suits; nonwoven HDPE fabric






Plastic mailing envelopes (hdpe)






Clear plastic bags (shown) are made of low density polythene (LDPE); blown-film shopping bags with handles are now made of HDPE






A Ziploc bag made from LDPE






Food wrap (ldpe)






Metalised polypropylene film is a commonly used snack pack material[30]






Kinder Joy shell made of polypropylene






A polypropylene chair






Stools of hdpe






Expanded polystyrene foam ("Thermocol")






Extruded polystyrene foam ("Styrofoam")






Thermocol take-away food container






Egg tray (polystyrene)






A piece of packaging foam made from LDPE






A kitchen sponge made of polyurethane foam






Non-stick cookware made of Teflon






iPhone 5c, a smartphone with a polycarbonate unibody shell






10m deep Monterey Bay Aquarium tank has acrylic windows up to 33 cm thick to withstand the water pressure






PVC pipes






PVC blister pack




Applications
The largest application for plastics is as packaging materials, but they are used in a wide range of other sectors, including: construction (pipes, gutters, door and windows), textiles (stretchable fabrics, fleece), consumer goods (toys, tableware, toothbrushes), transportation (headlights, bumpers, body panels, wing mirrors), electronics (phones, computers, televisions) and as machine parts.[23]








Additives
Additives are chemicals blended into plastics to change their performance or appearance, making it possible to alter the properties of plastics to better suit their intended applications.[31][32] Additives are therefore one of the reasons why plastic is used so widely.[33] Plastics are composed of chains of polymers. Many different chemicals are used as plastic additives. A randomly chosen plastic product generally contains around 20 additives. The identities and concentrations of additives are generally not listed on products.[2]
In the EU, over 400 additives are used in high volumes.[34][2] 5500 additives were found in a global market analysis.[35] At a minimum all plastic contains some polymer stabilisers which permit them to be melt-processed (moulded) without suffering polymer degradation. Other additives are optional and can be added as required, with loadings varying significantly between applications. The amount of additives contained in plastics varies depending on the additives’ function. For example, additives in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can constitute up to 80% of the total volume.[2] Pure unadulterated plastic (barefoot resin) is never sold, even by the primary producers.

Leaching
Additives may be weakly bound to the polymers or react in the polymer matrix. Although additives are blended into plastic they remain chemically distinct from it, and can gradually leach back out during normal use, when in landfills, or following improper disposal in the environment.[36] Additives may also degrade to form other toxic molecules. Plastic fragmentation into microplastics and nanoplastics can allow chemical additives to move in the environment far from the point of use. Once released, some additives and derivatives may persist in the environment and bioaccumulate in organisms. They can have adverse effects on human health and biota. A recent review by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) revealed that out of 3,377 chemicals potentially associated with plastic packaging and 906 likely associated with it, 68 were ranked by ECHA as “highest for human health hazards” and 68 as “highest for environmental hazards”.[2]

Recycling
Main article: Plastic recycling
As additives change the properties of plastics they have to be considered during recycling. Presently, almost all recycling is performed by simply remelting and reforming used plastic into new items. Additives present risks in recycled products, as they are difficult to remove. When plastic products are recycled, it is highly likely that the additives will be integrated into the new products. Waste plastic, even if it is all of the same polymer type, will contain varying types and amounts of additives. Mixing these together can give a material with inconsistent properties, which can be unappealing to industry. For example, mixing different coloured plastics with different plastic colorants together can produce a discoloured or brown material and for this reason plastic is usually sorted by both polymer type and color before recycling.[2]
Absence of transparency and reporting across the value chain often results in lack of knowledge concerning the chemical profile of the final products. For example, products containing brominated flame retardants have been incorporated into new plastic products. Flame retardants are a group of chemicals used in electronic and electrical equipment, textiles, furniture and construction materials which should not be present in food packaging or child care products. A recent study found brominated dioxins as unintentional contaminants in toys made from recycled plastic electronic waste that contained brominated flame retardants. Brominated dioxins have been found to exhibit toxicity similar to that of chlorinated dioxins. They can have negative developmental effects and negative effects on the nervous system and interfere with mechanisms of the endocrine system.[2]

Health effects
Many of the controversies associated with plastics actually relate to their additives, as some compounds can be persistent, bioaccumulating and potentially harmful.[37][38][31] The now banned flame retardants OctaBDE and PentaBDE are an example of this, while the health effects of phthalates are an ongoing area of public concern. Additives can also be problematic if waste is burned, especially when burning is uncontrolled or takes place in low- technology incinerators, as is common in many developing countries. Incomplete combustion can cause emissions of hazardous substances such as acid gases and ash which can contain persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as dioxins.[2]
A number of additives identified as hazardous to humans and/or the environment are regulated internationally. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) is a global treaty to protect human health and the environment from chemicals that remain intact in the environment for long periods, become widely distributed geographically, accumulate in the fatty tissue of humans and wildlife, and have harmful impacts on human health or on the environment.[2]
Other additives proven to be harmful such as cadmium, chromium, lead and mercury (regulated under the Minamata Convention on Mercury), which have previously been used in plastic production, are banned in many jurisdictions. However they are still routinely found in some plastic packaging including food packaging. The use of the additive bisphenol A (BPA) in plastic baby bottles is banned in many parts of the world, but is not restricted in some low-income countries.[2]

Types of additive


Additive type
Typical concentration when present (%)[31]
Description
Example compounds
Comment
Share of global additive production (by weight)[23]


Plasticizers
10–70
Plastics can be brittle, adding some plasticizer makes them more durable, adding lots makes them flexible
Phthalates are the dominant class, safer alternatives include  adipate esters (DEHA, DOA) and citrate esters (ATBC and TEC)
80–90 % of world production is used in PVC, much of the rest is used in cellulose acetate. For most products loadings are between 10 and 35%, high loadings are used for plastisols
34%


Flame retardants
1-30
Being petrochemicals, most plastics burn readily, flame retardants can prevent this
Brominated flame retardants, chlorinated paraffins
Non-chlorinated organophosphates are ecologically safer, though often less efficient
13%


Heat stabilizers
0.3-5
Prevents heat related degradation
Traditionally derivatives of lead, cadmium & tin. Safer modern alternatives include barium/zinc mixtures and calcium stearate, along with various synergists
Almost exclusively used in PVC.
5%


Fillers
0-50
Changes appearance and mechanical properties, can reduce price
Calcium carbonate "chalk", talc, glass beads, carbon black. Also reinforcing fillers like carbon-fiber
Most opaque plastic contains fillers. High levels can also protect against UV rays.
28%


Impact modifiers
10-40
Improved toughness and resistance to damage[39]
Typically some other elastomeric polymer, e.g. rubbers, styrene copolymers
Chlorinated polyethylene is used for PVC
5%


Antioxidants
0.05–3
Protects against degradation during processing
Phenols, phosphite esters, certain thioethers
The most widely used type of additives, all plastics will contain polymer stabilisers of some sort
6%


Colorants
0.001-10
Imparts colour
Numerous dyes or pigments

2%


Lubricants
0.1-3
Assists in molding the plastic, includes processing aids (or flow aids), release agents, slip additives
Paraffin wax, wax esters, metal stearates (i.e. zinc stearate), long-chain fatty acid amides (oleamide, erucamide)

2%


Light stabilizers
0.05–3
Protects against UV damage
HALS, UV blockers and quenchers
Normally only used for items itended for outdoor use
1%


Other

Various
Antimicrobials, antistatics, blowing agents, nucleating agents

4%

Toxicity
Pure plastics have low toxicity due to their insolubility in water, and because they have a large molecular weight, they are biochemically inert. Plastic products contain a variety of additives, however, some of which can be toxic.[40] For example, plasticizers like adipates and phthalates are often added to brittle plastics like PVC to make them pliable enough for use in food packaging, toys, and many other items. Traces of these compounds can leach out of the product. Owing to concerns over the effects of such leachates, the EU has restricted the use of DEHP (di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate) and other phthalates in some applications, and the US has limited the use of DEHP, DPB, BBP, DINP, DIDP, and DnOP in children's toys and child-care articles through the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. Some compounds leaching from polystyrene food containers have been proposed to interfere with hormone functions and are suspected human carcinogens (cancer-causing substances).[41] Other chemicals of potential concern include alkylphenols.[38]
While a finished plastic may be non-toxic, the monomers used in the manufacture of its parent polymers may be toxic. In some cases, small amounts of those chemicals can remain trapped in the product unless suitable processing is employed. For example, the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has recognized vinyl chloride, the precursor to PVC, as a human carcinogen.[41]

Bisphenol A (BPA)
See also: Health effects of Bisphenol A
Some plastic products degrade to chemicals with estrogenic activity.[42] The primary building block of polycarbonates, bisphenol A (BPA), is an estrogen-like endocrine disruptor that may leach into food.[41] Research in Environmental Health Perspectives finds that BPA leached from the lining of tin cans, dental sealants and polycarbonate bottles can increase the body weight of lab animals' offspring.[43] A more recent animal study suggests that even low-level exposure to BPA results in insulin resistance, which can lead to inflammation and heart disease.[44] As of January 2010, the Los Angeles Times reported that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is spending $30 million to investigate indications of BPA's link to cancer.[45] Bis(2-ethylhexyl) adipate, present in plastic wrap based on PVC, is also of concern, as are the volatile organic compounds present in new car smell. The EU has a permanent ban on the use of phthalates in toys. In 2009, the US government banned certain types of phthalates commonly used in plastic.[46]

Environmental effects
 A communication campaign infographic showing that there will be more plastic in the oceans than fish by 2050
See also: Plastic pollution, Marine debris, and Great Pacific garbage patch
Because the chemical structure of most plastics renders them durable, they are resistant to many natural degradation processes. Much of this material may persist for centuries or longer, given the demonstrated persistence of structurally similar natural materials such as amber.
There are differing estimates of how much plastic waste has been produced in the last century. By one estimate, one billion tons of plastic waste have been discarded since the 1950s.[47] Others estimate a cumulative human production of 8.3 billion tons of plastic, of which 6.3 billion tons is waste, with only 9% getting recycled.[48]
It is estimated that this waste is made up of 81% polymer resin, 13% polymer fibres and 32% additives. In 2018 more than 343 million tonnes of plastic waste were generated, 90% of which was composed of post-consumer plastic waste (industrial, agricultural, commercial and municipal plastic waste). The rest was pre-consumer waste from resin production and manufacturing of plastic products (e.g. materials rejected due to unsuitable colour, hardness, or processing characteristics).[2]
The Ocean Conservancy reported that China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam dump more plastic into the sea than all other countries combined.[49] The rivers Yangtze, Indus, Yellow, Hai, Nile, Ganges, Pearl, Amur, Niger, and Mekong "transport 88% to 95% of the global [plastics] load into the sea."[50][51][verify quote punctuation]
The presence of plastics, particularly microplastics, within the food chain is increasing. In the 1960s microplastics were observed in the guts of seabirds, and since then have been found in increasing concentrations.[52] The long-term effects of plastics in the food chain are poorly understood. In 2009 it was estimated that 10% of modern waste was plastic,[53] although estimates vary according to region.[52] Meanwhile, 50% to 80% of debris in marine areas is plastic.[52] Plastic is often used in agriculture. There is more plastic in the soil that in the oceans. The presence of plastic in the environment hurt ecosystems and human health.[54]
Research on the environmental impacts has typically focused on the disposal phase. However, the production of plastics is also responsible for substantial environmental, health and socioeconomic impacts.[55]
Prior to the Montreal Protocol, CFCs had been commonly used in the manufacture of the plastic polystyrene, the production of which had contributed to depletion of the ozone layer.
Efforts to reduce environmental effects of plastics may include reduction of plastics production and use, waste- and recycling-policies, and the proactive development and deployment of alternatives to plastics such as for sustainable packaging.

Microplastics
This section is an excerpt from Microplastics.[edit]
 Microplastics in sediments from four rivers in Germany. Note the diverse shapes indicated by white arrowheads. (The white bars represent 1 mm for scale.)
 Photodegraded Plastic Straw. A light touch breaks larger straw into microplastics.
Microplastics are fragments of any type of plastic less than 5 mm (0.20 in) in length, according to the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)[56][57] and the European Chemicals Agency.[58] They cause pollution by entering natural ecosystems from a variety of sources, including cosmetics, clothing, food packaging, and industrial processes.
The term macroplastics is used to differentiate microplastics from larger plastic waste, such as plastic bottles. Two classifications of microplastics are currently recognized. Primary microplastics include any plastic fragments or particles that are already 5.0 mm in size or less before entering the environment. These include microfibers from clothing, microbeads, and plastic pellets (also known as nurdles).[59][60][61] Secondary microplastics arise from the degradation (breakdown) of larger plastic products through natural weathering processes after entering the environment. Such sources of secondary microplastics include water and soda bottles, fishing nets, plastic bags, microwave containers, tea bags and tire wear.[62][61][63][64] Both types are recognized to persist in the environment at high levels, particularly in aquatic and marine ecosystems, where they cause water pollution.[65] 35% of all ocean microplastics come from textiles/clothing, primarily due to the erosion of polyester, acrylic, or nylon-based clothing, often during the washing process.[66] However, microplastics also accumulate in the air and terrestrial ecosystems.
Because plastics degrade slowly (often over hundreds to thousands of years),[67][68] microplastics have a high probability of ingestion, incorporation into, and accumulation in the bodies and tissues of many organisms. The toxic chemicals that come from both the ocean and runoff can also biomagnify up the food chain.[69][70] In terrestrial ecosystems, microplastics have been demonstrated to reduce the viability of soil ecosystems and reduce weight of earthworms.[71][72] The cycle and movement of microplastics in the environment are not fully known, but research is currently underway to investigate the phenomenon. Deep layer ocean sediment surveys in China (2020) show the presence of plastics in deposition layers far older than the invention of plastics, leading to suspected underestimation of microplastics in surface sample ocean surveys.[73] Microplastics have also been found in the high mountains, at great distances from their source.[74]

Microplastics have also been found in human blood, though their effects are largely unknown.[75][76]
Decomposition of plastics
Main article: Polymer degradation
Plastics  degrade by a variety of processes, the most significant of which is usually photo-oxidation. Their chemical structure determines their fate. Polymers' marine degradation takes much longer as a result of the saline environment and cooling effect of the sea, contributing to the persistence of plastic debris in certain environments.[52] Recent studies have shown, however, that plastics in the ocean decompose faster than had been previously thought, due to exposure to the sun, rain, and other environmental conditions, resulting in the release of toxic chemicals such as bisphenol A. However, due to the increased volume of plastics in the ocean, decomposition has slowed down.[77] The Marine Conservancy has predicted the decomposition rates of several plastic products: It is estimated that a foam plastic cup will take 50 years, a plastic beverage holder will take 400 years, a disposable diaper will take 450 years, and fishing line will take 600 years to degrade.[78]
Microbial species capable of degrading plastics are known to science, some of which are potentially useful for disposal of certain classes of plastic waste.

In 1975, a team of Japanese scientists studying ponds containing waste water from a nylon factory discovered a strain of Flavobacterium that digests certain byproducts of nylon 6 manufacture, such as the linear dimer of 6-aminohexanoate.[79] Nylon 4 (polybutyrolactam) can be degraded by the ND-10 and ND-11 strands of Pseudomonas sp. found in sludge, resulting in GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) as a byproduct.[80]
Several species of soil fungi can consume polyurethane,[81] including two species of the Ecuadorian fungus Pestalotiopsis. They can consume polyurethane both aerobically and anaerobically (such as at the bottom of landfills).[82]
Methanogenic microbial consortia degrade styrene, using it as a carbon source.[83] Pseudomonas putida can convert styrene oil into various biodegradable plastic|biodegradable polyhydroxyalkanoates.[84][85]
Microbial communities isolated from soil samples mixed with starch have been shown to be capable of degrading polypropylene.[86]
The fungus Aspergillus fumigatus effectively degrades plasticized PVC.[87]: 45–46  Phanerochaete chrysosporium has been grown on PVC in a mineral salt agar.[87]: 76 </ref> P. chrysosporium, Lentinus tigrinus, A. niger, and A. sydowii can also effectively degrade PVC.[87]: 122 
Phenol-formaldehyde, commonly known as Bakelite, is degraded by the white rot fungus P. chrysosporium.[88]
Acinetobacter has been found to partially degrade low-molecular-weight polyethylene oligomers.[80] When used in combination, Pseudomonas fluorescens and Sphingomonas can degrade over 40% of the weight of plastic bags in less than three months.[89] The thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis (strain 707) was isolated from a soil sample and found capable of using low-density polyethylene as a sole carbon source when incubated at 50 °C. Pre-exposure of the plastic to ultraviolet radiation broke chemical bonds and aided biodegradation; the longer the period of UV exposure, the greater the promotion of the degradation.[90]
Hazardous molds have been found aboard space stations that degrade rubber into a digestible form.[91]
Several species of yeasts, bacteria, algae and lichens have been found growing on synthetic polymer artifacts in museums and at archaeological sites.[92]
In the plastic-polluted waters of the Sargasso Sea, bacteria have been found that consume various types of plastic; however, it is unknown to what extent these bacteria effectively clean up poisons rather than simply release them into the marine microbial ecosystem.
Plastic-eating microbes also have been found in landfills.[93]
Nocardia can degrade PET with an esterase enzyme.[citation needed]
The fungus Geotrichum candidum, found in Belize, has been found to consume the polycarbonate plastic found in CDs.[94][95]
Futuro houses are made of fiberglass-reinforced polyesters, polyester-polyurethane, and PMMA. One such house was found to be harmfully degraded by Cyanobacteria and Archaea.[96][97]
 Manual material triage for recycling.
Recycling
This section is an excerpt from Plastic recycling.[edit]
Plastic recyclingClockwise from top left: Sorting plastic waste at a single-stream recycling centreBaled colour-sorted used bottlesRecovered HDPE ready for recyclingA watering can made from recycled bottles
Plastic recycling is  the reprocessing of plastic waste into new products.[98][99][100]  When performed correctly, this can reduce dependence on landfill, conserve resources and protect the environment from plastic pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.[101][102]
Although recycling rates are increasing, they lag behind those of other recoverable materials, such as aluminium, glass and paper. The global recycling rate in 2015 was 9%, while 12% was incinerated and the remaining 79% disposed of to landfill or to the environment including the sea.[103] Since the beginning of plastic production in the 20th century, until 2015, the world has produced some 6.3 billion tonnes of plastic waste, only 9% of which has been recycled, and only ~1% has been recycled more than once.[103]
Recycling is necessary because almost all plastic is non-biodegradable and thus builds-up in the environment,[104][105] where it can cause harm. For example, approximately 8 million tons of waste plastic enter the Earth's oceans every year, causing damage to the aquatic ecosystem and forming large ocean garbage patches.[106]
Presently, almost all recycling is performed by remelting and reforming used plastic into new items; so-called mechanical recycling. This can cause polymer degradation at a chemical level, and also requires that waste be sorted by both colour and polymer type before being reprocessed, which is complicated and expensive. Failures in this can lead to material with inconsistent properties, rendering it unappealing to industry.[107] In an alternative approach known as feedstock recycling, waste plastic is converted back into its starting chemicals, which can then be reprocessed back into fresh plastic. This offers the hope of greater recycling but suffers from higher energy and capital costs. Waste plastic can also be burnt in place of fossil fuels as part of energy recovery. This is a controversial practice, but is nonetheless performed on a large scale. In some countries, it is the dominant form of plastic waste disposal, particularly where landfill diversion policies are in place.

Plastic recycling sits quite low in the waste hierarchy as a means of reducing plastic waste. It has been advocated since the early 1970s,[108] but due to severe economic and technical challenges, did not impact plastic waste to any significant extent until the late 1980s. The plastics industry has been criticised for lobbying for the expansion of recycling programs, even while industry research showed that most plastic could not be economically recycled and simultaneously increasing the amount of virgin plastic, or plastic that has not been recycled, being produced.[109][110]
Climate change
According to the OECD, plastic contributed greenhouse gases in the equivalent of 1.8 billion tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere in 2019, 3.4% of global emissions.[111] They say that by 2060, plastic could emit 4.3 billion tons of greenhouse gas emissions a year.
The effect of plastics on global warming is mixed. Plastics are generally made from petroleum, thus the production of plastics creates further emissions. However, due to the lightness and durability of plastic versus glass or metal, plastic may reduce energy consumption. For example, packaging beverages in PET plastic rather than glass or metal is estimated to save 52% in transportation energy.[4]

Production of plastics
Production of plastics from crude oil requires 7.9 to 13.7 kWh/lb (taking into account the average efficiency of US utility stations of 35%). Producing silicon and semiconductors for modern electronic equipment is even more energy consuming: 29.2 to 29.8 kWh/lb for silicon, and about 381 kWh/lb for semiconductors.[112] This is much higher than the energy needed to produce many other materials. For example, to produce iron (from iron ore) requires 2.5-3.2 kWh/lb of energy; glass (from sand, etc.) 2.3–4.4 kWh/lb; steel (from iron) 2.5–6.4 kWh/lb; and paper (from timber) 3.2–6.4 kWh/lb.[113]

Incineration of plastics
Controlled high-temperature incineration, above 850 °C for two seconds,[citation needed] performed with selective additional heating, breaks down toxic dioxins and furans from burning plastic, and is widely used in municipal solid waste incineration. Municipal solid waste incinerators also normally include flue gas treatments to reduce pollutants further. This is needed because uncontrolled incineration of plastic produces polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, a carcinogen (cancer causing chemical). The problem occurs because the heat content of the waste stream varies.[114] Open-air burning of plastic occurs at lower temperatures, and normally releases such toxic fumes.

Pyrolytic disposal
Plastics can be pyrolyzed into hydrocarbon fuels, since plastics include hydrogen and carbon. One kilogram of waste plastic produces roughly a liter of hydrocarbon.[115]

History
See also: Timeline of plastic development
The development of plastics has evolved from the use of naturally plastic materials (e.g., gums and shellac) to the use of the chemical modification of those materials (e.g., natural rubber, cellulose, collagen, and milk proteins), and finally to completely synthetic plastics (e.g., bakelite, epoxy, and PVC). Early plastics were bio-derived materials such as egg and blood proteins, which are organic polymers. In around 1600 BC, Mesoamericans used natural rubber for balls, bands, and figurines.[4] Treated cattle horns were used as windows for lanterns in the Middle Ages. Materials that mimicked the properties of horns were developed by treating milk proteins with lye. In the nineteenth century, as chemistry developed during the Industrial Revolution, many materials were reported. The development of plastics accelerated with Charles Goodyear's 1839 discovery of vulcanization to harden natural rubber.

 Plaque commemorating Parkes at the Birmingham Science Museum
Parkesine, invented by Alexander Parkes in 1855 and patented the following year,[116] is considered the first man-made plastic. It was manufactured from cellulose (the major component of plant cell walls) treated with nitric acid as a solvent. The output of the process (commonly known as cellulose nitrate or pyroxilin) could be dissolved in alcohol and hardened into a transparent and elastic material that could be molded when heated.[117] By incorporating pigments into the product, it could be made to resemble ivory. Parkesine was unveiled at the 1862 International Exhibition in London and garnered for Parkes the bronze medal.[118]
In 1893, French chemist Auguste Trillat discovered the means to insolubilize casein (milk proteins) by immersion in formaldehyde, producing material marketed as galalith.[119] In 1897, mass-printing press owner Wilhelm Krische of Hanover, Germany, was commissioned to develop an alternative to blackboards.[119] The resultant horn-like plastic made from casein was developed in cooperation with the Austrian chemist (Friedrich) Adolph Spitteler (1846–1940). Although unsuitable for the intended purpose, other uses would be discovered.[119]
The world's first fully synthetic plastic was Bakelite, invented in New York in 1907 by Leo Baekeland,[5] who coined the term plastics.[6] Many chemists have contributed to the materials science of plastics, including Nobel laureate Hermann Staudinger, who has been called "the father of polymer chemistry," and Herman Mark, known as "the father of polymer physics."[7]
After World War I, improvements in chemistry led to an explosion of new forms of plastics, with mass production beginning in the 1940s and 1950s.[53] Among the earliest examples in the wave of new polymers were polystyrene (first produced by BASF in the 1930s)[4] and polyvinyl chloride (first created in 1872 but commercially produced in the late 1920s).[4] In 1923, Durite Plastics, Inc., was the first manufacturer of phenol-furfural resins.[120] In 1933, polyethylene was discovered by Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) researchers Reginald Gibson and Eric Fawcett.[4]
The discovery of polyethylene terephthalate is credited to employees of the Calico Printers' Association in the UK in 1941; it was licensed to DuPont for the US and ICI otherwise, and as one of the few plastics appropriate as a replacement for glass in many circumstances, resulting in widespread use for bottles in Europe.[4] In 1954 polypropylene was discovered by Giulio Natta and began to be manufactured in 1957.[4] Also in 1954 expanded polystyrene (used for building insulation, packaging, and cups) was invented by Dow Chemical.[4]

Policy
See also: Global plastic pollution treaty
Work is currently underway to develop a global treaty on plastic pollution. On March 2, 2022 UN Member States voted at the resumed fifth UN Environment Assembly (UNEA-5.2) to establish an Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) with the mandate of advancing a legally-binding international agreement on plastics.[121] The resolution is entitled “End plastic pollution: Towards an international legally binding instrument.” The mandate specifies that the INC must begin its work by the end of 2022 with the goal of "completing a draft global legally binding agreement by the end of 2024."[122]

See also

Corn construction
Films
Light activated resin
Nurdle
Molding (process)
Injection molding
Rotational molding
Organic light emitting diode
Plastic film
Plastic recycling
Plastics engineering
Plastics extrusion
Plasticulture
Biodegradable plastic
Bioplastic
Organisms breaking down plastic
Progressive bag alliance
Refill (scheme)
Roll-to-roll processing
Self-healing plastic
Thermal cleaning
Thermoforming
Timeline of materials technology

References


^ "Life Cycle of a Plastic Product". Americanchemistry.com. Archived from the original on 2010-03-17. Retrieved 2011-07-01.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Environment, U. N. (2021-10-21). "Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics". UNEP - UN Environment Programme. Retrieved 2022-03-21.

^ "The environmental impacts of plastics and micro-plastics use, waste and pollution: EU and national measures" (PDF). europarl.europa.eu. October 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Andrady AL, Neal MA (July 2009). "Applications and societal benefits of plastics". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences. 364 (1526): 1977–84. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0304. PMC 2873019. PMID 19528050.

^ a b American Chemical Society National Historic Chemical Landmarks. "Bakelite: The World's First Synthetic Plastic". Retrieved 23 February 2015.

^ a b Edgar D, Edgar R (2009). Fantastic Recycled Plastic: 30 Clever Creations to Spark Your Imagination. Sterling Publishing Company, Inc. ISBN 978-1-60059-342-0 – via Google Books.

^ a b Teegarden DM (2004). Polymer Chemistry: Introduction to an Indispensable Science. NSTA Press. ISBN 978-0-87355-221-9 – via Google Books.

^ "Plastikos" πλαστι^κ-ός. Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon. Retrieved 2011-07-01.

^ "Plastic". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2021-07-29.

^ Ebbing D, Gammon SD (2016). General Chemistry. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-1-305-88729-9.

^ "Classification of Plastics". Joanne and Steffanie's Plastics Web Site. Archived from the original on 2007-12-15. Retrieved 2011-07-01.

^ Kent R. "Periodic Table of Polymers". Plastics Consultancy Network. Archived from the original on 2008-07-03.

^ "Composition and Types of Plastic". Infoplease. Archived from the original on 2012-10-15. Retrieved 2009-09-29.

^ Gilleo K (2004). Area Array Packaging Processes: For BGA, Flip Chip, and CSP. McGraw Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-142829-3 – via Google Books.

^ Kutz M (2002). Handbook of Materials Selection. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-35924-1 – via Google Books.

^ Heeger AJ, Kivelson S, Schrieffer JR, Su WP (1988). "Solitons in Conducting Polymers". Reviews of Modern Physics. 60 (3): 781–850. Bibcode:1988RvMP...60..781H. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.60.781.

^ "Properties of Copper". Copper Development Association.

^ Brandl H, Püchner P (1992). "Biodegradation Biodegradation of Plastic Bottles Made from 'Biopol' in an Aquatic Ecosystem Under In Situ Conditions". Biodegradation. 2 (4): 237–43. doi:10.1007/BF00114555. S2CID 37486324.

^ "Biochemical Opportunities in the UK, NNFCC 08-008 — NNFCC". Archived from the original on 2011-07-20. Retrieved 2011-03-24.

^ "Bioplastics industry shows dynamic growth". 5 December 2019.

^ "Becoming Employed in a Growing Bioplastics Industry - bioplastics MAGAZINE". www.bioplasticsmagazine.com.

^ Galie F (November 2016). "Global Market Trends and Investments in Polyethylene and Polyproplyene" (PDF). ICIS Whitepaper. Reed business Information, Inc. Retrieved 16 December 2017.

^ a b c d e Geyer, Roland; Jambeck, Jenna R.; Law, Kara Lavender (July 2017). "Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made". Science Advances. 3 (7): e1700782. Bibcode:2017SciA....3E0782G. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700782. PMC 5517107. PMID 28776036.

^ "Top 100 Producers: The Minderoo Foundation". www.minderoo.org. Retrieved 14 October 2021.

^ a b  (PDF) https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/5716/0752/4286/AF_Plastics_the_facts-WEB-2020-ING_FINAL.pdf. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)

^ a b PP&A stand for polyester, polyamide and acrylate polymers; all of which are used to make synthetic fibres. Care should be taken not to confuse it with polyphthalamide (PPA)

^ The majority of polyurethanes are thermosets, however some thermoplastics are also produced, for instance spandex

^ "Plastic Recycling Factsheet" (PDF). EuRIC - European Recycling Industries’ Confederation. Retrieved 9 November 2021.

^ "Polymers in aerospace applications". Euroshore. Retrieved 2021-06-02.

^ "Sustainable packaging materials for snacks". 2021-10-28. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 2022-09-10.

^ a b c Hahladakis JN, Velis CA, Weber R, Iacovidou E, Purnell P (February 2018). "An overview of chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during their use, disposal and recycling". Journal of Hazardous Materials. 344: 179–199. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014. PMID 29035713.

^ Marturano, Valentina; Cerruti, Pierfrancesco; Ambrogi, Veronica (27 June 2017). "Polymer additives". Physical Sciences Reviews. 2 (6): 130. Bibcode:2017PhSRv...2..130M. doi:10.1515/psr-2016-0130. S2CID 199059895.

^ Pfaendner, Rudolf (September 2006). "How will additives shape the future of plastics?". Polymer Degradation and Stability. 91 (9): 2249–2256. doi:10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2005.10.017.

^ "Mapping exercise – Plastic additives initiative - ECHA". echa.europa.eu. Retrieved 3 May 2022.

^ Wiesinger, Helene; Wang, Zhanyun; Hellweg, Stefanie (2021-07-06). "Deep Dive into Plastic Monomers, Additives, and Processing Aids". Environmental Science & Technology. 55 (13): 9339–9351. Bibcode:2021EnST...55.9339W. doi:10.1021/acs.est.1c00976. hdl:20.500.11850/495854. PMID 34154322. S2CID 235597312.

^ "Emission Scenario Documents: N°3 Plastic Additives (2004, revised in 2009)". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Retrieved 19 May 2022.

^ Elias, Hans-Georg; Mülhaupt, Rolf (14 April 2015). "Plastics, General Survey, 1. Definition, Molecular Structure and Properties". Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry: 1–70. doi:10.1002/14356007.a20_543.pub2. ISBN 9783527306732.

^ a b Teuten EL, Saquing JM, Knappe DR, Barlaz MA, Jonsson S, Björn A,  et al. (July 2009). "Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences. 364 (1526): 2027–45. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0284. PMC 2873017. PMID 19528054.

^ "Impact modifiers: how to make your compound tougher". Plastics, Additives and Compounding. 6 (3): 46–49. May 2004. doi:10.1016/S1464-391X(04)00203-X.

^ Hahladakis JN, Velis CA, Weber R, Iacovidou E, Purnell P (February 2018). "An overview of chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during their use, disposal and recycling". Journal of Hazardous Materials. 344: 179–199. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014. PMID 29035713.

^ a b c McRandle PW (March–April 2004). "Plastic Water Bottles". National Geographic. Retrieved 2007-11-13.

^ Yang CZ, Yaniger SI, Jordan VC, Klein DJ, Bittner GD (July 2011). "Most plastic products release estrogenic chemicals: a potential health problem that can be solved". Environmental Health Perspectives. 119 (7): 989–96. doi:10.1289/ehp.1003220. PMC 3222987. PMID 21367689.

^ Rubin BS, Murray MK, Damassa DA, King JC, Soto AM (July 2001). "Perinatal exposure to low doses of bisphenol A affects body weight, patterns of estrous cyclicity, and plasma LH levels". Environmental Health Perspectives. 109 (7): 675–80. doi:10.2307/3454783. JSTOR 3454783. PMC 1240370. PMID 11485865.

^ Alonso-Magdalena P, Morimoto S, Ripoll C, Fuentes E, Nadal A (January 2006). "The estrogenic effect of bisphenol A disrupts pancreatic beta-cell function in vivo and induces insulin resistance". Environmental Health Perspectives. 114 (1): 106–12. doi:10.1289/ehp.8451. PMC 1332664. PMID 16393666. Archived from the original on 2009-01-19.

^ Zajac A (2010-01-16). "FDA Issues BPA Guidelines". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 2021-07-29.

^ McCormick LW (30 October 2009). "More Kids' Products Found Containing Unsafe Chemicals". ConsumerAffairs.com.

^ Weisman A (2007). The world without us. New York: Thomas Dunne Books/St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1-4434-0008-4.

^ Geyer R, Jambeck JR, Law KL (July 2017). "Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made". Science Advances. 3 (7): e1700782. Bibcode:2017SciA....3E0782G. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700782. PMC 5517107. PMID 28776036.

^ Leung H (21 April 2018). "Five Asian Countries Dump More Plastic Into Oceans Than Anyone Else Combined: How You Can Help". Forbes. Retrieved 23 June 2019. China, Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam are dumping more plastic into oceans than the rest of the world combined, according to a 2017 report by Ocean Conservancy

^ Schmidt C, Krauth T, Wagner S (November 2017). "Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea" (PDF). Environmental Science & Technology. 51 (21): 12246–12253. Bibcode:2017EnST...5112246S. doi:10.1021/acs.est.7b02368. PMID 29019247. The 10 top-ranked rivers transport 88–95% of the global load into the sea

^ Franzen H (30 November 2017). "Almost all plastic in the ocean comes from just 10 rivers". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 18 December 2018. It turns out that about 90 percent of all the plastic that reaches the world's oceans gets flushed through just 10 rivers: The Yangtze, the Indus, Yellow River, Hai River, the Nile, the Ganges, Pearl River, Amur River, the Niger, and the Mekong (in that order).

^ a b c d Barnes DK, Galgani F, Thompson RC, Barlaz M (July 2009). "Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences. 364 (1526): 1985–98. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0205. PMC 2873009. PMID 19528051.

^ a b Thompson RC, Swan SH, Moore CJ, vom Saal FS (July 2009). "Our plastic age". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences. 364 (1526): 1973–6. doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0054. PMC 2874019. PMID 19528049.

^ Carrington, Damian (7 December 2021). "'Disastrous' plastic use in farming threatens food safety – UN". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 December 2021.

^ Cabernard, Livia; Pfister, Stephan; Oberschelp, Christopher; Hellweg, Stefanie (2021-12-02). "Growing environmental footprint of plastics driven by coal combustion". Nature Sustainability. 5 (2): 139–148. doi:10.1038/s41893-021-00807-2. ISSN 2398-9629. S2CID 244803448.

^ Arthur, Courtney; Baker, Joel; Bamford, Holly (2009). "Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris" (PDF). NOAA Technical Memorandum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-04-28. Retrieved 2018-10-25.

^ Collignon, Amandine; Hecq, Jean-Henri; Galgani, François; Collard, France; Goffart, Anne (2014). "Annual variation in neustonic micro- and meso-plastic particles and zooplankton in the Bay of Calvi (Mediterranean–Corsica)" (PDF). Marine Pollution Bulletin. 79 (1–2): 293–298. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013.11.023. PMID 24360334. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-09-20. Retrieved 2019-02-06.

^ European Chemicals Agency. "Restricting the use of intentionally added microplastic particles to consumer or professional use products of any kind". ECHA. European Commission. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2020.

^ Cole, Matthew; Lindeque, Pennie; Fileman, Elaine; Halsband, Claudia; Goodhead, Rhys; Moger, Julian; Galloway, Tamara S. (18 June 2013). "Microplastic Ingestion by Zooplankton" (PDF). Environmental Science & Technology. 47 (12): 6646–6655. Bibcode:2013EnST...47.6646C. doi:10.1021/es400663f. hdl:10871/19651. PMID 23692270. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 4 May 2020.

^ "Where Does Marine Litter Come From?". Marine Litter Facts. British Plastics Federation. Archived from the original on 2021-05-18. Retrieved 2018-09-25.

^ a b Boucher, Julien; Friot, Damien (2017). Primary microplastics in the oceans: A global evaluation of sources. doi:10.2305/IUCN.CH.2017.01.en. ISBN 978-2831718279.

^ Kovochich, Michael; Liong, Monty; Parker, Jillian A.; Oh, Su Cheun; Lee, Jessica P.; Xi, Luan; Kreider, Marisa L.; Unice, Kenneth M. (February 2021). "Chemical mapping of tire and road wear particles for single particle analysis". Science of the Total Environment. 757: 144085. Bibcode:2021ScTEn.757n4085K. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144085. ISSN 0048-9697. PMID 33333431. S2CID 229318535.

^ Conkle, Jeremy L.; Báez Del Valle, Christian D.; Turner, Jeffrey W. (2018). "Are We Underestimating Microplastic Contamination in Aquatic Environments?". Environmental Management. 61 (1): 1–8. Bibcode:2018EnMan..61....1C. doi:10.1007/s00267-017-0947-8. PMID 29043380. S2CID 40970384.

^ "Plastic free July: How to stop accidentally consuming plastic particles from packaging". Stuff. 2019-07-11. Archived from the original on 2021-11-04. Retrieved 2021-04-13.

^ "Development solutions: Building a better ocean". European Investment Bank. Archived from the original on 2021-10-21. Retrieved 2020-08-19.

^ Resnick, Brian (2018-09-19). "More than ever, our clothes are made of plastic. Just washing them can pollute the oceans". Vox. Archived from the original on 2022-01-05. Retrieved 2021-10-04.

^ Chamas, Ali; Moon, Hyunjin; Zheng, Jiajia; Qiu, Yang; Tabassum, Tarnuma; Jang, Jun Hee; Abu-Omar, Mahdi; Scott, Susannah L.; Suh, Sangwon (2020). "Degradation Rates of Plastics in the Environment". ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering. 8 (9): 3494–3511. doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06635.

^ Klein S, Dimzon IK, Eubeler J, Knepper TP (2018). "Analysis, Occurrence, and Degradation of Microplastics in the Aqueous Environment.".  In Wagner M, Lambert S (eds.). Freshwater Microplastics. The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry. Vol. 58. Cham.: Springer. pp. 51–67. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5_3. ISBN 978-3319616148. See Section 3, "Environmental Degradation of Synthetic Polymers".

^ Grossman, Elizabeth (2015-01-15). "How Plastics from Your Clothes Can End up in Your Fish". Time. Archived from the original on 2020-11-18. Retrieved 2015-03-15.

^ "How Long Does it Take Trash to Decompose". 4Ocean. 20 January 2017. Archived from the original on 25 September 2018. Retrieved 25 September 2018.

^ "Why food's plastic problem is bigger than we realise". www.bbc.com. Archived from the original on 2021-11-18. Retrieved 2021-03-27.

^ Nex, Sally (2021). How to garden the low carbon way: the steps you can take to help combat climate change (First American ed.). New York. ISBN 978-0744029284. OCLC 1241100709.

^ Xue B, Zhang L, Li R, Wang Y, Guo J, Yu K, Wang S (February 2020). "Underestimated Microplastic Pollution Derived from Fishery Activities and "Hidden" in Deep Sediment". Environmental Science & Technology. 54 (4): 2210–2217. Bibcode:2020EnST...54.2210X. doi:10.1021/acs.est.9b04850. PMID 31994391. S2CID 210950462.
"Microplastics From Ocean Fishing Can 'Hide' in Deep Sediments". ECO Magazine. February 3, 2020. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021.

^ "No mountain high enough: study finds plastic in 'clean' air". The Guardian. AFP. 21 December 2021. Archived from the original on 14 January 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2021.

^ "Microplastics found in human blood for the first time". Independent. 26 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-05-14.

^ Leslie, Heather A.; van Velzena, Martin J.M.; Brandsmaa, Sicco H.; Vethaakab, A. Dick; Garcia-Vallejoc, Juan J.; Lamoree, Maria H. (2022). "Discovery and quantification of plastic particle pollution in human blood". Environment International. 1 (3): 117. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2022.107199. ISSN 0160-4120. PMID 35367073. S2CID 247688966.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ American Chemical Society. "Plastics In Oceans Decompose, Release Hazardous Chemicals, Surprising New Study Says". Science Daily. Science Daily. Retrieved 15 March 2015.

^ Le Guern C (March 2018). "When The Mermaids Cry: The Great Plastic Tide". Coastal Care. Archived from the original on 5 April 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018.

^ Kinoshita S, Kageyama S, Iba K, Yamada Y, Okada H (1975). "Utilization of a Cyclic Dimer and Linear Oligomers of E-Aminocaproic Acid by Achromobacter Guttatus". Agricultural and Biological Chemistry. 39 (6): 1219–1223. doi:10.1271/bbb1961.39.1219.

^ a b Tokiwa Y, Calabia BP, Ugwu CU, Aiba S (August 2009). "Biodegradability of plastics". International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 10 (9): 3722–42. doi:10.3390/ijms10093722. PMC 2769161. PMID 19865515.

^ Russell JR, Huang J, Anand P, Kucera K, Sandoval AG, Dantzler KW,  et al. (September 2011). "Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by endophytic fungi". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 77 (17): 6076–84. Bibcode:2011ApEnM..77.6076R. doi:10.1128/aem.00521-11. PMC 3165411. PMID 21764951.

^ Russell JR, Huang J, Anand P, Kucera K, Sandoval AG, Dantzler KW,  et al. (September 2011). "Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by endophytic fungi". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 77 (17): 6076–84. Bibcode:2011ApEnM..77.6076R. doi:10.1128/AEM.00521-11. PMC 3165411. PMID 21764951.

^ "Deep Geologic Repository Project" (PDF). Ceaa-acee.gc.ca. Retrieved 2017-04-18.

^ Roy R (2006-03-07). "Immortal Polystyrene Foam Meets its Enemy". Livescience.com. Retrieved 2017-04-18.

^ Ward PG, Goff M, Donner M, Kaminsky W, O'Connor KE (April 2006). "A two step chemo-biotechnological conversion of polystyrene to a biodegradable thermoplastic". Environmental Science & Technology. 40 (7): 2433–7. Bibcode:2006EnST...40.2433W. doi:10.1021/es0517668. PMID 16649270.

^ Cacciari I, Quatrini P, Zirletta G, Mincione E, Vinciguerra V, Lupattelli P, Giovannozzi Sermanni G (November 1993). "Isotactic polypropylene biodegradation by a microbial community: physicochemical characterization of metabolites produced". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 59 (11): 3695–700. Bibcode:1993ApEnM..59.3695C. doi:10.1128/AEM.59.11.3695-3700.1993. PMC 182519. PMID 8285678.

^ a b c Ishtiaq AM (2011). Microbial Degradation of Polyvinyl Chloride Plastics (PDF) (Ph.D.). Islamabad: Quaid-i-Azam University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-12-24. Retrieved 2013-12-23.

^ Gusse AC, Miller PD, Volk TJ (July 2006). "White-rot fungi demonstrate first biodegradation of phenolic resin". Environmental Science & Technology. 40 (13): 4196–9. Bibcode:2006EnST...40.4196G. doi:10.1021/es060408h. PMID 16856735.

^ "CanadaWorld – WCI student isolates microbe that lunches on plastic bags". The Record.com. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18.

^ Hadad D, Geresh S, Sivan A (2005). "Biodegradation of polyethylene by the thermophilic bacterium Brevibacillus borstelensis". Journal of Applied Microbiology. 98 (5): 1093–100. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02553.x. PMID 15836478. S2CID 2977246.

^ Bell TE (2007). "Preventing "Sick" Spaceships".

^ Cappitelli F, Sorlini C (February 2008). "Microorganisms attack synthetic polymers in items representing our cultural heritage". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 74 (3): 564–9. Bibcode:2008ApEnM..74..564C. doi:10.1128/AEM.01768-07. PMC 2227722. PMID 18065627.

^ Zaikab GD (March 2011). "Marine Microbes Digest Plastic". Nature. doi:10.1038/news.2011.191.

^ Bosch X (2001). "Fungus Eats CD". Nature. doi:10.1038/news010628-11.

^ "Fungus 'Eats' CDs". BBC News. 22 June 2001.

^ Cappitelli F, Principi P, Sorlini C (August 2006). "Biodeterioration of modern materials in contemporary collections: can biotechnology help?". Trends in Biotechnology. 24 (8): 350–4. doi:10.1016/j.tibtech.2006.06.001. PMID 16782219.

^ Rinaldi A (November 2006). "Saving a fragile legacy. Biotechnology and microbiology are increasingly used to preserve and restore the world's cultural heritage". EMBO Reports. 7 (11): 1075–9. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.7400844. PMC 1679785. PMID 17077862.

^ Al-Salem, S.M.; Lettieri, P.; Baeyens, J. (October 2009). "Recycling and recovery routes of plastic solid waste (PSW): A review". Waste Management. 29 (10): 2625–2643. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2009.06.004. PMID 19577459.

^ Ignatyev, I.A.; Thielemans, W.; Beke, B. Vander (2014). "Recycling of Polymers: A Review". ChemSusChem. 7 (6): 1579–1593. doi:10.1002/cssc.201300898. PMID 24811748.

^ Lazarevic, David; Aoustin, Emmanuelle; Buclet, Nicolas; Brandt, Nils (December 2010). "Plastic waste management in the context of a European recycling society: Comparing results and uncertainties in a life cycle perspective". Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 55 (2): 246–259. doi:10.1016/j.resconrec.2010.09.014.

^ Hopewell, Jefferson; Dvorak, Robert; Kosior, Edward (27 July 2009). "Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 364 (1526): 2115–2126. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0311. PMC 2873020. PMID 19528059.

^ Lange, Jean-Paul (12 November 2021). "Managing Plastic Waste─Sorting, Recycling, Disposal, and Product Redesign". ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering. 9 (47): 15722–15738. doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c05013.

^ a b Geyer, Roland; Jambeck, Jenna R.; Law, Kara Lavender (July 2017). "Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made". Science Advances. 3 (7): e1700782. Bibcode:2017SciA....3E0782G. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700782. PMC 5517107. PMID 28776036.

^ Andrady, Anthony L. (February 1994). "Assessment of Environmental Biodegradation of Synthetic Polymers". Journal of Macromolecular Science, Part C: Polymer Reviews. 34 (1): 25–76. doi:10.1080/15321799408009632.

^ Ahmed, Temoor; Shahid, Muhammad; Azeem, Farrukh; Rasul, Ijaz; Shah, Asad Ali; Noman, Muhammad; Hameed, Amir; Manzoor, Natasha; Manzoor, Irfan; Muhammad, Sher (March 2018). "Biodegradation of plastics: current scenario and future prospects for environmental safety". Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 25 (8): 7287–7298. doi:10.1007/s11356-018-1234-9. PMID 29332271. S2CID 3962436.

^ Jambeck, Jenna, Science 13 February 2015: Vol. 347 no. 6223;  et al. (2015). "Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean". Science. 347 (6223): 768–771. Bibcode:2015Sci...347..768J. doi:10.1126/science.1260352. PMID 25678662. S2CID 206562155.

^ "Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy". eur-lex.europa.eu.

^ Huffman, George L.; Keller, Daniel J. (1973). "The Plastics Issue". Polymers and Ecological Problems: 155–167. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-0871-3_10. ISBN 978-1-4684-0873-7.

^ National Public Radio, 12 September 2020 "How Big Oil Misled The Public Into Believing Plastic Would Be Recycled"

^ PBS, Frontline, 31 March 2020, "Plastics Industry Insiders Reveal the Truth About Recycling"

^ "Plastic leakage and greenhouse gas emissions are increasing". OECD. Retrieved 2022-08-11.

^ De Decker K (June 2009).  Grosjean V (ed.). "The monster footprint of digital technology". Low-Tech Magazine. Retrieved 2017-04-18.

^ "How much energy does it take (on average) to produce 1 kilogram of the following materials?". Low-Tech Magazine. 2014-12-26. Retrieved 2017-04-18.

^ Halden RU (2010). "Plastics and health risks". Annual Review of Public Health. 31: 179–94. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103714. PMID 20070188.

^ Narayanan S (12 December 2005). "The Zadgaonkars turn carry-bags into petrol!". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 2012-11-09. Retrieved 1 July 2011.

^ UK Patent office (1857). Patents for inventions. UK Patent office. p. 255.

^ "Dictionary – Definition of celluloid". Websters-online-dictionary.org. Archived from the original on 2009-12-11. Retrieved 2011-10-26.

^ Fenichell S (1996). Plastic : the making of a synthetic century. New York: HarperBusiness. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-88730-732-4.

^ a b c Trimborn C (August 2004). "Jewelry Stone Make of Milk". GZ Art+Design. Retrieved 2010-05-17.

^ "Historical Overview and Industrial Development". International Furan Chemicals, Inc. Retrieved 4 May 2014.

^ Geddie, John; Brock, Joe (2022-03-02). "'Biggest green deal since Paris': UN agrees plastic treaty roadmap". Reuters. Retrieved 2022-08-03.

^ "Historic day in the campaign to beat plastic pollution: Nations commit to develop a legally binding agreement". UN Environment. 2022-03-02. Retrieved 2022-08-03.


Substantial parts of this text originated from An Introduction to Plastics v1.0 by Greg Goebel (1 March 2001), which is in the public domain.
Sources
 This article incorporates text from a free content work.  Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO License statement/permission. Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics,   United Nations Environment Programme. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plastics.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Plastic.

"J. Harry Dubois Collection on the History of Plastics, ca. 1900–1975". Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on 2006-02-12.
"Material Properties of Plastics – Mechanical, Thermal & Electrical Properties". Plastics International. Archived from the original on 2017-03-24.
"Plastics Historical Society".
"History of plastics, Society of the Plastics Industry". plasticsindustry.org. Archived from the original on 2009-07-06.
Knight L (17 May 2014). "A brief history of plastics, natural and synthetic". BBC Magazine.
"Timeline of important milestone of plastic injection moulding and plastics". Tangram Technology Ltd. 27 June 2014.
vtePlasticsChemical types
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS)
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX, XLPE)
Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA)
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)
Poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA)
Polyacrylic acid (PAA)
Polyamide (PA)
Polybutylene (PB)
Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT)
Polycarbonate (PC)
Polyetheretherketone (PEEK)
Polyester (PEs)
Polyethylene (PE)
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET, PETE)
Polyimide (PI)
Polylactic acid (PLA)
Polyoxymethylene (POM)
Polyphenyl ether (PPE)
Poly(p-phenylene oxide) (PPO)
Polypropylene (PP)
Polystyrene (PS)
Polysulfone (PES)
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
Polyurethane (PU)
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC)
Styrene maleic anhydride (SMA)
Styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN)
Mechanical types
Thermoplastic
Thermosetting polymer
Fibre-reinforced plastic
Corrugated plastic
Polymeric foam
High-performance plastics
Additives
Polymer additive
Colorants
Plasticizer
Polymer stabilizers
Biodegradable additives
Filler (materials)
Plastics processing
Injection moulding
Plastic extrusion
Blow molding
Thermoforming
Compression molding
Calendering
Transfer molding
Laminating
Fiberglass molding
Pultrusion
Filament winding
Vacuum forming
Rotational molding
ProductsPlastics industry segments
Commodity plastics
Construction
Engineering plastics
Geosynthetics
High-performance plastics
Nurdle
Category:Plastics applications
Plasticulture (Agriculture)
Specific goods
Blister pack
Chairs
Packaging film
Bottles
Bags
Cutlery
Shopping bags
Foam food containers
Environment and healthvteHealth issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs)Plasticizers: Phthalates
DIBP
DBP
BBP (BBzP)
DIHP
DEHP (DOP)
DIDP
DINP
Miscellaneous plasticizers
Organophosphates
Adipates (DEHA
DOA)
Monomers
Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates)
Vinyl chloride (in PVC)
Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs
PBDEs
PCBs
Organotins
PFCs
Perfluorooctanoic acid
Health issues
Teratogen
Carcinogen
Endocrine disruptor
Diabetes
Obesity
Polymer fume fever
Pollution
Plastic pollution
Rubber pollution
Great Pacific garbage patch
Persistent organic pollutant
Dioxins
List of environmental health hazards
Regulations
California Proposition 65
European REACH regulation
Japan Toxic Substances Law
Toxic Substances Control Act
Waste
Plastic pollution
Garbage patch
Great Pacific garbage patch
Persistent organic pollutant
Dioxins
List of environmental health hazards
Plastic recycling
Biodegradable plastic
Identification codes
vteLabelingLabel construction
Adhesive
Die cutting (web)
Hologram
In-mould labelling
Label
Paper
Perforation
Pressure-sensitive adhesive
Plastic
Printing
Security hologram
Release liner
Security printing
Security label
Smart label
Sticker
Content
Advertising
Barcode
Country of origin
Cigarette warning label
Ecolabel
EU energy label
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
List of food labeling regulations
Mandatory labelling
Nameplate
Nutrition facts label
Plain tobacco packaging
Radio-frequency identification
United Kingdom food information regulations
UPC
Warning label
Wine label
Use
Advertising
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Label dispenser
Label printer
Packaging and labeling
Track and trace

vteRubberChemical types
Latex
Natural rubber
Synthetic rubber
Butyl rubber
Chloroprene rubber
EPDM rubber
Nitrile rubber
Silicone rubber
Styrene-butadiene
Mechanical types
Cold rubber
Foam rubber
Micronized rubber powder
Additives
Biodegradable additives
Filler (materials)
Plasticizer
Polymer additive
Polymer stabilizers
Rubber processing
Rubber tapping
Rubber technology
Vulcanization
Industry
Bridgestone
Dunlop
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
Michelin
Rubber Board
Rubber industry in Malaysia
Rubber Industry Smallholders Development Authority
Rubber Manufacturers Association
United States Rubber Company
List of tire companies
Products
Rubber band
Rubber mulch
Rubberized asphalt
Tires
codes
Waste
Airfield rubber removal
Rubber pollution
Dioxins
Environmental hazards
Great Pacific garbage patch
Persistent organic pollutant
Tire-derived fuel
Tire recycling

 Category
 Commons

vteSculpturesTypes of sculptures
Architectural sculpture
Assemblage
Bas relief
Bust
Earth art
Environmental sculpture
Figurine
Installation art
Kinetic sculpture
Mobile
Statue
Styles of sculptures
Detonography
Modern sculpture
Relief
Elements in sculpture
Mass
Negative space
Space
Volume
Traditional materials
Wood
Marble
Limestone
Granite
Porphyry
Diorite
Jade
Ivory
Clay
Terracotta
Bronze
Gold
Silver
Butter
Soapstone
Modern materials
Steel
Jesmonite
Acrylic
Concrete
Plastic
Fiberglass
Glass
Aluminum
Fabric
Paper
Found object
Notable sculptures
Great Sphinx of Giza (c. 2558–2532 BCE)
Abu Simbel temples (c. 1264 BCE)
Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon (438 BCE)
Colossus of Rhodes (c. 292 BCE)
Winged Victory of Samothrace (c. 2nd century BCE)
Terracotta Army (246–210 BCE)
Laocoön and His Sons (c. 200 BCE-70 CE)
Venus de Milo (130–100 BCE)
Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius (175 CE)
Buddhas of Bamiyan (507–554 CE)
Chartes Cathedral (c. 1194–1250 CE)
The Golden Virgin
Jules Verne's Tomb
Konark Sun Temple (1250 CE)
Les Quatre Braves
Moai, Easter Islands (1250–1500 CE)
Pietà (1498–1499)
David (1501–1504)
Kamagaya Great Buddha (1776)
Nelson's Column (1843)
Adams Memorial (1881)
Liberty Enlightening the World, Statue of Liberty (1886)
The Gates of Hell (1890–1917)
The Thinker (1904)
Mount Rushmore (1927–1941)
Christ the Redeemer (1927–1931)
The Motherland Calls (1967)
Mother Motherland, Kiev (1981)
Genghis Khan Equestrian Statue (2008)

 Category

vteHuman impact on the environmentGeneral
Anthropocene
Environmental issues
list of issues
Human impact
on marine life
List of global issues
Impact assessment
Planetary boundaries
Causes
Agriculture
cannabis cultivation
irrigation
meat production
cocoa production
palm oil
Energy industry
biofuels
biodiesel
coal
nuclear power
oil shale
petroleum
reservoirs
Genetic pollution
Environmental crime
Industrialisation
Land use
Manufacturing
cleaning agents
concrete
plastics
nanotechnology
paint
paper
pesticides
pharmaceuticals and personal care
Marine life
fishing
fishing down the food web
marine pollution
overfishing
Mining
Overconsumption
Overdrafting
Overexploitation
Overgrazing
Particulates
Pollution
Quarrying
Reservoirs
Tourism
Transport
aviation
roads
shipping
Urbanization
urban sprawl
War
Effects
Biodiversity threats
biodiversity loss
decline in amphibian populations
decline in insect populations
Climate change
runaway climate change
Coral reefs
Deforestation
Defaunation
Desertification
Ecocide
Erosion
Environmental degradation
Freshwater cycle
Habitat destruction
Holocene extinction
Nitrogen cycle
Land degradation
Land consumption
Land surface effects on climate
Loss of green belts
Phosphorus cycle
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Resource depletion
Water degradation
Water scarcity
Mitigation
Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion
Birth control
Cleaner production
Climate change mitigation
Climate engineering
Community resilience
Decoupling
Ecological engineering
Environmental engineering
Environmental mitigation
Industrial ecology
Mitigation banking
Organic farming
Recycling
Reforestation
urban
Restoration ecology
Sustainable consumption
Waste minimization

  Commons
  Category
by country
assessment
mitigation

vteTechnology and related conceptsMajor technologiesNecessities
Agriculture
Domestication
Grafting
Working animal
Clothing
Sewing machine
Cooking
Beer
Bread
Cheese
Milling
Wine
Food storage
Pottery
Sanitation
Plumbing
Toilet
Tool
Blade
Hammer
Plough
Wedge
Weapon
Gun
Social
Accounting
Calculation
Abacus
Calendar
Cryptography
Lock and key
Money
Banknote
Coin
Musical instrument
Phonograph
Toy
Game
Video game
Writing
Book
Map
Printing press
Typewriter
Construction
Aqueduct
Canal
Irrigation
Arch
Bridge
Building
Fortification
Foundation
Scaffolding
Tower
Dam
Caisson
Road
Tunnel
Transport
Aircraft
Aerostat
Airplane
Compass
Elevator
Horseback riding
Stirrup
Jet engine
Rocket
Motor vehicle
Railroad
Train
Scuba set
Spacecraft
Satellite
Space station
Space suit
Watercraft
Sailing
Ship
Submarine
Manufacturing
3D printing
Carpentry
Casting
Injection moulding
Lost-wax casting
Mass production
Assembly line
Interchangeable parts
Machine tool
Welding
Simple machine
Axle
Bearing
Ball bearing
Belt
Chain
Lever
Catapult
Crane
Shadoof
Linkage
Cam
Clutch
Four-bar linkage
Piston
Rack and pinion
Pendulum
Screw
Archimedes' screw
Propeller
Spring
Valve
Wheel
Block and tackle
Flywheel
Gear
Potter's wheel
Pulley
Wing
Machinery
Agricultural machinery
Appliance
Dishwasher
Washing machine
Engine
Electric motor
Internal combustion
Turbine
Waterwheel
Windmill
Heavy equipment
Hydraulics
Cylinder
Manifold
Pump
Mechanism
Clock
Differential
Epicyclic gearing
Gimbal
Gyroscope
Whippletree
MEMS
Pneumatics
Compressor
Jackhammer
Rivet gun
Vacuum pump
Robotics
Arm
Leg
Energy
Fire
Charcoal
Oven
Energy storage
Battery
Geothermal power
Heat exchanger
Heat pump
Nuclear power
Nuclear weapon
Oil drilling
Fracking
Refrigeration
Air conditioning
Refrigerator
Solar power
Photovoltaics
Material
Cement
Concrete
Ceramic
Brick
Chipped stone
Glass
Masonry
Metallurgy
Aluminum
Bronze
Ironworking
Steel
Nanomaterials
Paper
Plastic
Rammed earth
Recycling
Rubber
Vulcanization
Textile
Loom
Spinning wheel
Biotechnology
Birth control
Blood transfusion
Dentistry
Genetic engineering
CRISPR gene editing
Genetic testing
PCR
Hospital
Medical imaging
Medication
Anesthesia
Antibiotic
Prosthesis
Surgery
Vaccine
Chemical
Detergent
Soap
Dye
Explosive
Dynamite
Fireworks
Gunpowder
TNT
Fertilizer
Haber process
Laboratory glassware
Pesticide
Pigment
Separation
Chromatography
Distillation
Filtration
Spectrometer
Synthesis
Electromagnetism
Electromagnet
Laser
Optical disc
Lens
Eyeglasses
Magnetic storage
Microwave oven
Mirror
Optical fiber
Optical instrument
Microscope
Telescope
Photography
Camera
Motion picture
Radar
Telecommunications
Mobile phone
Radio
Telegraph
Telephone
Television
Electricity
Circuit
AC
Circuit breaker
DC
Electrical grid
Fuse
Generator
Switch
Transformer
Electric light
Fluorescent
Incandescent
LED
Neon
Electronics
Capacitor
Circuit board
Resistor
Inductor
Vacuum tube
Lightning rod
Multimeter
Oscilloscope
Semiconductor
Diode
Integrated circuit
Transistor
Superconductor
Computer
Artificial intelligence
Hardware
CPU
GPU
Modem
Motherboard
Mouse
RAM
Router
Storage
Touchscreen
Networking
Client–server model
Email
Internet
Peer-to-peer
Social media
World Wide Web
Programming language
Software
Compiler
Database
GUI
Graphics software
Operating system
Spreadsheet
Web browser
Word processor
PerspectivesCriticism
Appropriate technology
Low technology
Luddite
Neo-Luddism
Precautionary principle
Ecotechnology
Environmental technology
Clean technology
Sustainable design
Sustainable engineering
Policy & politics
Government by algorithm
Intellectual property
Patent
Trade secret
Persuasive technology
Science policy
Strategy of Technology
Technology assessment
Technorealism
Progressivism
Futures studies
Technology forecasting
Technological utopianism
Technocracy movement
Technological singularity
Transhumanism
Studies
Diffusion of innovations
Technology transfer
History
Timeline of historic inventions
Philosophy
Social construction of technology
Technological determinism
Technology acceptance model
Related conceptsApplied science
Agronomy
Architecture
Construction
Engineering
Forensics
Forestry
Logistics
Medicine
Mining
Navigation
Surveying
Innovation
Design
High tech
Invention
Mature technology
Research and development
Technological convergence
Technology lifecycle

 Category
 Outline
 Portal

vteHealth issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs)Plasticizers: Phthalates
DIBP
DBP
BBP (BBzP)
DIHP
DEHP (DOP)
DIDP
DINP
Miscellaneous plasticizers
Organophosphates
Adipates (DEHA
DOA)
Monomers
Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates)
Vinyl chloride (in PVC)
Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs
PBDEs
PCBs
Organotins
PFCs
Perfluorooctanoic acid
Health issues
Teratogen
Carcinogen
Endocrine disruptor
Diabetes
Obesity
Polymer fume fever
Pollution
Plastic pollution
Rubber pollution
Great Pacific garbage patch
Persistent organic pollutant
Dioxins
List of environmental health hazards
Regulations
California Proposition 65
European REACH regulation
Japan Toxic Substances Law
Toxic Substances Control Act

Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plastic&oldid=1112798695"
Categories: PlasticsDielectricsHidden categories: Pages using the Graph extensionCS1 maint: url-statusCS1 uses Greek-language script (el)CS1 errors: missing titleCS1 errors: bare URLCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse American English from March 2021All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2021Articles with excerptsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2019Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019Free-content attributionFree content from United Nations Environment ProgrammeCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهBasa BaliবাংলাBanjarBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskالدارجةDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaIsiXhosaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenКыргызчаລາວLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLombardMagyarMadhurâМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीBahasa MelayuMinangkabauMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄MirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยᏣᎳᎩTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوVènetoTiếng ViệtWalonWest-VlamsWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 28 September 2022, at 05:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










