



Pre-Columbian era - Wikipedia









































Pre-Columbian era

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
The Americas prior to European influences
 An Olmec colossal head at the Xalapa Museum of Anthropology, in Veracruz, Mexico
Part of a series onHuman historyHuman Era
↑ Prehistory   (Pleistocene epoch)
Holocene
TimelinesNeolithic – Contemporary(10,000 BCE – Present)



Age of the human race
Recorded history

Earliest records
Protohistory
Proto-writing
History by period


Ancient
Bronze age
Iron age

Axial Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity



Africa
North America
South America

Oceania
East Asia
South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe


Postclassical
Timeline



Africa
Americas

Oceania
East Asia

South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe
Renaissance


Modern

Early modern (Renaissance)
Late modern (Industrial Revolution)
Contemporary



Africa
North America
South America

Oceania
East Asia
South Asia

Southeast Asia
West Asia

Europe



See also

Age of Discovery
Modernity
Postmodernity
Futurology
Political history



↓ Future   vte
In the history of the Americas, the pre-Columbian era spans from the original settlement of North and South America in the Upper Paleolithic period through European colonization, which began with Christopher Columbus's voyage of 1492. Usually, the era covers the history of Indigenous cultures until significant influence by Europeans. This may have occurred decades or even centuries after Columbus for certain cultures.
Many pre-Columbian civilizations were marked by permanent settlements, cities, agriculture, civic and monumental architecture, major earthworks, and complex societal hierarchies. Some of these civilizations had long faded by the time of the first permanent European colonies (c. late 16th–early 17th centuries),[1] and are known only through archaeological investigations and oral history. Other civilizations were contemporary with the colonial period and were described in European historical accounts of the time. A few, such as the Maya civilization, had their own written records. Because many Christian Europeans of the time viewed such texts as pagan, men like Diego de Landa burned them, even while seeking to preserve native histories. Only a few hidden documents have survived in their original languages, while others were transcribed or dictated into Spanish, giving modern historians glimpses of ancient culture and knowledge. 
Many Indigenous peoples in the Americas continue traditional practices while evolving and adapting to the modern world.
The alternative terms precontact, precolonial, or prehistoric Americas are also used; in Hispanic America, the usual term is pre-Hispanic; in Brazil, the term used is pre-Cabraline.

Contents

1 Historiography
2 Genetics
3 Settlement of the Americas
4 North America

4.1 Archaic period

4.1.1 Middle Archaic period
4.1.2 Late Archaic period


4.2 Woodland period
4.3 Mississippian culture
4.4 Historic tribes


5 Mesoamerica

5.1 Olmec civilization
5.2 Teotihuacan civilization
5.3 Tarascan/Purepecha civilization
5.4 Maya civilization
5.5 Aztec/Mexica/Triple Alliance civilization


6 South America

6.1 Norte Chico civilization
6.2 Valdivia culture
6.3 Cañari people
6.4 Chavín civilization
6.5 Muisca people
6.6 Moche civilization
6.7 Tiwanaku Empire
6.8 Inca Empire
6.9 Cambeba


7 Agricultural development
8 See also
9 References

9.1 Bibliography


10 External links


Historiography[edit]
Before the development of archaeology in the 19th century, historians of the pre-Columbian period mainly interpreted the records of the European conquerors and the accounts of early European travelers and antiquaries. It was not until the nineteenth century that the work of people such as John Lloyd Stephens, Eduard Seler and Alfred P. Maudslay, and of institutions such as the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology of Harvard University, led to the reconsideration and criticism of the early European sources. Now, the scholarly study of pre-Columbian cultures is most often based on scientific and multidisciplinary methodologies.[2]

Genetics[edit]
 Schematic illustration of maternal (mtDNA) gene-flow in and out of Beringia, from 25,000 years ago to present
Main article: Genetic history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas
The haplogroup most commonly associated with Indigenous genetics is Haplogroup Q1a3a (Y-DNA).[3] Y-DNA, like mtDNA, differs from other nuclear chromosomes in that the majority of the Y chromosome is unique and does not recombine during meiosis. This has the effect that the historical pattern of mutations can easily be studied.[4] The pattern indicates Indigenous peoples experienced two very distinctive genetic episodes: first with the initial peopling of the Americas and second with European colonization of the Americas.[5][6] The former is the determinant factor for the number of gene lineages and founding haplotypes present in today's Indigenous  populations.[6]
Human settlement of the Americas occurred in stages from the Bering sea coast line, with an initial 20,000-year layover on Beringia for the founding population.[7][8] The micro-satellite diversity and distributions of the Y lineage specific to South America indicates that certain Amerindian populations have been isolated since the initial colonization of the region.[9] The Na-Dené, Inuit and Indigenous Alaskan populations exhibit haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA) mutations, however, and are distinct from other Indigenous peoples with various mtDNA mutations.[10][11][12] This suggests that the earliest migrants into the northern extremes of North America and Greenland derived from later populations.[13]

Settlement of the Americas[edit]
Main articles: Settlement of the Americas and Paleo-Indians
Further information: Genetic history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
Asian nomadic Paleo-Indians are thought to have entered the Americas via the Bering Land Bridge (Beringia), now the Bering Strait, and possibly along the coast. Genetic evidence found in Indigenous peoples' maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) supports the theory of multiple genetic populations migrating from Asia.[14][15] After crossing the land bridge, they moved southward along the Pacific coast[16] and through an interior ice-free corridor.[17] Over the course of millennia, Paleo-Indians spread throughout the rest of North and South America.
Exactly when the first people migrated into the Americas is the subject of much debate. One of the earliest identifiable cultures was the Clovis culture, with sites dating from some 13,000 years ago. However, older sites dating back to 20,000 years ago have been claimed. Some genetic studies estimate the colonization of the Americas dates from between 40,000 and 13,000 years ago.[18]
The chronology of migration models is currently divided into two general approaches. The first is the short chronology theory with the first movement beyond Alaska into the Americas occurring no earlier than 14,000–17,000 years ago, followed by successive waves of immigrants.[19][20][21][22] The second belief is the long chronology theory, which proposes that the first group of people entered the hemisphere at a much earlier date, possibly 50,000–40,000 years ago or earlier.[23][24][25][26]
Artifacts have been found in both North and South America which have been dated to 14,000 years ago,[27] and accordingly humans have been proposed to have reached Cape Horn at the southern tip of South America by this time. In that case, the Inuit would have arrived separately and at a much later date, probably no more than 2,000 years ago, moving across the ice from Siberia into Alaska.

North America[edit]
Further information: Aboriginal peoples in Canada § History, History of North America § Pre-Columbian era, List of archaeological periods (North America), Native Americans in the United States § History, and Pre-Columbian Mexico
Archaic period[edit]
 Simplified map of subsistence methods in the Americas at 1000 BCE   hunter-gatherers   simple farming societies   complex farming societies (tribal chiefdoms or civilizations)The North American climate was unstable as the ice age receded. It finally stabilized by about 10,000 years ago; climatic conditions were then very similar to today's.[28] Within this time frame, roughly pertaining to the Archaic Period, numerous archaeological cultures have been identified.
The unstable climate led to widespread migration, with early Paleo-Indians soon spreading throughout the Americas, diversifying into many hundreds of culturally distinct tribes.[29] The Paleo-Indians were hunter-gatherers, likely characterized by small, mobile bands consisting of approximately 20 to 50 members of an extended family. These groups moved from place to place as preferred resources were depleted and new supplies were sought.[30] During much of the Paleo-Indian period, bands are thought to have subsisted primarily through hunting now-extinct giant land animals such as mastodon and ancient bison.[31] Paleo-Indian groups carried a variety of tools, including distinctive projectile points and knives, as well as less distinctive butchering and hide-scraping implements.
The vastness of the North American continent, and the variety of its climates, ecology, vegetation, fauna, and landforms, led ancient peoples to coalesce into many distinct linguistic and cultural groups.[32] This is reflected in the oral histories of the indigenous peoples, described by a wide range of traditional creation stories which often say that a given people have been living in a certain territory since the creation of the world.
Over the course of thousands of years, paleo-Indian people domesticated, bred and cultivated a number of plant species, including crops which now constitute 50–60% of worldwide agriculture.[33] In general, Arctic, Subarctic, and coastal peoples continued to live as hunters and gatherers, while agriculture was adopted in more temperate and sheltered regions, permitting a dramatic rise in population.[28]

Middle Archaic period[edit]
 Major cultural areas of the pre-Columbian Americas:      Arctic      Northwest      Aridoamerica      Mesoamerica      Isthmo-Colombian      Caribbean      Amazon      AndesAfter the migration or migrations, it was several thousand years before the first complex societies arose, the earliest emerging about seven to eight thousand years ago.[citation needed] As early as 6500 BCE, people in the Lower Mississippi Valley at the Monte Sano site were building complex earthwork mounds, probably for religious purposes. This is the earliest dated of numerous mound complexes found in present-day Louisiana, Mississippi and Florida. Since the late twentieth century, archeologists have explored and dated these sites. They have found that they were built by hunter-gatherer societies, whose people occupied the sites on a seasonal basis, and who had not yet developed ceramics. Watson Brake, a large complex of eleven platform mounds, was constructed beginning 3400 BCE and added to over 500 years. This has changed earlier assumptions that complex construction arose only after societies had adopted agriculture, become sedentary, with stratified hierarchy and usually ceramics. These ancient people had organized to build complex mound projects under a different social structure.
Late Archaic period[edit]
 Artist's reconstruction of Poverty Point, 1500 BCE
Until the accurate dating of Watson Brake and similar sites, the oldest mound complex was thought to be Poverty Point, also located in the Lower Mississippi Valley. Built about 1500 BCE, it is the centerpiece of a culture extending over 100 sites on both sides of the Mississippi. The Poverty Point site has earthworks in the form of six concentric half-circles, divided by radial aisles, together with some mounds. The entire complex is nearly a mile across.
Mound building was continued by succeeding cultures, who built numerous sites in the middle Mississippi and Ohio River valleys as well, adding effigy mounds, conical and ridge mounds and other shapes.

Woodland period[edit]
Main article: Woodland period
 Hopewell mounds from the Mound City group in Ohio
The Woodland period of North American pre-Columbian cultures lasted from roughly 1000 BCE to 1000 CE. The term was coined in the 1930s and refers to prehistoric sites between the Archaic period and the Mississippian cultures. The Adena culture and the ensuing Hopewell tradition during this period built monumental earthwork architecture and established continent-spanning trade and exchange networks.
In the Great Plains, this period is called the Woodland period.
This period is considered a developmental stage without any massive changes in a short period, but instead having a continuous development in stone and bone tools, leatherworking, textile manufacture, tool production, cultivation, and shelter construction. Some Woodland peoples continued to use spears and atlatls until the end of the period, when they were replaced by bows and arrows.

Mississippian culture[edit]
Main article: Mississippian culture
The Mississippian culture was spread across the Southeast and Midwest from the Atlantic coast to the edge of the plains, from the Gulf of Mexico to the Upper Midwest, although most intensively in the area along the Mississippi River and Ohio River. One of the distinguishing features of this culture was the construction of complexes of large earthen mounds and grand plazas, continuing the moundbuilding traditions of earlier cultures. They grew maize and other crops intensively, participated in an extensive trade network and had a complex stratified society. The Mississippians first appeared around 1000 CE, following and developing out of the less agriculturally intensive and less centralized Woodland period. The largest urban site of these people, Cahokia—located near modern East St. Louis, Illinois—may have reached a population of over 20,000. Other chiefdoms were constructed throughout the Southeast, and its trade networks reached to the Great Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico. At its peak, between the 12th and 13th centuries, Cahokia was the most populous city in North America. (Larger cities did exist in Mesoamerica and South America.) Monk's Mound, the major ceremonial center of Cahokia, remains the largest earthen construction of the prehistoric Americas. The culture reached its peak in about 1200–1400 CE, and in most places, it seems to have been in decline before the arrival of Europeans.[citation needed]
Many Mississippian peoples were encountered by the expedition of Hernando de Soto in the 1540s, mostly with disastrous results for both sides. Unlike the Spanish expeditions in Mesoamerica, who conquered vast empires with relatively few men, the de Soto expedition wandered the American Southeast for four years, becoming more bedraggled, losing more men and equipment, and eventually arriving in Mexico as a fraction of its original size. The local people fared much worse though, as the fatalities of diseases introduced by the expedition devastated the populations and produced much social disruption. By the time Europeans returned a hundred years later, nearly all of the Mississippian groups had vanished, and vast swaths of their territory were virtually uninhabited.[34]





Monks Mound of Cahokia (UNESCO World Heritage Site) in summer. The concrete staircase follows the approximate course of the ancient wooden stairs.






An artistic recreation of The Kincaid site from the prehistoric Mississippian culture as it may have looked at its peak 1050–1400 CE.






Engraved stone palette from Moundville, illustrating two horned rattlesnakes, perhaps referring to The Great Serpent of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex.






A human head effigy pot from the Nodena site.




Historic tribes[edit]
When the Europeans arrived, Indigenous peoples of North America had a wide range of lifeways from sedentary, agrarian societies to semi-nomadic hunter-gatherer societies. Many formed new tribes or confederations in response to European colonization. These are often classified by cultural regions, loosely based on geography. These can include the following:

Arctic, including Aleut, Inuit, and Yupik peoples
Subarctic
Northeastern Woodlands
Southeastern Woodlands
Great Plains
Great Basin
Northwest Plateau
Northwest Coast
California
Southwest (Oasisamerica)
Numerous pre-Columbian societies were sedentary, such as the Pueblo peoples, Mandan, Hidatsa and others, and some established large settlements, even cities, such as Cahokia, in what is now Illinois. The Iroquois League of Nations or "People of the Long House" was a politically advanced, democratic society, which is thought by some historians to have influenced the United States Constitution,[35][36] with the Senate passing a resolution to this effect in 1988.[37] Other historians have contested this interpretation and believe the impact was minimal, or did not exist, pointing to numerous differences between the two systems and the ample precedents for the constitution in European political thought.[38][39][40]

Mesoamerica[edit]
Further information: Mesoamerican chronology
 One of the pyramids in the upper level of YaxchilánMesoamerica is the region extending from central Mexico south to the northwestern border of Costa Rica that gave rise to a group of stratified, culturally related agrarian civilizations spanning an approximately 3,000-year period before the visits to the Caribbean by Christopher Columbus. Mesoamerican is the adjective generally used to refer to that group of pre-Columbian cultures. This refers to an environmental area occupied by an assortment of ancient cultures that shared religious beliefs, art, architecture, and technology in the Americas for more than three thousand years.
Between 2000 and 300 BCE, complex cultures began to form in Mesoamerica. Some matured into advanced pre-Columbian Mesoamerican civilizations such as the Olmec, Teotihuacan, Maya, Zapotec, Mixtec, Huastec, Purepecha, Toltec, and Mexica/Aztecs. The Mexica civilization is also known as the Aztec Triple Alliance, since they were three smaller kingdoms loosely united together.[41] Atlantes at Tula, Hidalgo
These Indigenous civilizations are credited with many inventions: building pyramid-temples, mathematics, astronomy, medicine, writing, highly accurate calendars, fine arts, intensive agriculture, engineering, an abacus calculator, and complex theology. They also invented the wheel, but it was used solely as a toy. In addition, they used native copper, silver and gold for metalworking.
Archaic inscriptions on rocks and rock walls all over northern Mexico (especially in the state of Nuevo León) demonstrate an early propensity for counting. Their number system was base 20 and included zero. These early count-markings were associated with astronomical events and underscore the influence that astronomical activities had upon Mesoamerican people before the arrival of Europeans. Many of the later Mesoamerican civilizations carefully built their cities and ceremonial centers according to specific astronomical events.
The biggest Mesoamerican cities, such as Teotihuacan, Tenochtitlan, and Cholula, were among the largest in the world. These cities grew as centers of commerce, ideas, ceremonies, and theology, and they radiated influence outwards onto neighboring cultures in central Mexico.
While many city-states, kingdoms, and empires competed with one another for power and prestige, Mesoamerica can be said to have had five major civilizations: the Olmec, Teotihuacan, the Toltec, the Mexica and the Maya. These civilizations (with the exception of the politically fragmented Maya) extended their reach across Mesoamerica—and beyond—like no others. They consolidated power and distributed influence in matters of trade, art, politics, technology, and theology. Other regional power players made economic and political alliances with these civilizations over the span of 4,000 years. Many made war with them, but almost all peoples found themselves within one of their spheres of influence.
Regional communications in ancient Mesoamerica have been the subject of considerable research. There is evidence of trade routes starting as far north as the Mexico Central Plateau, and going down to the Pacific coast. These trade routes and cultural contacts then went on as far as Central America. These networks operated with various interruptions from pre-Olmec times and up to the Late Classical Period (600–900 CE).

Olmec civilization[edit]
Main article: Olmec
The earliest known civilization in Mesoamerica is the Olmec. This civilization established the cultural blueprint by which all succeeding indigenous civilizations would follow in Mexico. Pre-Olmec civilization began with the production of pottery in abundance, around 2300 BCE in the Grijalva River delta. Between 1600 and 1500 BCE, the Olmec civilization had begun, with the consolidation of power at their capital, a site today known as San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán near the coast in southeast Veracruz.[42] The Olmec influence extended across Mexico, into Central America, and along the Gulf of Mexico. They transformed many peoples' thinking toward a new way of government, pyramid-temples, writing, astronomy, art, mathematics, economics, and religion. Their achievements paved the way for the Maya civilization and the civilizations in central Mexico.

Teotihuacan civilization[edit]
Main article: Teotihuacan
The decline of the Olmec resulted in a power vacuum in Mexico. Emerging from that vacuum was Teotihuacan, first settled in 300 BCE. By 150 CE, Teotihuacan had risen to become the first true metropolis of what is now called North America. Teotihuacan established a new economic and political order never before seen in Mexico. Its influence stretched across Mexico into Central America, founding new dynasties in the Maya cities of Tikal, Copan, and Kaminaljuyú. Teotihuacan's influence over the Maya civilization cannot be overstated: it transformed political power, artistic depictions, and the nature of economics. Within the city of Teotihuacan was a diverse and cosmopolitan population. Most of the regional ethnicities of Mexico were represented in the city, such as Zapotecs from the Oaxaca region. They lived in apartment communities where they worked their trades and contributed to the city's economic and cultural prowess. Teotihuacan's economic pull impacted areas in northern Mexico as well. It was a city whose monumental architecture reflected a monumental new era in Mexican civilization, declining in political power about 650 CE—but lasting in cultural influence for the better part of a millennium, to around 950 CE.

 Maya architecture at Uxmal
Tarascan/Purepecha civilization[edit]
Main article: Purépecha Empire
Initially, the lands that would someday comprise the lands of the powerful Tarascan Empire were inhabited by several independent communities. Around 1300, however, the first Cazonci, Tariacuri, united these communities and built them into one of the most advanced civilizations in Mesoamerica. Their capital at Tzintzuntzan was just one of the many cities—there were ninety more under its control. The Tarascan Empire was among the largest in Central America, so it is no surprise that they routinely came into conflict with the neighboring Aztec Empire.
Out of all the civilizations in its area, the Tarascan Empire was the most prominent in metallurgy, harnessing copper, silver, and gold to create items such as tools, decorations, and even weapons and armor. Bronze was also used. The great victories over the Aztecs by the Tarascans cannot be understated. Nearly every war they fought in resulted in a Tarascan victory. Because the Tarascan Empire had little links to the former Toltec Empire, they were also quite independent in culture from their neighbors. The Aztecs, Tlaxcaltec, Olmec, Mixtec, Maya, and others were very similar to each other, however. This is because they were all directly preceded by the Toltecs, and they therefore shared almost identical cultures. The Tarascans, however, possessed a unique religion, as well as other things[vague].

Maya civilization[edit]
Main article: Maya civilization
Contemporary with Teotihuacan's greatness was that of the Maya civilization. The period between 250 CE and 650 CE was a time of intense flourishing of Maya civilized accomplishments. While the many Maya city-states never achieved political unity on the order of the central Mexican civilizations, they exerted a tremendous intellectual influence upon Mexico and Central America. The Maya built some of the most elaborate cities on the continent, and made innovations in mathematics, astronomy, and calendrics. The Maya also developed the only true writing system[citation needed] native to the Americas using pictographs and syllabic elements in the form of texts and codices inscribed on stone, pottery, wood, or perishable books made from bark paper.

Aztec/Mexica/Triple Alliance civilization[edit]
Main article: Aztec Empire
With the decline of the Toltec civilization came political fragmentation in the Valley of Mexico. Into this new political game of contenders to the Toltec throne stepped outsiders: the Mexica. They were also a desert people, one of seven groups who formerly called themselves "Azteca", in memory of Aztlán, but they changed their name after years of migrating. Since they were not from the Valley of Mexico, they were initially seen as crude and unrefined in the ways of Nahua civilization. Through political maneuvers and ferocious martial skill, they managed to rule Mexico as the head of the 'Triple Alliance' which included two other Aztec cities, Tetxcoco and Tlacopan.
Latecomers to Mexico's central plateau, the Mexica thought of themselves, nevertheless, as heirs of the civilizations that had preceded them. For them, arts, sculpture, architecture, engraving, feather-mosaic work, and the calendar, were bequest from the former inhabitants of Tula, the Toltecs.
The Mexica-Aztecs were the rulers of much of central Mexico by about 1400 (while Yaquis, Coras and Apaches commanded sizable regions of northern desert), having subjugated most of the other regional states by the 1470s. At their peak, the Valley of Mexico where the Aztec Empire presided, saw a population growth that included nearly 1 million people during the late Aztec period (1350–1519).[43]
Their capital, Tenochtitlan, is the site of modern-day Mexico City. At its peak, it was one of the largest cities in the world with population estimates of 200,000–300,000.[44] The market established there was the largest ever seen by the conquistadores on arrival.

South America[edit]
Main articles: Pre-Columbian Peru, Inca Empire, and Muisca Confederation
See also: Andean civilizations
 Geoglyphs on deforested land in the Amazon rainforest
 Muisca raft. The figure refers to the ceremony of the legend of El Dorado.
By the first millennium, South America's vast rainforests, mountains, plains, and coasts were the home of millions of people. Estimates vary, but 30–50 million are often given and 100 million by some estimates. Some groups formed permanent settlements. Among those groups were Chibcha-speaking peoples ("Muisca" or "Muysca"), Valdivia, Quimbaya, Calima, Marajoara culture and the Tairona. The Muisca of Colombia, postdating the Herrera Period, Valdivia of Ecuador, the Quechuas and the Aymara of Peru and Bolivia were the four most important sedentary Amerindian groups in South America. From the 1970s, numerous geoglyphs have been discovered on deforested land in the Amazon rainforest, Brazil, supporting Spanish accounts of a complex, possibly ancient Amazonian civilization.[45][46]
The theory of pre-Columbian contact across the South Pacific Ocean between South America and Polynesia has received support from several lines of evidence, although solid confirmation remains elusive. A diffusion by human agents has been put forward to explain the pre-Columbian presence in Oceania of several cultivated plant species native to South America, such as the bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) or sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas). Direct archaeological evidence for such pre-Columbian contacts and transport has not emerged. Similarities noted in names of edible roots in Maori and Ecuadorian languages ("kumari") and Melanesian and Chilean ("gaddu") have been inconclusive.[47]
A 2007 paper published in PNAS put forward DNA and archaeological evidence that domesticated chickens had been introduced into South America via Polynesia by late pre-Columbian times.[48] These findings were challenged by a later study published in the same journal, that cast doubt on the dating calibration used and presented alternative mtDNA analyses that disagreed with a Polynesian genetic origin.[49] The origin and dating remains an open issue. Whether or not early Polynesian–American exchanges occurred, no compelling human-genetic, archaeological, cultural or linguistic legacy of such contact has turned up.

Norte Chico civilization[edit]
Main article: Norte Chico civilization
 The ancient city of Caral
On the north-central coast of present-day Peru, Norte Chico or Caral (as known in Peru) was a civilization that emerged around 3000 BCE (contemporary with urbanism's rise in Mesopotamia).[41] It had a cluster of large-scale urban settlements of which the Sacred City of Caral, in the Supe valley, is one of the largest and best studied site. The civilization had no knowledge of machinery or pottery but still managed to develop trade, especially cotton and dehydrated fish. It was a hierarchical society that managed its ecosystems and had intercultural exchange. Its economy was heavily dependent on agriculture and fishing on the nearby coast.[50] It is considered one of the cradles of civilization in the world[41] and Caral is the oldest known civilization in the Americas.[51]

Valdivia culture[edit]
Main article: Valdivia culture
The Valdivia culture was concentrated on the coast of Ecuador. Their existence was recently discovered by archeological findings. Their culture is among the oldest found in the Americas, spanning from 3500 to 1800 BCE. The Valdivia lived in a community of houses built in a circle or oval around a central plaza. They were sedentary people who lived off farming and fishing, though occasionally they hunted for deer. From the remains that have been found, scholars have determined that Valdivians cultivated maize, kidney beans, squash, cassava, hot peppers, and cotton plants, the last of which was used to make clothing. Valdivian pottery initially was rough and practical, but it became showy, delicate, and big over time. They generally used red and gray colors; and the polished dark red pottery is characteristic of the Valdivia period. In its ceramics and stone works, the Valdivia culture shows a progression from the most simple to much more complicated works.

Cañari people[edit]
Main article: Cañari
The Cañari were the indigenous natives of today's Ecuadorian provinces of Cañar and Azuay. They were an elaborate civilization with advanced architecture and complex religious beliefs. The Inca destroyed and burned most of their remains. The Cañari's old city was replaced twice, first by the Incan city of Tumebamba and later on the same site by the colonial city of Cuenca. The city was also believed to be the site of El Dorado, the city of gold from the mythology of Colombia.
The Cañari were most notable for having repelled the Incan invasion with fierce resistance for many years until they fell to Tupac Yupanqui. Many of their descendants are still present in Cañar. The majority did not mix with the colonists or become Mestizos.

 Larco Museum houses the largest private collection of pre-Columbian art. Lima, Peru.
Chavín civilization[edit]
Main article: Chavín culture
The Chavín, a Peruvian preliterate civilization, established a trade network and developed agriculture by 900 BCE, according to some estimates and archeological finds. Artifacts were found at a site called Chavín in modern Peru at an elevation of 3,177 meters. The Chavín civilization spanned from 900 to 300 BCE.

Muisca people[edit]
Main article: Muisca people
The Chibcha-speaking communities were the most numerous, the most territorially extended and the most socio-economically developed of the pre-Hispanic Colombians. By the 8th century, the indigenous people had established their civilization in the northern Andes. At one point, the Chibchas occupied part of what is now Panama, and the high plains of the Eastern Sierra of Colombia.
The areas which they occupied in Colombia were the present-day Departments of Santander (North and South), Boyacá and Cundinamarca. This is where the first farms and industries were developed. It is also where the independence movement originated. They are currently the richest areas in Colombia. The Chibcha developed the most populous zone between the Maya region and the Inca Empire. Next to the Quechua of Peru and the Aymara in Bolivia, the Chibcha of the eastern and north-eastern Highlands of Colombia developed the most notable culture among the sedentary Indigenous peoples in South America.
In the Colombian Andes, the Chibcha comprised several tribes who spoke similar languages (Chibcha). They included the following: the Muisca, Guane, Lache, Cofán, and Chitareros.

Moche civilization[edit]
Main article: Moche culture
The Moche thrived on the north coast of Peru from about 100 to 800 CE. The heritage of the Moche is seen in their elaborate burials. Some were recently excavated by UCLA's Christopher B. Donnan in association with the National Geographic Society.
As skilled artisans, the Moche were a technologically advanced people. They traded with distant peoples such as the Maya. What has been learned about the Moche is based on study of their ceramic pottery; the carvings reveal details of their daily lives. The Larco Museum of Lima, Peru, has an extensive collection of such ceramics. They show that the people practiced human sacrifice, had blood-drinking rituals, and that their religion incorporated non-procreative sexual practices (such as fellatio).

Tiwanaku Empire[edit]
Main article: Tiwanaku Empire
 Gate of the Sun in Tiwanaku
The Tiwanaku empire was based in western Bolivia and extended into present-day Peru and Chile from 300 to 1000. Tiwanaku is recognized by Andean scholars as one of the most important South American civilizations prior to the birth of the Inca Empire in Peru; it was the ritual and administrative capital of a major state power for approximately five hundred years. The ruins of the ancient city state are near the south-eastern shore of Lake Titicaca in Tiwanaku Municipality, Ingavi Province, La Paz Department, about 72 kilometres (45 mi) west of La Paz.

Inca Empire[edit]
Main article: Inca Empire
Holding their capital at the great cougar-shaped city of Cusco, Peru, the Inca civilization dominated the Andes region from 1438 to 1533. Known as Tawantinsuyu, or "the land of the four regions", in Quechua, the Inca civilization was highly distinct and developed. Inca rule extended to nearly a hundred linguistic or ethnic communities, some 9 to 14 million people connected by a 40,000 kilometer road system. Cities were built with precise stonework, constructed over many levels of mountain terrain. Terrace farming was a useful form of agriculture. There is evidence of excellent metalwork and even successful brain surgery in Inca civilization.

 The iconic Machu Picchu, symbol of the Inca civilization.
Cambeba[edit]
Main article: Cambeba people
Also known as the Omagua, Umana and Kambeba, the Cambeba are an indigenous people in Brazil's Amazon basin. The Cambeba were a populous, organized society in the late Pre-Columbian era whose population suffered steep decline in the early years of the Columbian Exchange. The Spanish explorer Francisco de Orellana traversed the Amazon River during the 16th century and reported densely populated regions running hundreds of kilometers along the river. These populations left no lasting monuments, possibly because they used local wood as their construction material as stone was not locally available. While it is possible Orellana may have exaggerated the level of development among the Amazonians, their semi-nomadic descendants have the odd distinction among tribal indigenous societies of a hereditary, yet landless, aristocracy. Archaeological evidence has revealed the continued presence of semi-domesticated orchards, as well as vast areas of land enriched with terra preta. Both of these discoveries, along with Cambeba ceramics discovered within the same archaeological levels suggest that a large and organized civilization existed in the area.[52]

Agricultural development[edit]
Further information: Agriculture on the prehistoric Great Plains, Incan agriculture, and Hoe-cultivation belt
See also: Columbian Exchange and List of pre-Columbian engineering projects in the Americas
Early inhabitants of the Americas developed agriculture, developing and breeding maize (corn) from ears 2–5 cm in length to the current size that are familiar today. Potatoes, tomatoes, tomatillos (a husked green tomato), pumpkins, chili peppers, squash, beans, pineapple, sweet potatoes, the grains quinoa and amaranth, cocoa beans, vanilla, onion, peanuts, strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, blackberries, papaya, and avocados were among other plants grown by natives. Over two-thirds of all types of food crops grown worldwide are native to the Americas.[citation needed]
Early Indigenous peoples began using fire in a widespread manner. Intentional burning of vegetation was taken up to mimic the effects of natural fires that tended to clear forest understories, thereby making travel easier and facilitating the growth of herbs and berry-producing plants that were important for both food and medicines. This created the Pre-Columbian savannas of North America.[53]
While not as widespread as in other areas of the world (Asia, Africa, Europe), indigenous Americans did have livestock. Domesticated turkeys were common in Mesoamerica and in some regions of North America; they were valued for their meat, feathers, and, possibly, eggs. There is documentation of Mesoamericans utilizing hairless dogs, especially the Xoloitzcuintle breed, for their meat. Andean societies had llamas and alpacas for meat and wool, as well as for beasts of burden. Guinea pigs were raised for meat in the Andes. Iguanas and a range of wild animals, such as deer and pecari, were another source of meat in Mexico, Central, and northern South America.
By the 15th century, maize had been transmitted from Mexico and was being farmed in the Mississippi embayment, as far as the East Coast of the United States, and as far north as southern Canada. Potatoes were utilized by the Inca, and chocolate was used by the Aztecs.

See also[edit]


History portal
Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal
1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus by Charles C. Mann
Before the Revolution, 2013 book by Daniel K. Richter
List of pre-Columbian cultures
Metallurgy in pre-Columbian America
Periodization of pre-Columbian Peru
Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact theories

References[edit]


^ "Early European Settlements in North America". Tripline. Retrieved 2017-05-06.

^ Bernal, Ignition (1980). A History of Mexican Archaeology: The Vanished Civilizations of Middle America. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-5007-8008-4.

^ Bortolini, Maria-Catira; Salzano, Francisco M.; Thomas, Mark G.;  et al. (September 2003). "Y-Chromosome Evidence for Differing Ancient Demographic Histories in the Americas". American Journal of Human Genetics. 73 (3): 524–539. doi:10.1086/377588. PMC 1180678. PMID 12900798.

^ Orgel, Leslie E. (2004). "Prebiotic chemistry and the origin of the RNA world" (PDF). Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 39 (2): 99–123. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.537.7679. doi:10.1080/10409230490460765. PMID 15217990. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ Wells, Spencer (2002). The Journey of Man: A Genetic Odyssey. Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-7146-0.

^ a b Tymchuk, Wendy (2008). "Learn about Y-DNA Haplogroup Q-M242". Genebase Systems. Archived from the original on June 22, 2010. Haplogroups are defined by unique mutation events such as single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs. These SNPs mark the branch of a haplogroup, and indicate that all descendants of that haplogroup at one time shared a common ancestor. The Y-DNA SNP mutations were passed from father to son over thousands of years. Over time, additional SNPs occur within a haplogroup, leading to new lineages. These new lineages are considered subclades of the haplogroup. Each time a new mutation occurs, there is a new branch in the haplogroup, and therefore a new subclade. Haplogroup Q, possibly the youngest of the 20 Y-chromosome haplogroups, originated with the SNP mutation M242 in a man from Haplogroup P that likely lived in Siberia approximately 15,000 to 20,000 years before present

^ Viegas, Jennifer. "First Americans Endured 20,000-Year Layover". Discovery News. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Archaeological evidence, in fact, recognizes that people started to leave Beringia for the New World around 40,000 years ago, but rapid expansion into North America didn't occur until about 15,000 years ago, when the ice had literally broken

^ Than, Ker (2008). "New World Settlers Took 20,000-Year Pit Stop". National Geographic Society. Over time descendants developed a unique culture—one that was different from the original migrants' way of life in Asia but which contained seeds of the new cultures that would eventually appear throughout the Americas

^ "Summary of knowledge on the subclades of Haplogroup Q". Genebase Systems. 2009. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved 2009-11-22.

^ Ruhlen, M. (November 1998). "The origin of the Na-Dene". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 95 (23): 13994–13996. Bibcode:1998PNAS...9513994R. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.23.13994. PMC 25007. PMID 9811914.

^ Zegura, Stephen L.; Karafet, Tatiana M.; Zhivotovsky, Lev A.; Hammer, Michael F. (January 2004). "High-resolution SNPs and microsatellite haplotypes point to a single, recent entry of Native American Y chromosomes into the Americas". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 21 (1): 164–175. doi:10.1093/molbev/msh009. PMID 14595095.

^ Saillard, Juliette; Forster, Peter; Lynnerup, Niels; Bandelt, Hans-Jürgen; Nørby, Søren (September 2000). "mtDNA Variation among Greenland Eskimos: The Edge of the Beringian Expansion". American Journal of Human Genetics. 67 (3): 718–726. doi:10.1086/303038. PMC 1287530. PMID 10924403. The relatively lower coalescence time of the entire haplogroup A2 including the shared sub-arctic branches A2b (Siberians and Inuit) and A2a (Eskimos and Na-Dené) is probably due to secondary expansions of haplogroup A2 from the Beringia area, which would have averaged the overall internal variation of haplogroup A2 in North America.

^ Torroni, Antonio; Schurr, Theodore G.; Yang, Chi-Chuan;  et al. (January 1992). "Native American Mitochondrial DNA Analysis Indicates That the Amerind and the Nadene Populations Were Founded by Two Independent Migrations". Genetics. 130 (1): 153–162. doi:10.1093/genetics/130.1.153. PMC 1204788. PMID 1346260. The divergence time for the Nadene portion of the HaeIII np 663 lineage was about 6,000–10,000 years. Hence, the ancestral Nadene migrated from Asia independently and considerably more recently than the progenitors of the Amerinds.

^ "Study confirms Bering land bridge flooded later than previously believed". Cyberwest. July 31, 1996.

^ "Bering Land Bridge National Preserve". National Park System.

^ Fladmark, K. R. (January 1979). "Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in North America". American Antiquity. 44 (1): 55–69. doi:10.2307/279189. ISSN 0002-7316. JSTOR 279189. S2CID 162243347.

^ Meltzer, David J. (2009). First peoples in a new world : colonizing ice age America. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-94315-5. OCLC 609850106.

^ Wells, Spencer; Read, Mark (2002). The Journey of Man - A Genetic Odyssey. Random House. pp. 138–140. ISBN 0-8129-7146-9.

^ Lovgren, Stefan (March 13, 2008). "Americas Settled 15,000 Years Ago, Study Says". National Geographic News.

^ Meltzer, David J. "First Americans". Encarta Online Encyclopedia. Microsoft. Archived from the original on 2009-10-21.

^ Fagundes, Nelson J.R.; Kanitz, Ricardo; Eckert, Roberta;  et al. (2008). "Mitochondrial Population Genomics Supports a Single Pre-Clovis Origin with a Coastal Route for the Peopling of the Americas". American Journal of Human Genetics. 82 (3): 583–592. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.11.013. PMC 2427228. PMID 18313026.

^ Magocsi, Paul Robert, ed. (1999). "Beginnings to 1500 C.E.". Encyclopedia of Canada's Peoples. Multicultural History Society of Ontario. ISBN 978-0-8020-2938-6. Archived from the original on 2010-12-06.

^ "Atlas of the Human Journey". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 2011-05-01.

^ Marder, William (2005). Indians in the Americas: The Untold Story. Book Tree. p. 11. ISBN 978-1-58509-104-1.

^ "Journey of mankind". BradShaw Foundation.

^ Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. (1998). "Pre-Clovis".  In Gibbon, Guy E. (ed.). Archaeology of Prehistoric Native America: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. pp. 682–683. ISBN 978-0-8153-0725-9.

^ Wilford, John Noble (April 4, 2008). "Evidence Supports Earlier Date for People in North America". The New York Times.

^ a b Imbrie, John; Imbrie, Katherine Palmer (1979). Ice Ages: Solving the Mystery. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-44075-3.

^ Jacobs (2002).[full citation needed]

^ Kelly, Robert L.; Todd, Lawrence C. (1988). "Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility". American Antiquity. 53 (2): 231–244. doi:10.2307/281017. JSTOR 281017. S2CID 161058784.

^ Breitburg, Emanual; Broster, John B.; Reesman, Arthur L.; Stearns, Richard G. (1996). "Coats-Hines Site: Tennessee's First Paleo-Indian Mastodon Association". Current Research in the Pleistocene. 13: 6–8.

^ Fagan, Dr. Brian; Durrani, Nadia (2016). People of the Earth: An Introduction to World Prehistory (fourteenth ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-34682-1.[page needed]

^ "Native Americans: The First Farmers". AgExporter. Allbusiness.com. October 1, 1999. Retrieved 2011-06-03.

^ Hudson, Charles M. (1997). Knights of Spain, Warriors of the Sun: Hernando de Soto and the South's Ancient Chiefdoms. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-5290-9.

^ Daly, Janet L. (1997). "The Effect of the Iroquois Constitution on the United States Constitution". IPOAA Magazine. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017.

^ Woods, Thomas E. (2007). 33 Questions about American History You're Not Supposed to Ask. Crown Forum. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-307-34668-1.

^ "H. Con. Res. 331" (PDF). United States Senate. October 21, 1988. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ Shannon, Timothy J. (2002). Indians and Colonists at the Crossroads of Empire: The Albany Congress of 1754. Cornell University Press. pp. 6–8. ISBN 0-8014-8818-4.

^ Clifton, James A., ed. (1990). "The United States Constitution and the Iroquois League". Invented indian. Transaction Publishers. pp. 107–128. ISBN 978-1-4128-2659-4.

^ Rakove, Jack (July 21, 2005). "Did the Founding Fathers Really Get Many of Their Ideas of Liberty from the Iroquois?". History News Network. Columbian College of Arts and Sciences, George Mason University.

^ a b c Mann, Charles C. (2006) [2005]. 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus. Vintage Books. pp. 199–212. ISBN 1-4000-3205-9.

^ Diehl, Richard A. (2004). The Olmecs: America's First Civilization. London: Thames and Hudson. pp. 9–25. ISBN 0-500-28503-9.

^ Smith, Michael E. (1997). "Life in the Provinces of the Aztec Empire". Scientific American. 277 (3): 76. ISSN 0036-8733.

^ Levy, Buddy (2008). Conquistador: Hernán Cortés, King Montezuma, and the last stand of the Aztecs. Bantam Books Trade Paperbacks. p. 106. ISBN 9780553384710.

^ Romero, Simon (January 14, 2012). "Once Hidden by Forest, Carvings in Land Attest to Amazon's Lost World". The New York Times.

^ Pärssinen, Martti; Schaan, Denise; Ranzi, Alceu (December 2009). "Pre-Columbian geometric earthworks in the upper Purús: a complex society in western Amazonia". Antiquity. 83 (322): 1084–1095. doi:10.1017/s0003598x00099373. S2CID 55741813.

^ Christian, F. W. (1923). "The Story of the Kumara". Journal of the Polynesian Society. 32 (128): 255.

^ Storey, Alice A.; Ramírez, José Miguel; Quiroz, Daniel;  et al. (June 2007). "Radiocarbon and DNA evidence for a pre-Columbian introduction of Polynesian chickens to Chile". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104 (25): 10335–10339. Bibcode:2007PNAS..10410335S. doi:10.1073/pnas.0703993104. PMC 1965514. PMID 17556540.

^ Gongora, Jaime; Rawlence, Nicolas J.; Mobegi, Victor A.;  et al. (July 29, 2008). "Indo-European and Asian origins for Chilean and Pacific chickens revealed by mtDNA". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 105 (30): 10308–10313. Bibcode:2008PNAS..10510308G. doi:10.1073/pnas.0801991105. PMC 2492461. PMID 18663216.

^ "Caral, cradle of the oldest civilization in America". www.peru.travel. Retrieved 2 May 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "Sacred City of Caral-Supe". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 2022-05-02.

^ Forero, Juan (September 5, 2010). "Scientists find evidence discrediting theory Amazon was virtually unlivable". Washington Post.

^ Owen, Wayne (December 8, 2013). "Chapter 2 (TERRA–2): The History of Native Plant Communities in the South". Southern Forest Resource Assessment Final Report. United States Department of Agriculture, United States Forest Service, Southern Research Station.


Bibliography[edit]

Brown, Michael D.; Hosseini, Seyed H.; Torroni, Antonio;  et al. (December 1998). "mtDNA haplogroup X: An ancient link between Europe/Western Asia and North America?". American Journal of Human Genetics. 63 (6): 1852–1861. doi:10.1086/302155. PMC 1377656. PMID 9837837.
Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (1987). Before Columbus: Exploration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic: 1229–1492. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-333-40382-2.
Schurr, Theodore G.; Ballinger, Scott W.; Gan, Yik-Yuen;  et al. (March 1990). "Amerindian mitochondrial DNAs have rare Asian mutations at high frequencies, suggesting they derived from four primary maternal lineages". American Journal of Human Genetics. 46 (3): 613–623. PMC 1683611. PMID 1968708.
Wright, Ronald (2005). Stolen Continents: 500 Years of Conquest and Resistance in the Americas. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-49240-4.

External links[edit]
Ancient civilizations can show us how to protect the Amazon rainforest on YouTube published on July 5, 2019 Quartz
Collection: "Pre-Columbian Central and South America" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art
Ancient American art at the Denver Art Museum
Art of the Americas at the Cleveland Museum of Art



Look up pre-columbian era in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pre-Columbian era.

vtePre-Columbian civilizations and culturesAmericas
Paleo-Indians
Genetic history
Archaeology of the Americas
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
North America
North American pre-Columbian cultures
Ancestral Puebloans
Caddoan Mississippian
Chichimeca
Hopewell tradition
Coles Creek
Fremont
Hohokam
Marksville
Mississippian
Mogollon
Plaquemine
Plum Bayou
Poverty Point
Sinagua
Troyville
Weeden Island
Mesoamerica
Mesoamerican pre-Columbian chronology
Acolhua
Capacha
Chalcatzingo
Cholula
Chupícuaro
Diquis
Coclé
Epi-Olmec
Huastec
Izapa
Mezcala
Mixtec
Olmecs
Pipil
Quelepa
Shaft tomb tradition
Teuchitlán
Purépecha
Tarascans
Teotihuacan
Tepanec
Tlatilco
Tlaxcaltec
Toltec
Totonac
Veracruz
Xochipala
Zapotec
South America
Andean civilizations
South American Indigenous people
El Abra
Aymara
Cañaris
Caral-Supe
Chachapoya
Chancay
Chavín
Chimú
Chinchorro
Chiripa
Cultures of Pre-Columbian Colombia
Cultures Pre-Columbian Ecuador
Cultural periods of Peru
Gran Chaco
Hydraulic culture of mounds (Bolivia)
Las Vegas
Lima
La Tolita (Tumaco)
Manteño-Huancavilca
Mapuche
Moche
Mollo
Monte Verde
Nariño
Nazca
Piaroa
Pucará
Quimbaya
San Agustín
Shuar
Sican
Taíno
Tairona
Tierradentro
Timoto–Cuica
Tiwanaku
Valdivia
Wankarani
Wari
Zenú
AztecMayaMuiscaInca Language Nahuatl Mayan languages Muysccubun Quechua Writing Script Script Numerals Quipu Religion Religion Religion Religion Religion Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Calendar Calendar Calendar Calendar Society Society Society Economy (Women) Society Infrastructure Chinampas Architecture Architecture  Agriculture Architecture (road system) Agriculture History History History History Inca history Neo-Inca State People Moctezuma I Moctezuma II Cuitláhuac Cuauhtémoc  Kʼinich Janaabʼ Pakal Uaxaclajuun Ubʼaah Kʼawiil Jasaw Chan Kʼawiil I NemequeneQuemuenchatochaTisquesusaTundamaZoratama Manco Cápac Pachacuti Atahualpa Manco Inca Yupanqui Túpac Amaru  Conquest Spanish conquest (Hernán Cortés) Spanish conquest Spanish conquest of Yucatán (Francisco de Montejo) Spanish conquest of Guatemala (Pedro de Alvarado) Spanish conquest(Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada)(Hernán Pérez de Quesada)(List of conquistadors) Spanish conquest (Francisco Pizarro)See also
Aztecs
Portal:Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Portal:Mesoamerica
Columbian exchange
Mesoamerican writing systems
Native American cuisine
Native American pottery
Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Pre‑Columbian art
Painting in the Americas before European colonization
 Civilizations portal
vte Pre-Columbian North America
Periods
Lithic
Archaic
Formative
Classic
Post-Classic
Archaeological cultures
Adena
Alachua
Ancient Beringian
Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi)
Baytown
Belle Glade
Buttermilk Creek complex
Caborn-Welborn
Calf Creek
Caloosahatchee
Clovis
Coles Creek
Comondú
Deptford
Folsom
Fort Ancient
Fort Walton
Fremont
Glacial Kame
Glades
Hohokam
Hopewell
List of Hopewell sites
La Jolla
Las Palmas
Leon-Jefferson
Maritime Archaic
Mississippian
List of Mississippian sites
Mogollon
Monongahela
Old Cordilleran
Oneota
Paleo-Arctic
Paleo-Indians
Patayan
Plano
Plaquemine
Poverty Point
Red Ocher
Safety Harbor culture
Santa Rosa-Swift Creek
St. Johns
Steed-Kisker
Tchefuncte
Troyville
Weeden Island
Archaeologicalsites
Angel Mounds
Anzick Clovis burial
Bandelier National Monument
Bastian
Benson
Blue Spring Shelter
The Bluff Point Stoneworks
Brewster
Cahokia
Candelaria Cave
Casa Grande
Chaco Canyon
Coso Rock Art District
Crystal River Archaeological State Park
Cuarenta Casas
Cueva de la Olla
Eaker
El Fin del Mundo
El Vallecito
Effigy Mounds National Monument
Etowah Indian Mounds
Eva
Folsom site
Fort Ancient
Fort Center
Fort Juelson
Four Mounds
Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument
Glenwood
Grimes Point
Holly Bluff site
Hopewell Culture National Historical Park
Horr's Island
Huápoca
Key Marco
Kimball Village
Kincaid Mounds
Kolomoki Mounds
Lake Jackson Mounds
L'Anse aux Meadows
Lynch Quarry Site
Marksville
Marmes Rockshelter
Meadowcroft Rockshelter
Mesa Verde
Moaning Cavern
Moorehead Circle
Morrison Mounds
Moundville
Mummy Cave
Nodena site
Ocmulgee National Monument
Old Stone Fort
Orwell site
Paquime
Parkin Park
Pinson Mounds
Portsmouth Earthworks
Poverty Point
Pueblo Bonito
Recapture Canyon
Roberts Island complex
Rock Eagle
Rock Hawk
Rosenstock Village Site
Russell Cave National Monument
Salmon Ruins
Serpent Mound
Sierra de San Francisco
Spiro Mounds
SunWatch
Taos Pueblo
Toltec Mounds
Town Creek Indian Mound
Turkey River Mounds
Upward Sun River site
Velda Mound
West Oak Forest Earthlodge
Wickiup Hill
Windover
Winterville
Wupatki National MonumentHumanremains
Anzick-1
Arlington Springs Man
Buhl Woman
Kennewick Man
La Brea Woman
Leanderthal Lady
Melbourne Man
Minnesota Woman
Peñon woman
Spirit Cave mummy
Vero man
Miscellaneous
Aridoamerica
Black drink
Ceremonial pipe
Chanunpa
Chunkey
Clovis point
Container Revolution
Eastern Agricultural Complex
Eden point
Effigy mound
Falcon dancer
Folsom point
Green Corn Ceremony
Horned Serpent
Kiva
Medicine wheel
Metallurgy
Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing
Mound Builders
N.A.G.P.R.A.
Norse colonization of North America
Oasisamerica
Piasa
Projectile point
Southeastern Ceremonial Complex
Stickball
Three Sisters agriculture
Thunderbird
Underwater panther
Water glyphs

Related
Genetic history
Pre-Columbian era

vteIndigenous peoples of the AmericasPre-history
Paleo-Indians
Pre-Columbian era
Classification
Archaeology
Genetics
Solutrean hypothesis
Mythology/Religion
Mythologies‎
List of deities
Native American religion
North America
Arborglyph
Great Spirit
Fifth World
Medicine man
Medicine wheel
The red road
Totem pole
MesoamericaCommon
Religion
Cosmovision
Creation
World tree
Variations
Aztec
Maya
Olmec
South America
Inca
Mapuche
Muisca

Culture
Andes
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru
Art
Visual
Painting
Music
Artists
Writers

Europeancolonization
European colonization
Population history
Columbian exchange
Modern groupsby countryNorth America
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Dominica
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
South America
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
Related topics
Ancestry
Languages
Movements
Philosophy
Studies

Category
Portal

vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism

Links to related articles
vteCultural areas of Indigenous North Americans
Arctic
Subarctic
Northwest Coast
Plateau
Interior Plains
Eastern Woodlands
Northeastern Woodlands
Southeastern Woodlands
California
Great Basin
Southwest
Mexico
Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Caribbean

vteHistory of the United StatesTimeline
Prehistory
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
1776–1789
1789–1849
1849–1865
1865–1918
1918–1945
1945–1964
1964–1980
1980–1991
Reagan Era
1991–2008
2008–present
Topics
Agriculture
American Century
African Americans
Cities
The Constitution
Demography
Economy
Banking
Education
Higher education
Flag
Foreign policy
Diplomacy
Immigration
Labor
LGBT
Lumber
Medicine
Merchant Marine
Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
Music
Native Americans
Postal service
Railway
Religion
Slavery
Sexual slavery
Sports
Technology and industry
Territorial evolution
Historic regions
American frontier
Manifest destiny
Indian removal
Voting rights
Women
By region
New England
The South
The West
The West Coast

 Category
 Portal

vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776–1789
1789–1849
1849–1865
1865–1918
1918–1945
1945–1964
1964–1980
1980–1991
1991–2008
2008–present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865–1896
1896–1954
1954–1968
1954–1968 in popular culture
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890–1945
1946–1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps

51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
Foreign policy
Hawaiian sovereignty movement
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
Exceptionalism
Nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Purple America
Scandals
State government
Governor
State legislature
State court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
Dance
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pre-Columbian_era&oldid=1115060841"
Categories: Pre-Columbian eraHistory of indigenous peoples of the AmericasHistorical erasHidden categories: All articles with incomplete citationsArticles with incomplete citations from January 2018Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2018CS1 maint: url-statusArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2012Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2020Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016Commons category link is on Wikidata



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia Commons




Languages


العربيةAsturianuAzərbaycancaBân-lâm-gúБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიLadinLatinaLietuviųМакедонскиBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt文言吴语粵語中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 16:51 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










