



Rembrandt - Wikipedia











































Rembrandt

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Dutch painter and printmaker (1606–1669)
This article is about the Dutch artist. For other uses, see Rembrandt (disambiguation).


RembrandtSelf-Portrait with Beret and Turned-Up Collar (1659), National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.BornRembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn(1606-07-15)15 July 1606[1]Leiden, Dutch RepublicDied4 October 1669(1669-10-04) (aged 63)Amsterdam, Dutch RepublicEducationJacob van Swanenburg  Pieter LastmanKnown forPainting, printmaking, drawingNotable workSelf-portraitsThe Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp (1632)Belshazzar's Feast (1635)The Night Watch (1642)Bathsheba at Her Bath (1654)Syndics of the Drapers' Guild (1662)The Hundred Guilder Print (etching, c. 1647–1649)MovementDutch Golden AgeBaroque
Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn (/ˈrɛmbrænt, ˈrɛmbrɑːnt/,[2] Dutch: [ˈrɛmbrɑnt ˈɦɑrmə(n)ˌsoːɱ vɑn ˈrɛin] (listen); 15 July 1606[1] – 4 October 1669), usually simply known as Rembrandt, was a Dutch Golden Age painter, printmaker and draughtsman. An innovative and prolific master in three media,[3] he is generally considered one of the greatest visual artists in the history of art and the most important in Dutch art history.[4]
Unlike most Dutch masters of the 17th century, Rembrandt's works depict a wide range of style and subject matter, from portraits and self-portraits to landscapes, genre scenes, allegorical and historical scenes, biblical and mythological themes and animal studies. His contributions to art came in a period of great wealth and cultural achievement that historians call the Dutch Golden Age, when Dutch art (especially Dutch painting), whilst antithetical to the Baroque style that dominated Europe, was prolific and innovative. This era gave rise to important new genres. Like many artists of the Dutch Golden Age, such as Jan Vermeer, Rembrandt was an avid art collector and dealer.
Rembrandt never went abroad, but was considerably influenced by the work of the Italian masters and Netherlandish artists who had studied in Italy, like Pieter Lastman, the Utrecht Caravaggists, Flemish Baroque, and Peter Paul Rubens. After he achieved youthful success as a portrait painter, Rembrandt's later years were marked by personal tragedy and financial hardships. Yet his etchings and paintings were popular throughout his lifetime, his reputation as an artist remained high,[5] and for twenty years he taught many important Dutch painters.[6]
Rembrandt's portraits of his contemporaries, self-portraits and illustrations of scenes from the Bible are regarded as his greatest creative triumphs. His self-portraits form an intimate autobiography.[4] Rembrandt's foremost contribution in the history of printmaking was his transformation of the etching process from a relatively new reproductive technique into an art form. His reputation as the greatest etcher in the history of the medium was established in his lifetime. Few of his paintings left the Dutch Republic while he lived, but his prints were circulated throughout Europe, and his wider reputation was initially based on them alone.

 The Prodigal Son in the Brothel, a self-portrait with Saskia, c. 1635
In his works, he exhibited knowledge of classical iconography. A depiction of a biblical scene was informed by Rembrandt's knowledge of the specific text, his assimilation of classical composition, and his observations of Amsterdam's Jewish population.[7] Because of his empathy for the human condition, he has been called "one of the great prophets of civilization".[8] The French sculptor Auguste Rodin said, "Compare me with Rembrandt! What sacrilege! With Rembrandt, the colossus of Art! We should prostrate ourselves before Rembrandt and never compare anyone with him!"[9]

Contents

1 Life
2 Works

2.1 Periods, themes and styles
2.2 Graphic works
2.3 Oriental inspiration
2.4 The Night Watch


3 Expert assessments
4 Painting materials
5 Name and signature
6 Workshop
7 Museum collections
8 Influence and recognition

8.1 Rembrandt and the Jewish world
8.2 Criticism of Rembrandt
8.3 In popular culture
8.4 Works about Rembrandt

8.4.1 Literary works (e.g. poetry and fiction)
8.4.2 Films




9 Selected works
10 Exhibitions
11 Paintings

11.1 Self-portraits
11.2 Other paintings


12 Drawings and etchings
13 Notes
14 References

14.1 Works cited


15 Further reading
16 External links


Life[edit]
Rembrandt[a] Harmenszoon van Rijn was born on 15 July, 1606 in Leiden,[1] in the Dutch Republic, now the Netherlands. He was the ninth child born to Harmen Gerritszoon van Rijn and Neeltgen Willemsdochter van Zuijtbrouck.[11] His family was quite well-to-do; his father was a miller and his mother was a baker's daughter. Religion is a central theme in Rembrandt's works and the religiously fraught period in which he lived makes his faith a matter of interest. His mother was Catholic, and his father belonged to the Dutch Reformed Church. While his work reveals deep Christian faith, there is no evidence that Rembrandt formally belonged to any church, though some scholars, such as Hendrik Willem van Loon, suggest he may have been Mennonite,[12] and five of his children were christened in Dutch Reformed churches in Amsterdam: four in the Oude Kerk (Old Church) and one, Titus, in the Zuiderkerk (Southern Church).[13]
As a boy, he attended Latin school. At the age of 13, he was enrolled at the University of Leiden, although according to a contemporary he had a greater inclination towards painting; he was soon apprenticed to a Leiden history painter, Jacob van Swanenburg, with whom he spent three years.[14] After a brief but important apprenticeship of six months with the painter Pieter Lastman in Amsterdam, Rembrandt stayed a few months with Jacob Pynas and then started his own workshop, though Simon van Leeuwen claimed that Joris van Schooten taught Rembrandt in Leiden.[14][15] Unlike many of his contemporaries who traveled to Italy as part of their artistic training, Rembrandt never left the Dutch Republic during his lifetime.[16][17]

 Portrait of Saskia van Uylenburgh, c. 1635
He opened a studio in Leiden in 1624 or 1625, which he shared with friend and colleague Jan Lievens. In 1627, Rembrandt began to accept students, which included Gerrit Dou in 1628.[18]
In 1629, Rembrandt was discovered by the statesman Constantijn Huygens (father of the Dutch mathematician and physicist Christiaan Huygens), who procured for Rembrandt important commissions from the court of The Hague. As a result of this connection, Prince Frederik Hendrik continued to purchase paintings from Rembrandt until 1646.[19]
At the end of 1631, Rembrandt moved to Amsterdam, a city rapidly expanding as the new business capital of the Netherlands. He began to practice as a professional portraitist for the first time, with great success. He initially stayed with an art dealer, Hendrick van Uylenburgh, and in 1634, married Hendrick's cousin, Saskia van Uylenburgh.[20][21] Saskia came from a good family: her father had been a lawyer and the burgemeester (mayor) of Leeuwarden. When Saskia, as the youngest daughter, became an orphan, she lived with an older sister in Het Bildt. Rembrandt and Saskia were married in the local church of St. Annaparochie without the presence of Rembrandt's relatives.[22] In the same year, Rembrandt became a burgess of Amsterdam and a member of the local guild of painters. He also acquired a number of students, among them Ferdinand Bol and Govert Flinck.[23]
In 1635, Rembrandt and Saskia moved into their own house, renting in fashionable Nieuwe Doelenstraat with a view on the Amstel river. In 1639 they moved to a prominent newly built house (now the Rembrandt House Museum) in the upscale 'Breestraat' (eng.: 'Broadway'), today known as Jodenbreestraat in what was becoming the Jewish quarter; then a young upcoming neighborhood. The mortgage to finance the 13,000 guilder purchase would be a primary cause for later financial difficulties.[23] Rembrandt should easily have been able to pay the house off with his large income, but it appears his spending always kept pace with his income, and he may have made some unsuccessful investments.[24] It was there that Rembrandt frequently sought his Jewish neighbors to model for his Old Testament scenes.[25] Although they were by now affluent, the couple suffered several personal setbacks; their son Rumbartus died two months after his birth in 1635 and their daughter Cornelia died at just three weeks of age in 1638. In 1640, they had a second daughter, also named Cornelia, who died after living barely over a month. Only their fourth child, Titus, who was born in 1641, survived into adulthood. Saskia died in 1642 soon after Titus's birth, probably from tuberculosis. Rembrandt's drawings of her on her sick and death bed are among his most moving works.[26]

 Rembrandt's son Titus, as a monk, 1660
During Saskia's illness, Geertje Dircx was hired as Titus' caretaker and nurse and also became Rembrandt's lover. She would later charge Rembrandt with breach of promise (a euphemism for seduction under [breached] promise to marry) and was awarded alimony of 200 guilders a year.[23] Rembrandt worked to have her committed to an asylum or poorhouse (called a "bridewell") at Gouda, after learning she had pawned jewelry he had given her that once belonged to Saskia.[27]
In the late 1640s Rembrandt began a relationship with the much younger Hendrickje Stoffels, who had initially been his maid. In 1654 they had a daughter, Cornelia, bringing Hendrickje a summons from the Reformed Church to answer the charge "that she had committed the acts of a whore with Rembrandt the painter". She admitted this and was banned from receiving communion. Rembrandt was not summoned to appear for the Church council because he was not a member of the Reformed Church.[28] The two were considered legally wed under common law, but Rembrandt had not married Hendrickje. Had he remarried he would have lost access to a trust set up for Titus in Saskia's will.[26]
Rembrandt lived beyond his means, buying art (including bidding up his own work), prints (often used in his paintings) and rarities, which probably caused a court arrangement (cessio bonorum) to avoid his bankruptcy in 1656, by selling most of his paintings and large collection of antiquities, but was allowed to keep his tools. The sale list survives and gives a good insight into Rembrandt's collections, which, apart from Old Master paintings and drawings, included busts of the Roman emperors, suits of Japanese armor among many objects from Asia, and collections of natural history and minerals. But the prices realized in the sales in 1657 and 1658 were disappointing.[29] Rembrandt was forced to sell his house and his printing-press and move to more modest accommodation on the Rozengracht in 1660.[30] The authorities and his creditors were generally accommodating to him, except for the Amsterdam painters' guild, which introduced a new rule that no one in Rembrandt's circumstances could trade as a painter. To get around this, Hendrickje and Titus set up a dummy corporation as art dealers in 1660, with Rembrandt as an employee.[31]

 Rembrandt Memorial Marker Westerkerk Amsterdam
In 1661 Rembrandt (or rather the new business) was contracted to complete work for the newly built city hall, but only after Govert Flinck, the artist previously commissioned, died without beginning to paint. The resulting work, The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis, was rejected and returned to the painter; the surviving fragment is only a fraction of the whole work.[32] It was around this time that Rembrandt took on his last apprentice, Aert de Gelder. In 1662 he was still fulfilling major commissions for portraits and other works.[33] In 1662 one of Rembrandt's creditors went to the High Court (Hof van Holland) to contest that Titus had to be paid first.[34] Isaac van Hertsbeeck lost twice and had to pay the money he had already received to Titus, which he did in 1668.[35] When Cosimo III de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany came to Amsterdam in 1667, he visited Rembrandt at his house.[36]
Rembrandt outlived both Hendrickje, who died in 1663, and Titus, who died in 1668, leaving a baby daughter. He died within a year of his son, on 4 October 1669 in Amsterdam, and was buried as a supposedly rich man as the heirs paid in burial taxes a substantial amount of money, f 15.[37] but in a paupers grave in the Westerkerk. It was in a numbered 'kerkgraf' (grave owned by the church) somewhere under a tombstone in the church. After twenty years, his remains were taken away and destroyed, as was customary.

Works[edit]
See also: List of paintings by Rembrandt, List of etchings by Rembrandt, and List of drawings by Rembrandt
In a letter to Huygens, Rembrandt offered the only surviving explanation of what he sought to achieve through his art: the greatest and most natural movement, translated from de meeste en de natuurlijkste beweegelijkheid. The word "beweegelijkheid" is also argued to mean "emotion" or "motive". Whether this refers to objectives, material or otherwise, is open to interpretation; either way, critics have drawn particular attention to the way Rembrandt seamlessly melded the earthly and spiritual.[38]

 Rembrandt's only known seascape, The Storm on the Sea of Galilee, 1633. The painting is still missing after the robbery from the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in 1990.
Earlier-20th-century connoisseurs claimed Rembrandt had produced well over 600 paintings,[39] nearly 400 etchings and 2,000 drawings.[40] More recent scholarship, from the 1960s to the present day (led by the Rembrandt Research Project), often controversially, has winnowed his oeuvre to nearer 300 paintings.[b] His prints, traditionally all called etchings, although many are produced in whole or part by engraving and sometimes drypoint, have a much more stable total of slightly under 300.[c] It is likely Rembrandt made many more drawings in his lifetime than 2,000, but those extant are more rare than presumed.[d] Two experts claim that the number of drawings whose autograph status can be regarded as effectively "certain" is no higher than about 75, although this is disputed. The list was to be unveiled at a scholarly meeting in February 2010.[43]
At one time about ninety paintings were counted as Rembrandt self-portraits, but it is now known that he had his students copy his own self-portraits as part of their training. Modern scholarship has reduced the autograph count to over forty paintings, as well as a few drawings and thirty-one etchings, which include many of the most remarkable images of the group.[44] Some show him posing in quasi-historical fancy dress, or pulling faces at himself. His oil paintings trace the progress from an uncertain young man, through the dapper and very successful portrait-painter of the 1630s, to the troubled but massively powerful portraits of his old age. Together they give a remarkably clear picture of the man, his appearance and his psychological make-up, as revealed by his richly weathered face.[e]

 A Polish Nobleman, 1637
In his portraits and self-portraits, he angles the sitter's face in such a way that the ridge of the nose nearly always forms the line of demarcation between brightly illuminated and shadowy areas. A Rembrandt face is a face partially eclipsed; and the nose, bright and obvious, thrusting into the riddle of halftones, serves to focus the viewer's attention upon, and to dramatize, the division between a flood of light—an overwhelming clarity—and a brooding duskiness.[45]
In a number of biblical works, including The Raising of the Cross, Joseph Telling His Dreams and The Stoning of Saint Stephen, Rembrandt painted himself as a character in the crowd. Durham suggests that this was because the Bible was for Rembrandt "a kind of diary, an account of moments in his own life".[46]
Among the more prominent characteristics of Rembrandt's work are his use of chiaroscuro, the theatrical employment of light and shadow derived from Caravaggio, or, more likely, from the Dutch Caravaggisti, but adapted for very personal means.[47] Also notable are his dramatic and lively presentation of subjects, devoid of the rigid formality that his contemporaries often displayed, and a deeply felt compassion for mankind, irrespective of wealth and age. His immediate family—his wife Saskia, his son Titus and his common-law wife Hendrickje—often figured prominently in his paintings, many of which had mythical, biblical or historical themes.

Periods, themes and styles[edit]
Throughout his career Rembrandt took as his primary subjects the themes of portraiture, landscape and narrative painting. For the last, he was especially praised by his contemporaries, who extolled him as a masterly interpreter of biblical stories for his skill in representing emotions and attention to detail.[48] Stylistically, his paintings progressed from the early "smooth" manner, characterized by fine technique in the portrayal of illusionistic form, to the late "rough" treatment of richly variegated paint surfaces, which allowed for an illusionism of form suggested by the tactile quality of the paint itself.[49]

 The Abduction of Europa, 1632. Oil on panel. The work has been described as "...a shining example of the 'golden age' of Baroque painting".[50]
A parallel development may be seen in Rembrandt's skill as a printmaker. In the etchings of his maturity, particularly from the late 1640s onward, the freedom and breadth of his drawings and paintings found expression in the print medium as well. The works encompass a wide range of subject matter and technique, sometimes leaving large areas of white paper to suggest space, at other times employing complex webs of line to produce rich dark tones.[51]
It was during Rembrandt's Leiden period (1625–1631) that Lastman's influence was most prominent. It is also likely that at this time Lievens had a strong impact on his work as well.[52] Paintings were rather small, but rich in details (for example, in costumes and jewelry). Religious and allegorical themes were favored, as were tronies.[52] In 1626 Rembrandt produced his first etchings, the wide dissemination of which would largely account for his international fame.[52] In 1629 he completed Judas Repentant, Returning the Pieces of Silver and The Artist in His Studio, works that evidence his interest in the handling of light and variety of paint application, and constitute the first major progress in his development as a painter.[53]

 A typical portrait from 1634, when Rembrandt was enjoying great commercial success
During his early years in Amsterdam (1632–1636), Rembrandt began to paint dramatic biblical and mythological scenes in high contrast and of large format (The Blinding of Samson, 1636, Belshazzar's Feast, c. 1635 Danaë, 1636 but reworked later), seeking to emulate the baroque style of Rubens.[54] With the occasional help of assistants in Uylenburgh's workshop, he painted numerous portrait commissions both small (Jacob de Gheyn III) and large (Portrait of the Shipbuilder Jan Rijcksen and his Wife, 1633, Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp, 1632).[55]
By the late 1630s Rembrandt had produced a few paintings and many etchings of landscapes. Often these landscapes highlighted natural drama, featuring uprooted trees and ominous skies (Cottages before a Stormy Sky, c. 1641; The Three Trees, 1643). From 1640 his work became less exuberant and more sober in tone, possibly reflecting personal tragedy. Biblical scenes were now derived more often from the New Testament than the Old Testament, as had been the case before. In 1642 he painted The Night Watch, the most substantial of the important group portrait commissions which he received in this period, and through which he sought to find solutions to compositional and narrative problems that had been attempted in previous works.[56]

 Self Portrait, 1658, Frick Collection, a masterpiece of the final style, "the calmest and grandest of all his portraits"[57]
In the decade following the Night Watch, Rembrandt's paintings varied greatly in size, subject, and style. The previous tendency to create dramatic effects primarily by strong contrasts of light and shadow gave way to the use of frontal lighting and larger and more saturated areas of color. Simultaneously, figures came to be placed parallel to the picture plane. These changes can be seen as a move toward a classical mode of composition and, considering the more expressive use of brushwork as well, may indicate a familiarity with Venetian art (Susanna and the Elders, 1637–47).[58]
At the same time, there was a marked decrease in painted works in favor of etchings and drawings of landscapes.[59] In these graphic works natural drama eventually made way for quiet Dutch rural scenes.
In the 1650s, Rembrandt's style changed again. Colors became richer and brush strokes more pronounced. With these changes, Rembrandt distanced himself from earlier work and current fashion, which increasingly inclined toward fine, detailed works. His use of light becomes more jagged and harsh, and shine becomes almost nonexistent. His singular approach to paint application may have been suggested in part by familiarity with the work of Titian, and could be seen in the context of the then current discussion of 'finish' and surface quality of paintings. Contemporary accounts sometimes remark disapprovingly of the coarseness of Rembrandt's brushwork, and the artist himself was said to have dissuaded visitors from looking too closely at his paintings.[60] The tactile manipulation of paint may hearken to medieval procedures, when mimetic effects of rendering informed a painting's surface. The end result is a richly varied handling of paint, deeply layered and often apparently haphazard, which suggests form and space in both an illusory and highly individual manner.[61]
In later years biblical themes were still depicted often, but emphasis shifted from dramatic group scenes to intimate portrait-like figures (James the Apostle, 1661). In his last years, Rembrandt painted his most deeply reflective self-portraits (from 1652 to 1669 he painted fifteen), and several moving images of both men and women (The Jewish Bride, c. 1666)—in love, in life, and before God.[62][63]

Graphic works[edit]
 The Hundred Guilder Print, c. 1647–49, etching, drypoint and burin on Japan paper, National Museum of Western Art.
Rembrandt produced etchings for most of his career, from 1626 to 1660, when he was forced to sell his printing-press and practically abandoned etching. Only the troubled year of 1649 produced no dated work.[64] He took easily to etching and, though he also learned to use a burin and partly engraved many plates, the freedom of etching technique was fundamental to his work. He was very closely involved in the whole process of printmaking, and must have printed at least early examples of his etchings himself. At first he used a style based on drawing, but soon moved to one based on painting, using a mass of lines and numerous bitings with the acid to achieve different strengths of line. Towards the end of the 1630s, he reacted against this manner and moved to a simpler style, with fewer bitings.[65] He worked on the so-called Hundred Guilder Print in stages throughout the 1640s, and it was the "critical work in the middle of his career", from which his final etching style began to emerge.[66]
Although the print only survives in two states, the first very rare, evidence of much reworking can be seen underneath the final print and many drawings survive for elements of it.[67]

 The Three Trees, 1643, etching
In the mature works of the 1650s, Rembrandt was more ready to improvise on the plate and large prints typically survive in several states, up to eleven, often radically changed. He now used hatching to create his dark areas, which often take up much of the plate. He also experimented with the effects of printing on different kinds of paper, including Japanese paper, which he used frequently, and on vellum. He began to use "surface tone," leaving a thin film of ink on parts of the plate instead of wiping it completely clean to print each impression. He made more use of drypoint, exploiting, especially in landscapes, the rich fuzzy burr that this technique gives to the first few impressions.[68]
His prints have similar subjects to his paintings, although the twenty-seven self-portraits are relatively more common, and portraits of other people less so. There are forty-six landscapes, mostly small, which largely set the course for the graphic treatment of landscape until the end of the 19th century. One third of his etchings are of religious subjects, many treated with a homely simplicity, whilst others are his most monumental prints. A few erotic, or just obscene, compositions have no equivalent in his paintings.[69] He owned, until forced to sell it, a magnificent collection of prints by other artists, and many borrowings and influences in his work can be traced to artists as diverse as Mantegna, Raphael, Hercules Seghers, and Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione.
Drawings by Rembrandt and his pupils/followers have been extensively studied by many artists and scholars[f] through the centuries. His original draughtsmanship has been described as an individualistic art style that was very similar to East Asian old masters, most notably Chinese masters:[76] a "combination of formal clarity and calligraphic vitality in the movement of pen or brush that is closer to Chinese painting in technique and feeling than to anything in European art before the twentieth century".[77]

Oriental inspiration[edit]
Main article: Rembrandt's Mughal drawings
 Rembrandt drawing of an Indian Mughal painting
 Role-playing in self-portrait as an oriental potentate with a kris/keris, a Javanese blade weapon from the VOC era (etching, c. 1634)
Rembrandt was interested in Mughal miniatures, especially around the 1650s. He drew versions of some 23 Mughal paintings, and may have owned an album of them. These miniatures include paintings of Shah Jahan, Akbar, Jahangir and Dara Shikoh. They may also have influenced the costumes and other aspects of his works.[78][79][80][81]

The Night Watch[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: The Night Watch
 The Night Watch or The Militia Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq, 1642. Oil on canvas; on display at the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
Rembrandt painted the large painting The Militia Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq between 1640 and 1642. This picture was called De Nachtwacht by the Dutch and The Night Watch by Sir Joshua Reynolds because by the 18th century the picture was so dimmed and defaced that it was almost indistinguishable, and it looked quite like a night scene. After it was cleaned, it was discovered to represent broad day—a party of musketeers stepping from a gloomy courtyard into the blinding sunlight.
The piece was commissioned for the new hall of the Kloveniersdoelen, the musketeer branch of the civic militia. Rembrandt departed from convention, which ordered that such genre pieces should be stately and formal, rather a line-up than an action scene. Instead he showed the militia readying themselves to embark on a mission (what kind of mission, an ordinary patrol or some special event, is a matter of debate).
Contrary to what is often said, the work was hailed as a success from the beginning. Parts of the canvas were cut off (approximately 20% from the left hand side was removed) to make the painting fit its new position when it was moved to Amsterdam town hall in 1715; the Rijksmuseum has a smaller copy of what is thought to be the full original composition; the four figures in the front are at the centre of the canvas. The painting is now in the Rijksmuseum.

Expert assessments[edit]
See also: Rembrandt catalog raisonné, 1968
 The Polish Rider – Possibly a Lisowczyk on horseback
In 1968 the Rembrandt Research Project began under the sponsorship of the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Scientific Research; it was initially expected to last a highly optimistic ten years. Art historians teamed up with experts from other fields to reassess the authenticity of works attributed to Rembrandt, using all methods available, including state-of-the-art technical diagnostics, and to compile a complete new catalogue raisonné of his paintings. As a result of their findings, many paintings that were previously attributed to Rembrandt have been removed from their list, although others have been added back.[82] Many of those removed are now thought to be the work of his students.
One example of activity is The Polish Rider, in New York's Frick Collection. Rembrandt's authorship had been questioned by at least one scholar, Alfred von Wurzbach, at the beginning of the twentieth century, but for many decades later most scholars, including the foremost authority writing in English, Julius S. Held, agreed that it was indeed by the master. In the 1980s, however, Dr. Josua Bruyn of the Foundation Rembrandt Research Project cautiously and tentatively attributed the painting to one of Rembrandt's closest and most talented pupils, Willem Drost, about whom little is known. But Bruyn's remained a minority opinion, the suggestion of Drost's authorship is now generally rejected, and the Frick itself never changed its own attribution, the label still reading "Rembrandt" and not "attributed to" or "school of". More recent opinion has shifted even more decisively in favor of the Frick, with Simon Schama (in his 1999 book Rembrandt's Eyes) and the Rembrandt Project scholar Ernst van de Wetering (Melbourne Symposium, 1997) both arguing for attribution to the master. Those few scholars who still question Rembrandt's authorship feel that the execution is uneven, and favour different attributions for different parts of the work.[83]

 The Man with the Golden Helmet, Gemäldegalerie, Berlin, once one of the most famous "Rembrandt" portraits, is no longer attributed to the master.[84]
A similar issue was raised by Simon Schama in his book Rembrandt's Eyes concerning the verification of titles associated with the subject matter depicted in Rembrandt's works. For example, the exact subject being portrayed in Aristotle with a Bust of Homer (recently retitled by curators at the Metropolitan Museum) has been directly challenged by Schama applying the scholarship of Paul Crenshaw.[85] Schama presents a substantial argument that it was the famous ancient Greek painter Apelles who is depicted in contemplation by Rembrandt and not Aristotle.[86]
Another painting, Pilate Washing His Hands, is also of questionable attribution. Critical opinion of this picture has varied since 1905, when Wilhelm von Bode described it as "a somewhat abnormal work" by Rembrandt. Scholars have since dated the painting to the 1660s and assigned it to an anonymous pupil, possibly Aert de Gelder. The composition bears superficial resemblance to mature works by Rembrandt but lacks the master's command of illumination and modeling.[87]
The attribution and re-attribution work is ongoing. In 2005 four oil paintings previously attributed to Rembrandt's students were reclassified as the work of Rembrandt himself: Study of an Old Man in Profile and Study of an Old Man with a Beard from a US private collection, Study of a Weeping Woman, owned by the Detroit Institute of Arts, and Portrait of an Elderly Woman in a White Bonnet, painted in 1640.[88] The Old Man Sitting in a Chair is a further example: in 2014, Professor Ernst van de Wetering offered his view to The Guardian that the demotion of the 1652 painting Old Man Sitting in a Chair "was a vast mistake...it is a most important painting. The painting needs to be seen in terms of Rembrandt's experimentation". This was highlighted much earlier by Nigel Konstam who studied Rembrandt throughout his career.[89]
Rembrandt's own studio practice is a major factor in the difficulty of attribution, since, like many masters before him, he encouraged his students to copy his paintings, sometimes finishing or retouching them to be sold as originals, and sometimes selling them as authorized copies. Additionally, his style proved easy enough for his most talented students to emulate. Further complicating matters is the uneven quality of some of Rembrandt's own work, and his frequent stylistic evolutions and experiments.[90] As well, there were later imitations of his work, and restorations which so seriously damaged the original works that they are no longer recognizable.[91] It is highly likely that there will never be universal agreement as to what does and what does not constitute a genuine Rembrandt.

Painting materials[edit]
 Saskia as Flora, 1635
Technical investigation of Rembrandt's paintings in the possession of the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister[92] and in the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister (Kassel)[93] was conducted by Hermann Kühn in 1977. The pigment analyses of some thirty paintings have shown that Rembrandt's palette consisted of the following pigments: lead white, various ochres, Vandyke brown, bone black, charcoal black, lamp black, vermilion, madder lake, azurite, ultramarine, yellow lake and lead-tin-yellow. One painting (Saskia van Uylenburgh as Flora)[94] reportedly contains gamboge. Rembrandt very rarely used pure blue or green colors, the most pronounced exception being Belshazzar's Feast[95][96] in the National Gallery in London. The book by Bomford[95] describes more recent technical investigations and pigment analyses of Rembrandt's paintings predominantly in the National Gallery in London. The entire array of pigments employed by Rembrandt can be found at ColourLex.[97] The best source for technical information on Rembrandt's paintings on the web is the Rembrandt Database containing all works of Rembrandt with detailed investigative reports, infrared and radiography images and other scientific details.[98]

Name and signature[edit]
 Slaughtered Ox (1655), Musée du Louvre, Paris
"Rembrandt" is a modification of the spelling of the artist's first name that he introduced in 1633. "Harmenszoon" indicates that his father's name is Harmen. "van Rijn" indicates that his family lived near the Rhine.[99]
Roughly speaking, his earliest signatures (c. 1625) consisted of an initial "R", or the monogram "RH" (for Rembrant Harmenszoon), and starting in 1629, "RHL" (the "L" stood, presumably, for Leiden). In 1632, he used this monogram early in the year, then added his family name to it, "RHL-van Rijn", but replaced this form in that same year and began using his first name alone with its original spelling, "Rembrant". In 1633 he added a "d", and maintained this form consistently from then on, proving that this minor change had a meaning for him (whatever it might have been). This change is purely visual; it does not change the way his name is pronounced. Curiously enough, despite the large number of paintings and etchings signed with this modified first name, most of the documents that mentioned him during his lifetime retained the original "Rembrant" spelling. (Note: the rough chronology of signature forms above applies to the paintings, and to a lesser degree to the etchings; from 1632, presumably, there is only one etching signed "RHL-v. Rijn," the large-format "Raising of Lazarus," B 73).[100] His practice of signing his work with his first name, later followed by Vincent van Gogh, was probably inspired by Raphael, Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo who, then as now, were referred to by their first names alone.[101]

Workshop[edit]
Rembrandt ran a large workshop and had many pupils. The list of Rembrandt pupils from his period in Leiden as well as his time in Amsterdam is quite long, mostly because his influence on painters around him was so great that it is difficult to tell whether someone worked for him in his studio or just copied his style for patrons eager to acquire a Rembrandt. A partial list should include[102] Ferdinand Bol,
Adriaen Brouwer,
Gerrit Dou,
Willem Drost,
Heiman Dullaart,
Gerbrand van den Eeckhout,
Carel Fabritius,
Govert Flinck,
Hendrick Fromantiou,
Aert de Gelder,
Samuel Dirksz van Hoogstraten,
Abraham Janssens,
Godfrey Kneller,
Philip de Koninck,
Jacob Levecq,
Nicolaes Maes,
Jürgen Ovens,
Christopher Paudiß,
Willem de Poorter,
Jan Victors, and
Willem van der Vliet.

Museum collections[edit]
 Rembrandt House Museum
The most notable collections of Rembrandt's work are at Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum, including The Night Watch and The Jewish Bride, the Mauritshuis in The Hague, the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, the National Gallery in London, Gemäldegalerie in Berlin, Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden, The Louvre, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, and Schloss Wilhelmshöhe in Kassel. The Royal Castle in Warsaw displays two paintings by Rembrandt.[103]
Notable collections of Rembrandt's paintings in the United States are housed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Frick Collection in New York City, the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, and J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles.[104]
The Rembrandt House Museum in central Amsterdam in the house he bought at the height of his success, has furnishings that are mostly not original, but period pieces comparable to those Rembrandt might have had, and paintings reflecting Rembrandt's use of the house for art dealing. His printmaking studio has been set up with a printing press, where replica prints are printed. The museum has a few Rembrandt paintings, many loaned, but an important collection of his prints, a good selection of which are on rotating display. All major print rooms have large collections of Rembrandt prints, although as some exist in only a single impression, no collection is complete. The degree to which these collections are displayed to the public, or can easily be viewed by them in the print room, varies greatly.

Influence and recognition[edit]
Further information: Old master print, Etching Revival, Rembrandt Research Project, List of things named after Rembrandt van Rijn, List of works about Rembrandt, List of Rembrandt pupils, and List of Rembrandt connoisseurs and scholars
 Rembrandt statue and the sculptures of The Night Watch in 3D at the Rembrandtplein in Amsterdam
[...] I maintain that it did not occur to Protogenes, Apelles or Parrhasius, nor could it occur to them were they return to earth that (I am amazed simply to report this) a youth, a Dutchman, a beardless miller, could bring together so much in one human figure and express what is universal. All honor to thee, my Rembrandt! To have carried Illium, indeed all Asia, to Italy is a lesser achievement than to have brought the laurels of Greece and Italy to Holland, the achievement of a Dutchman who has seldom ventured outside the walls of his native city...— Constantijn Huygens, Lord of Zuilichem, possibly the earliest known notable Rembrandt connoisseur and critic, 1629. Excerpt from the manuscript Autobiography of Constantijn Huygens (Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag), originally published in Oud Holland (1891), translated from the Dutch.[105]
 Rembrandt statue in Leiden
Rembrandt is one of the most famous[106][107] and the best expertly researched visual artists in history.[108][109] His life and art have long attracted the attention of interdisciplinary scholarship such as art history, socio-political history,[110] cultural history,[111] education, humanities, philosophy and aesthetics,[112] psychology, sociology, literary studies,[113] anatomy,[114] medicine,[115] religious studies,[g][116] theology,[117] Jewish studies,[118] Oriental studies (Asian studies),[119] global studies,[120] and art market research.[121] He has been the subject of a vast amount of literature in genres of both fiction and nonfiction. Research and scholarship related to Rembrandt is an academic field in its own right with many notable connoisseurs and scholars[122] and has been very dynamic since the Dutch Golden Age.[108][123][109]

According to art historian and Rembrandt scholar Stephanie Dickey: [Rembrandt] earned international renown as a painter, printmaker, teacher, and art collector while never leaving the Dutch Republic. In his home city of Leiden and in Amsterdam, where he worked for nearly forty years, he mentored generations of other painters and produced a body of work that has never ceased to attract admiration, critique, and interpretation. (...) Rembrandt's art is a key component in any study of the Dutch Golden Age, and his membership in the canon of artistic genius is well established, but he is also a figure whose significance transcends specialist interest. Literary critics have pondered "Rembrandt" as a "cultural text"; novelists, playwrights, and filmmakers have romanticized his life, and in popular culture, his name has become synonymous with excellence for products and services, ranging from toothpaste to self-help advice.[109]
 In 1775, a 25-year-old Johann Wolfgang von Goethe wrote in a letter that "I live wholly with Rembrandt" ("...ich zeichne, künstle p. Und lebe ganz mit Rembrandt."). At the age of 81 (1831), Goethe wrote the essay "Rembrandt der Denker" ("Rembrandt the Thinker"), published in the posthumous collection of his works.[124][125]
Francisco Goya, often considered to be among the last of the Old Masters, said, "I have had three masters: Nature, Velázquez, and Rembrandt." ("Yo no he tenido otros maestros que la Naturaleza, Velázquez y Rembrandt.")[126][127][128] In the history of the reception and interpretation of Rembrandt's art, it was the significant Rembrandt-inspired 'revivals' or 'rediscoveries' in 18th–19th century France,[129][130] Germany,[131][132][133] and Britain[134][135][136][137] that decisively helped in establishing his lasting fame in subsequent centuries.[138] When a critic referred to Auguste Rodin's busts in the same vein as Rembrandt's portraits, the French sculptor responded: "Compare me with Rembrandt? What sacrilege! With Rembrandt, the colossus of Art! What are you thinking of, my friend! We should prostrate ourselves before Rembrandt and never compare anyone with him!”[9] Vincent van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo (1885), "Rembrandt goes so deep into the mysterious that he says things for which there are no words in any language. It is with justice that they call Rembrandt—magician—that's no easy occupation."[139]

Rembrandt and the Jewish world[edit]
See also: History of the Jews in Amsterdam
Although Rembrandt was not Jewish, he has had a considerable influence on many modern Jewish artists, writers and scholars (art critics and art historians in particular).[140][141] The German-Jewish painter Max Liebermann said, "Whenever I see a Frans Hals, I feel like painting; whenever I see a Rembrandt, I feel like giving up."[142] Marc Chagall wrote in 1922, "Neither Imperial Russia, nor the Russia of the Soviets needs me. They don't understand me. I am a stranger to them," and he added, "I'm certain Rembrandt loves me."[143]

 The Jewish Bride, c. 1665–9, Rijksmuseum Amsterdam. In Vincent van Gogh's own words (1885), "I should be happy to give 10 years of my life if I could go on sitting here in front of this picture [The Jewish Bride] fortnight, with only a crust of dry bread for food." In a letter to his brother Theo, Vincent wrote, "What an intimate, what an infinitely sympathetic picture it is,"[144]
It has proved a comfort to me, in this era of European Jewish tragedy, to dwell upon the life and work of Rembrandt. Here was a man of Germanic ancestry who did not regard the Jews in the Holland of his day as a "misfortune," but approached them with friendly sentiments, dwelt in their midst, and portrayed their personalities and ways of life. Rembrandt, moreover, regarded the Bible as the greatest Book in the world and held it in reverent affection all his life, in affluence and poverty, in success and failure. He never wearied in his devotion to biblical themes as subjects for his paintings and other graphic presentations, and in these portrayals he was the first to have the courage to use the Jews of his environment as models for the heroes of the sacred narratives.— Franz Landsberger, a German Jewish émigré to America, the author of Rembrandt, the Jews, and the Bible (1946)[145][146]
Criticism of Rembrandt[edit]
Rembrandt has also been one of the most controversial (visual) artists in history.[108][147] Several of Rembrandt's notable critics include Constantijn Huygens, Joachim von Sandrart,[148] Andries Pels (who called Rembrandt "the first heretic in the art of painting"),[149] Samuel van Hoogstraten, Arnold Houbraken,[148] Filippo Baldinucci,[148] Gerard de Lairesse, Roger de Piles, John Ruskin,[150] and Eugène Fromentin.[147]

By 1875 Rembrandt was already a powerful figure, projecting from historical past into the present with such a strength that he could not be simply overlooked or passed by. The great shadow of the old master required a decided attitude. A late Romantic painter and critic, like Fromentin was, if he happened not to like some of Rembrandt's pictures, he felt obliged to justify his feeling. The greatness of the dramatic old master was for artists of about 1875 not a matter for doubt. 'Either I am wrong', Fromentin wrote from Holland 'or everybody else is wrong'. When Fromentin realized his inability to like some of the works by Rembrandt he formulated the following comments: 'I even do not dare to write down such a blasphemy; I would get ridiculed if this is disclosed'. Only about twenty-five years earlier another French Romantic master Eugène Delacroix, when expressing his admiration for Rembrandt, has written in his Journal a very different statement: '... perhaps one day we will discover that Rembrandt is a much greater painter than Raphael. It is a blasphemy which would make hair raise on the heads of all the academic painters'. In 1851 the blasphemy was to put Rembrandt above Raphael. In 1875 the blasphemy was not to admire everything Rembrandt had ever produced. Between these two dates, the appreciation of Rembrandt reached its turning point and since that time he was never deprived of the high rank in the art world.— Rembrandt scholar Jan Białostocki (1972)[147]
In popular culture[edit]
See also: Category:Cultural depictions of Rembrandt
[...] One thing that really surprises me is the extent to which Rembrandt exists as a phenomenon in pop culture. You have this musical group call [sic] the Rembrandts, who wrote the theme song to Friends—"I'll Be There For You". There are Rembrandt restaurants, Rembrandt hotels, art supplies and other things that are more obvious. But then there's Rembrandt toothpaste. Why on Earth would somebody name a toothpaste after this artist who's known for his really dark tonalities? It doesn't make a lot of sense. But I think it's because his name has become synonymous with quality. It's even a verb—there's a term in underworld slang, 'to be Rembrandted,' which means to be framed for a crime. And people in the cinema world use it to mean pictorial effects that are overdone. He's just everywhere, and people who don't know anything, who wouldn't recognize a Rembrandt painting if they tripped over it, you say the name Rembrandt and they already know that this is a great artist. He's become a synonym for greatness.— Rembrandt scholar, Stephanie Dickey, in an interview with Smithsonian Magazine, December 2006[107]
While shooting The Warrens of Virginia (1915), Cecil B. DeMille had experimented with lighting instruments borrowed from a Los Angeles opera house. When business partner Sam Goldwyn saw a scene in which only half an actor's face was illuminated, he feared the exhibitors would pay only half the price for the picture. DeMille remonstrated that it was Rembrandt lighting. "Sam's reply was jubilant with relief," recalled DeMille. "For Rembrandt lighting the exhibitors would pay double!"[151]

Works about Rembrandt[edit]
See also: Category:Works about Rembrandt
Literary works (e.g. poetry and fiction)[edit]
To the Picture of Rembrandt (Russian-language poem by Mikhail Lermontov, 1830)
Gaspard de la nuit: Fantaisies à la manière de Rembrandt et de Callot (French-language prose poems by Aloysius Bertrand, 1842)
Picture This (1988 novel by Joseph Heller)
Moi, la Putain de Rembrandt (French-language novel by Sylvie Matton, 1998)
Van Rijn (2006 novel by Sarah Emily Miano)
I Am Rembrandt's Daughter (2007 novel by Lynn Cullen)
The Rembrandt Affair (2011 novel by Daniel Silva)
The Anatomy Lesson (2014 novel by Nina Siegal)
Rembrandt's Mirror (2015 novel by Kim Devereux)
Films[edit]
The Stolen Rembrandt (1914 film directed by Leo D. Maloney and J.P. McGowan)
The Tragedy of a Great / Die Tragödie eines Großen (1920 film directed by Arthur Günsburg)
The Missing Rembrandt (1932 film directed by Leslie S. Hiscott)
Rembrandt (1936 film directed by Alexander Korda)
Rembrandt (1940 film)
Rembrandt in de schuilkelder / Rembrandt in the Bunker (1941 film directed by Gerard Rutten)
Rembrandt (1942 film directed by Hans Steinhoff)
Rembrandt: A Self-Portrait (1954 documentary film by Morrie Roizman)
Rembrandt, schilder van de mens / Rembrandt, Painter of Man (1957 film directed by Bert Haanstra)
Rembrandt fecit 1669 (1977 film directed by Jos Stelling)
Rembrandt: The Public Eye and the Private Gaze (1992 documentary film by Simon Schama)
Rembrandt (1999 film directed by Charles Matton)
Rembrandt: Fathers & Sons (1999 film directed by David Devine)
Stealing Rembrandt (2003 film directed by Jannik Johansen and Anders Thomas Jensen)
Simon Schama's Power of Art: Rembrandt (2006 BBC documentary film series by Simon Schama)
Nightwatching (2007 film directed by Peter Greenaway)
Rembrandt's J'Accuse (2008 documentary film by Peter Greenaway)
Rembrandt en ik (2011 film directed by Marleen Gorris)
Schama on Rembrandt: Masterpieces of the Late Years (2014 documentary film by Simon Schama)
Rembrandt: From the National Gallery, London and Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam (2014 documentary film by Exhibition on Screen)
Selected works[edit]
 Rembrandt Laughing, 1628, J. Paul Getty Museum
 The Girl in a Picture Frame, 1641, Royal Castle, Warsaw
 The evangelist Matthew and the Angel, 1661
The Stoning of Saint Stephen (1625) – Musée des Beaux-Arts, Lyon
Andromeda Chained to the Rocks (1630) – Mauritshuis, The Hague
Jacob de Gheyn III (1632) – Dulwich Picture Gallery, London
Philosopher in Meditation (1632) – The Louvre, Paris
The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp (1632) – Mauritshuis, The Hague
Artemisia (1634) – oil on canvas, 142 × 152 cm, Museo del Prado, Madrid
Descent from the Cross (1634) – oil on canvas, 158 × 117 cm, looted from the Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), Germany in 1806, currently Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg
Belshazzar's Feast (1635) – National Gallery, London
The Prodigal Son in the Tavern (c. 1635) – oil on canvas, 161 × 131 cm Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister, Dresden
Danaë (1636 – c. 1643) – Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg
The Scholar at the Lectern (1641) – Royal Castle in Warsaw, Warsaw
The Girl in a Picture Frame (1641) – Royal Castle, Warsaw
The Night Watch, formally The Militia Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq (1642) – Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
Christ Healing the Sick (etching c. 1643, also known as the Hundred Guilder Print), nicknamed for the huge sum paid for it
Boaz and Ruth (1643) aka The Old Rabbi or Old Man – Woburn Abbey/Gemaldegalerie, Berlin
The Mill (1645/48) – National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.
Old Man with a Gold Chain ("Old Man with a Black Hat and Gorget") (c. 1631) Art Institute of Chicago
Susanna and the Elders (1647) – oil on panel, 76 × 91 cm, Gemäldegalerie, Berlin
Head of Christ (c. 1648–56) – The Philadelphia Museum of Art[152]
Aristotle Contemplating a Bust of Homer (1653) – Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
Bathsheba at Her Bath (1654) – The Louvre, Paris
Christ Presented to the People (Ecce Homo) (1655) – Drypoint, Birmingham Museum of Art
Selfportrait (1658) – Frick Collection, New York
The Three Crosses (1660) Etching, fourth state
Ahasuerus and Haman at the Feast of Esther (1660) – Pushkin Museum, Moscow
The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis (1661) – Nationalmuseum, Stockholm (Claudius Civilis led a Dutch revolt against the Romans) (most of the cut up painting is lost, only the central part still exists)
Portrait of Dirck van Os (1662) – Joslyn Art Museum, Omaha, Nebraska
Syndics of the Drapers' Guild (Dutch De Staalmeesters, 1662) – Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
The Jewish Bride (1665) – Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
Haman before Esther (1665) – National Museum of Art of Romania, Bucharest [153]
The Entombment Sketch (c. 1639, reworked c. 1654) – oil on oak panel, Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery, Glasgow
Saul and David (c. 1660–1665) – Mauritshuis, The Hague
Portrait of an Old Man (1645) – Calouste Gulbenkian Museum, Lisbon
Pallas Athena (c.1657) – Calouste Gulbenkian Museum, Lisbon
Exhibitions[edit]
 Moving Rembrandt's The Night Watch for the 1898 Rembrandt Exhibition
Sept–Oct 1898: Rembrandt Tentoonstelling (Rembrandt Exhibition), Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.[154]
Jan–Feb 1899: Rembrandt Tentoonstelling (Rembrandt Exhibition), Royal Academy, London, England.[154]
21 April 2011 – 18 July 2011: Rembrandt and the Face of Jesus, Musée du Louvre.[155]
16 September 2013 – 14 November 2013: Rembrandt: The Consummate Etcher, Syracuse University Art Galleries.[156]
19 May 2014 – 27 June 2014: From Rembrandt to Rosenquist: Works on Paper from the NAC's Permanent Collection, National Arts Club.[157]
19 October 2014 – 4 January 2015: Rembrandt, Rubens, Gainsborough and the Golden Age of Painting in Europe, Jule Collins Smith Museum of Art.[158]
15 October 2014 – 18 January 2015: Rembrandt: The Late Works, The National Gallery, London.[159]
12 February 2015 – 17 May 2015: Late Rembrandt, The Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.[160]
16 September 2018 – 6 January 2019: Rembrandt – Painter as Printmaker, Denver Art Museum, Denver.[161]
24 Aug 2019 – 1 December 2019: Leiden circa 1630: Rembrandt Emerges, Agnes Etherington Art Centre, Kingston, Ontario[162]
4 October 2019 – 2 February 2020: Rembrandt's Light, Dulwich Picture Gallery, London[163]
18 February 2020 – 30 August 2020: Rembrandt and Amsterdam portraiture, 1590–1670 , Museo Nacional Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid[164]
10 August 2020 – 1 November 2020: Young Rembrandt, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford[165]
Paintings[edit]
Self-portraits[edit]
Main article: Self-portraits by Rembrandt




A young Rembrandt, c. 1628, when he was 22. Partly an exercise in chiaroscuro. Rijksmuseum






Self-Portrait in a Gorget, c. 1629; Germanisches Nationalmuseum, Nuremberg






Self-portrait, 1630, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm






Self-Portrait with Velvet Beret and Furred Mantle 1634






Self-portrait at the age of 34, 1640, National Gallery, London






Self-Portrait, oil on canvas, 1652. Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna






Self-portrait, Vienna c. 1655, oil on walnut, cut down in size. Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna






Self-Portrait, 1660






Self Portrait as Zeuxis, c. 1662. One of 2 painted self-portraits in which Rembrandt is turned to the left.[166] Wallraf-Richartz Museum, Cologne






Self-Portrait with Two Circles, c.1665–1669. Kenwood House, London






Self-portrait, 1669.






Self-portrait at the age of 63, dated 1669, the year he died. National Gallery, London




Other paintings[edit]




The Stoning of Saint Stephen, 1625, The first painting by Rembrandt, painted at the age of 19.[167] It is currently kept in the Musée des Beaux-Arts de Lyon.






Artist in His Studio, 1628, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston






Bust of an old man with a fur hat, the artist's father, 1630






Jeremiah Lamenting the Destruction of Jerusalem, c. 1630






Andromeda, Circa 1630






The Philosopher in Meditation, 1632






Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp, 1632






Portrait of Aeltje Uylenburgh, 1632, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston






Portrait of Saskia van Uylenburgh, c. 1633–1634






Sacrifice of Isaac, 1635






The Blinding of Samson, 1636, which Rembrandt gave to Huyghens






Susanna, 1636






Belshassar's Feast, 1636-1638






Danaë, 1636 - c. 1643, Hermitage Museum






The Archangel Raphael Leaving Tobias' Family, 1637, Louvre






The Landscape with Good Samaritan, 1638, Czartoryski Museum, Kraków






Scholar at his Writing Table, 1641, Royal Castle, Warsaw






Joseph's Dream, c. 1645






Susanna and the Elders, 1647






The Mill, 1648






An Old Man in Red, 1652–1654






Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, 1653, Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York






Young Girl at the Window, 1654, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm






Portrait of Jan Six, a wealthy friend of Rembrandt, 1654






Bathsheba at Her Bath, modelled by Hendrickje, 1654






A Woman Bathing in a Stream, modelled by Hendrickje, 1654






Pallas Athene, c.1655






The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Deijman, 1656






Jacob Blessing the Sons of Joseph, 1656






Woman in a Doorway, 1657–1658






Ahasuerus and Haman at the Feast of Esther, 1660






Saint Bartholomew, 1661, J. Paul Getty Museum






The Syndics of the Drapers' Guild, 1662






The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis (cut-down), 1661–62






Lucretia, 1666 (Minneapolis Institute of Art)






The Return of the Prodigal Son, detail, c. 1669 - Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg




Drawings and etchings[edit]




Self-portrait, c. 1628–29, pen and brush and ink on paper






Self-portrait in a cap, with eyes wide open, 1630, etching and burin






Seated Old Man (c.1630), red and black chalk on paper, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm






Suzannah and the Elders, 1634, drawing in Sanguine on paper, Kupferstichkabinett Berlin






Self-portrait with Saskia, 1636, etching, Rijksmuseum






An elephant, 1637, drawing in black chalk on paper, Albertina, Austria






Self-portrait leaning on a Sill, 1639, etching, National Gallery of Art






Christ and the woman taken in adultery, c. 1639–41, drawing in ink, Louvre






Beggars I., c. 1640–42, ink on paper, Warsaw University Library






The Windmill, 1641, etching






The Diemerdijk at Houtewael (near Amsterdam), 1648–49, pen and brown ink, brown wash, Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen






The Three Crosses, 1653, drypoint etching, state III of V, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston






Virgin and Child with a Cat, 1654, original copper etching plate above (the original copper plate), in Victoria and Albert Museum, example of the print below






Christ presented to the People, drypoint etching, 1655, state I of VIII, Rijksmuseum






Two Old Men in Conversation /Two Jews in Discussion, Walking, year unknown, black chalk and brown ink on paper, Teylers Museum






A a child being taught to walk (c. 1635). David Hockney said: "I think it's the greatest drawing ever done... It's a magnificent drawing, magnificent."[73]






A young woman sleeping (c. 1654). Shows Rembrandt's calligraphic-style draughtsmanship.[76][77]




Notes[edit]


^ This version of his first name, "Rembrandt" with a "d," first appeared in his signatures in 1633. Until then, he had signed with a combination of initials or monograms. In late 1632, he began signing solely with his first name, "Rembrant". He added the "d" in the following year and stuck to this spelling for the rest of his life. Although scholars can only speculate, this change must have had a meaning for Rembrandt, which is generally interpreted as his wanting to be known by his first name like the great figures of the Italian Renaissance: Leonardo, Raphael etc., who did not sign with their last names, if at all.[10]

^ Useful totals of the figures from various different oeuvre catalogues, often divided into classes along the lines of: "very likely authentic", "possibly authentic" and "unlikely to be authentic" are given at the Online Rembrandt catalogue [41]

^ Two hundred years ago Bartsch listed 375. More recent catalogues have added three (two in unique impressions) and excluded enough to reach totals as follows: Schwartz, p. 6, 289; Münz 1952, 279; Boon 1963, 287 Print Council of America – but Schwartz's total quoted does not tally with the book.

^ It is not possible to give a total, as a new wave of scholarship on Rembrandt drawings is still in progress – analysis of the Berlin collection for an exhibition in 2006/7 has produced a probable drop from 130 sheets there to about 60. Codart.nl [42] The British Museum is due to publish a new catalogue after a similar exercise.

^ While the popular interpretation is that these paintings represent a personal and introspective journey, it is possible that they were painted to satisfy a market for self-portraits by prominent artists. Van de Wetering, p. 290.

^ Such as Otto Benesch,[70][71][72] David Hockney,[73] Nigel Konstam, Jakob Rosenberg, Gary Schwartz, and Seymour Slive.[74][75]

^ It is important to note that Rembrandt's religious affiliation was uncertain. And there is no evidence that Rembrandt formally belonged to any denomination.


References[edit]


^ a b c Or possibly 1607 as on 10 June 1634 he himself claimed to be 26 years old. See Is the Rembrandt Year being celebrated one year too soon? One year too late? Archived 21 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine and (in Dutch) J. de Jong, Rembrandts geboortejaar een jaar te vroeg gevierd Archived 18 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine for sources concerning Rembrandt's birth year, especially supporting 1607. However, most sources continue to use 1606.

^ "Rembrandt" Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.

^ See: list of drawings, prints (etchings), and paintings by Rembrandt.

^ a b Gombrich, p. 420.

^ Gombrich, p. 427.

^ Clark 1969, pp. 203

^ Clark 1969, pp. 203–204

^ Clark 1969, pp. 205

^ a b Rodin, Auguste: Art: Conversations with Paul Gsell. Translated from the French by Jacques de Caso and Patricia B. Sanders. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1984) ISBN 0-520-03819-3, p. 85. Originally published as Auguste Rodin, L'Art: Entretiens réunis par Paul Gsell (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1911). Auguste Rodin: "Me comparer à Rembrandt, quel sacrilège! À Rembrandt, le colosse de l'Art! Y pensez-vous, mon ami! Rembrandt, prosternons-nous et ne mettons jamais personne à côté de lui!” (original in French)

^ "Rembrandt Signature Files". www.rembrandt-signature-file.com. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016.

^ Bull, et al., p. 28.

^ Hendrik Willem van Loon (1930). R. v. R.: the Life and Times of Rembrandt van Rijn. Horace Liveright.

^ "Doopregisters, Zoek" (in Dutch). Stadsarchief.amsterdam.nl. 3 April 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2014.[permanent dead link]

^ a b (in Dutch) Rembrandt biography in De groote schouburgh der Nederlantsche konstschilders en schilderessen (1718) by Arnold Houbraken, courtesy of the Digital library for Dutch literature

^ Joris van Schooten as teacher of Rembrandt and Lievens Archived 26 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine in Simon van Leeuwen's Korte besgryving van het Lugdunum Batavorum nu Leyden, Leiden, 1672

^ Rembrandt biography Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine, nationalgallery.org.uk

^ Erhardt, Michelle A., and Amy M. Morris. 2012. Mary Magdalene, Iconographic Studies from the Middle Ages to the Baroque Archived 8 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Boston : Brill. p. 252. ISBN 978-90-04-23195-5.

^ Slive has a comprehensive biography, pp. 55ff.

^ Slive, pp. 60, 65

^ Slive, pp. 60–61

^ "Netherlands, Noord-Holland Province, Church Records, 1553–1909 Image Netherlands, Noord-Holland Province, Church Records, 1553–1909; pal:/MM9.3.1/TH-1971-31164-16374-68". Familysearch.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016. Retrieved 7 April 2014.

^ Registration of the banns of Rembrandt and Saskia, kept at the Amsterdam City Archives

^ a b c Bull, et al., p. 28

^ Clark, 1978, pp. 26–27, 76, 102

^ Adams, p. 660

^ a b Slive, p. 71

^ Driessen, pp. 151–57

^ Slive, p. 82

^ Slive, p. 84

^ Schwartz, p. 12. The house sale was in 1658, but was agreed with two years for Rembrandt to vacate.

^ Clark, 1974 p. 105

^ Clark 1974, pp. 60–61

^ Bull, et al., p. 29.

^ Ruysscher, D. D., & ’T Veld, C. I. (2021). Rembrandt’s insolvency: The artist as legal actor, Oud Holland–Journal for Art of the Low Countries, 134(1), 9–24. doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/18750176-13401002 Archived 7 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine

^ Wexuan, Li. "Review of: 'Rembrandts plan: De ware geschiedenis van zijn faillissement", Oud Holland Reviews, April 2020.

^ Clark 1978, p. 34

^ Burial register of the Westerkerk with record of Rembrandt's burial, kept at the Amsterdam City Archives

^ Hughes, p. 6

^ "A Web Catalogue of Rembrandt Paintings". 28 July 2012. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012.

^ "Institute Member Login – Institute for the Study of Western Civilization". Archived from the original on 29 September 2007.

^ "A Web Catalogue of Rembrandt Paintings". Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2007.

^ "Rembrandt, der Zeichner". Archived from the original on 27 May 2016. Retrieved 3 October 2007.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ "Schwartzlist 301 – Blog entry by the Rembrandt scholar Gary Schwartz". Garyschwartzarthistorian.nl. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 17 February 2012.

^ White and Buvelot 1999, p. 10.

^ Taylor, Michael (2007).Rembrandt's Nose: Of Flesh & Spirit in the Master's Portraits Archived 5 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine p. 21, D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers, Inc., New York ISBN 978-1-933045-44-3'

^ Durham, p. 60.

^ Bull, et al., pp. 11–13.

^ van der Wetering, p. 268.

^ van de Wetering, pp. 160, 190.

^ Clough, p. 23

^ Ackley, p. 14.

^ a b c van de Wetering, p. 284.

^ van de Wetering, p. 285.

^ van de Wetering, p. 287.

^ van de Wetering, p. 286.

^ van de Wetering, p. 288.

^ Clark 1978, p. 28

^ van de Wetering, pp. 163–65.

^ van de Wetering, p. 289.

^ van de Wetering, pp. 155–65.

^ van de Wetering, pp. 157–58, 190.

^ "In Rembrandt's (late) great portraits we feel face to face with real people, we sense their warmth, their need for sympathy and also their loneliness and suffering. Those keen and steady eyes that we know so well from Rembrandt's self-portraits must have been able to look straight into the human heart." Gombrich, p. 423.

^ "It (The Jewish Bride) is a picture of grown-up love, a marvelous amalgam of richness, tenderness, and trust... the heads which, in their truth, have a spiritual glow that painters influenced by the classical tradition could never achieve." Clark, p. 206.

^ Schwartz, 1994, pp. 8–12

^ White 1969, pp. 5–6

^ White 1969, p. 6

^ White 1969, pp. 6, 9–10

^ White, 1969 pp. 6–7

^ See Schwartz, 1994, where the works are divided by subject, following Bartsch.

^ Benesch, Otto: The Drawings of Rembrandt: First Complete Edition in Six Volumes. (London: Phaidon, 1954–57)

^ Benesch, Otto: Rembrandt as a Draughtsman: An Essay with 115 Illustrations. (London: Phaidon Press, 1960)

^ Benesch, Otto: The Drawings of Rembrandt. A Critical and Chronological Catalogue [2nd ed., 6 vols.]. (London: Phaidon, 1973)

^ a b Lewis, Tim (16 November 2014). "David Hockney: 'When I'm working, I feel like Picasso, I feel I'm 30'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 May 2020. Retrieved 16 June 2020. David Hockney (2014): "There's a drawing by Rembrandt, I think it's the greatest drawing ever done. It's in the British Museum and it's of a family teaching a child to walk, so it's a universal thing, everybody has experienced this or seen it happen. Everybody. I used to print out Rembrandt drawings big and give them to people and say: 'If you find a better drawing send it to me. But if you find a better one it will be by Goya or Michelangelo perhaps.' But I don't think there is one actually. It's a magnificent drawing, magnificent."

^ Slive, Seymour: The Drawings of Rembrandt: A New Study. (London: Thames & Hudson, 2009)

^ Silve, Seymour: The Drawings of Rembrandt. (London: Thames & Hudson, 2019)

^ a b Mendelowitz, Daniel Marcus: Drawing. (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, Inc., 1967), p. 305. As Mendelowitz (1967) noted: "Probably no one has combined to as great a degree as Rembrandt a disciplined exposition of what his eye saw and a love of line as a beautiful thing in itself. His "Winter Landscape" displays the virtuosity of performance of an Oriental master, yet unlike the Oriental calligraphy, it is not based on an established convention of brush performance. It is as personal as handwriting."

^ a b Sullivan, Michael: The Meeting of Eastern and Western Art. (Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989), p. 91

^ Schrader, Stephanie; et al. (eds.): Rembrandt and the Inspiration of India Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine. (Los Angeles, CA: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2018) ISBN 978-1-60606-552-5

^ "Rembrandt and the Inspiration of India (catalogue)" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 October 2019. Retrieved 18 October 2019.

^ "In Paintings: Rembrandt & his Mughal India Inspiration". 3 September 2017. Archived from the original on 23 May 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2018.

^ Ganz, James (2013). Rembrandt's Century. San Francisco, CA: Fine Arts Museum of San Francisco. p. 45. ISBN 978-3-7913-5224-4.

^ "The Rembrandt Research Project: Past, Present, Future" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 August 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2014.

^ See "Further Battles for the 'Lisowczyk' (Polish Rider) by Rembrandt" Zdzislaw Zygulski, Jr., Artibus et Historiae, Vol. 21, No. 41 (2000), pp. 197–205. Also New York Times story Archived 8 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine. There is a book on the subject:Responses to Rembrandt; Who painted the Polish Rider? by Anthony Bailey (New York, 1993)

^ John Russell (1 December 1985). "Art View; In Search of the Real Thing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2017.

^ Schama, Simon (1999). Rembrandt's Eyes. Knopf, p. 720.

^ Schama, pp 582–591.

^ "Rembrandt Pilate Washing His Hands Oil Painting Reproduction". Outpost Art. Archived from the original on 12 January 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2015.

^ "Entertainment | Lost Rembrandt works discovered". BBC News. 23 September 2005. Archived from the original on 22 December 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2009.

^ Brown, Mark (23 May 2014), "Rembrandt expert urges National Gallery to rethink demoted painting", The Guardian, archived from the original on 21 September 2016, retrieved 21 December 2015

^ "...Rembrandt was not always the perfectly consistent, logical Dutchman he was originally anticipated to be." Ackley, p. 13.

^ van de Wetering, p. x.

^ Kühn, Hermann. 'Untersuchungen zu den Pigmenten und Malgründen Rembrandts, durchgeführt an den Gemälden der Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Dresden'(Examination of pigments and grounds used by Rembrandt, analysis carried out on paintings in the Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Dresden), Maltechnik/Restauro, issue 4 (1977): 223–233

^ Kühn, Hermann. 'Untersuchungen zu den Pigmenten und Malgründen Rembrandts, durchgeführt an den Gemälden der Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Kassel' (Examination of pigments and grounds used by Rembrandt, analysis carried out on paintings in the Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Kassel), Maltechnik/Restauro, volume 82 (1976): 25–33

^ Rembrandt, Saskia as Flora Archived 15 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, ColourLex

^ a b Bomford, D. et al., Art in the making: Rembrandt, New edition, Yale University Press, 2006

^ Rembrandt, Belshazzar's Feast, Pigment analysis Archived 7 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine at ColourLex

^ "Resources Rembrandt". ColourLex. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2021.

^ "The Rembrandt Database". Archived from the original on 23 August 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2015.

^ Roberts, Russell. Rembrandt. Mitchell Lane Publishers, 2009. ISBN 978-1-61228-760-7. p. 13.

^ Chronology of his signatures (pdf) Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine with examples. Source: www.rembrandt-signature-file.com

^ Slive, p. 60

^ Rembrandt pupils (under Leraar van) in the RKD

^ "The Lanckoroński Collection – Rembrandt's Paintings". zamek-krolewski.pl. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 20 May 2014. The works of art which Karolina Lanckorońska gave to the Royal Castle in 1994 was one of the most invaluable gift's made in the museum's history.

^ Clark 1974, pp. 147–50. See the catalogue in Further reading for the location of all accepted Rembrandts

^ Binstock, Benjamin: Vermeer's Family Secrets: Genius, Discovery, and the Unknown Apprentice. (New York, NY: Routledge, 2009), p. 330

^ *Golahny, Amy (2001), 'The Use and Misuse of Rembrandt: An Overview of Popular Reception Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine,'. Dutch Crossing: Journal of Low Countries Studies 25(2): 305–322
Solman, Paul (21 June 2004). "Rembrandt's Journey". PBS.org. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Paul Solman (2004): "[Rembrandt] The most famous brand name in western art. In America alone it graces toothpaste, bracelet charms, restaurant and bars, counter-tops and of course the town of Rembrandt, Iowa just halfway around the world from the Rembrandt Hotel in Bangkok, Thailand."
Valiunas, Algis (25 December 2006). "Looking at Rembrandt". The Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2020. Algis Valiunas (2006): "Alongside Leonardo and Michelangelo, Rembrandt is one of the three most famous artists ever, with whom the public is on a first-name basis; and the name Rembrandt has lent the cachet of greatness and the grace of familiarity to sell everything from kitchen countertops to whitening toothpaste to fancy hotels in Bangkok and Knightsbridge."

^ a b Crawford, Amy (12 December 2006). "An Interview with Stephanie Dickey, author of "Rembrandt at 400"". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018.

^ a b c Slive, Seymour: Rembrandt and his Critics, 1630–1730. (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1953)

^ a b c Franits, Wayne (ed.): The Ashgate Research Companion to Dutch Art of the Seventeenth Century. (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2016)

^ *Negri, Antonio: The Savage Anomaly: The Power of Spinoza's Metaphysics and Politics. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1991). Translated from the Italian by Michael Hardt. Originally published as L'anomalia selvaggia. Saggio su potere e potenza in Baruch Spinoza (Milano: Feltrinelli, 1981). Antonio Negri (1981): "Kolakowski, as we will see, has clearly depicted the religious life and the forms of community constructed by the cultured strata of the Dutch bourgeoisie. Spinoza lives in this world, with a vast network of simple and sociable friendships and correspondences. But for certain determinate strata of the bourgeoisie the sweetness of the cultured and sedate life is accompanied, without any contradiction, by an association with a capitalist power ('potestas'), expressed in very mature terms. This is the condition of a Dutch bourgeois man. We could say the same thing for the other genius of that age, Rembrandt van Rijn. On his canvases the power of light is concentrated with intensity on the figures of a bourgeois world in terrific expansion. It is a prosaic but very powerful society, which makes poetry without knowing it because it has the force to do so."
Ahmad, Iftikhar (2008), 'Art in Social Studies: Exploring the World and Ourselves with Rembrandt,'. The Journal of Aesthetic Education 42(2): 19–37
Molyneux, John (5 July 2019). "The Dialectics of Art". Rebelnews.ie. Archived from the original on 30 June 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2020. John Molyneux (2019): "...In short there is a dialectical relationship between art and society. Thus two major artists from the same period and the same part of the world may respond to the same historical events in very different ways. One example would be Rubens and Rembrandt. Rubens (1577–1640) was based in Antwerp and Rembrandt (1606–1669) in Amsterdam. Rembrandt's art was very much a product of the Dutch Revolt, a bourgeois revolution which established the Dutch Republic, while Rubens' art was commissioned by and expressed the aristocratic counter-revolution of the Habsburg Empire."

^ *Bab, Julius: Rembrandt und Spinoza. Ein Doppelbildnis im deutsch-jüdischen Raum. (Berlin: Philo-Verlag, 1934)
Valentiner, Wilhelm R.: Rembrandt and Spinoza: A Study of the Spiritual Conflicts in Seventeenth-Century Holland. (London: Phaidon Press, 1957)
Streiff, Bruno: Le Peintre et le Philosophe ou Rembrandt et Spinoza à Amsterdam. (Paris: Éditions Complicités, 2002) ISBN 978-2-910721-34-3

^ *Simmel, Georg: Rembrandt: Ein kunstphilodophischer Versuch. (Leipzig: K. Wolff Verlag, 1916)
Simmel, Georg: Rembrandt: An Essay in the Philosophy of Art. Translated and edited by Alan Scott and Helmut Staubmann. (New York: Routledge, 2005)
Budick, Sanford (1997), 'Descartes's Cogito, Kant's Sublime, and Rembrandt's Philosophers: Cultural Transmission as Occasion for Freedom,'. Modern Language Quarterly 58(1): 27–61. doi:10.1215/00267929-58-1-27
Wright, J. Lenore (2007), 'Reading Rembrandt: The influence of Cartesian dualism on Dutch art,'. History of European Ideas 33(3): 275–291. doi:10.1016/j.histeuroideas.2006.11.012

^ *Genet, Jean: Le Secret de Rembrandt [Œuvres complètes]. (Paris: Gallimard, 1968) ISBN 2-07-010215-7
Genet, Jean: Rembrandt. (Paris: Gallimard, 2016)
Proust, Marcel: Chardin et Rembrandt. (Paris: Le Bruit du Temps, 2009)
Pavans, Jean: Proust, Vermeer, Rembrandt. (Paris: Éditions Arléa, 2018)
Todorov, Tzvetan: L'art ou la vie! Le cas Rembrandt. Suivi d'Art et morale. (Paris: Biro Éditeur, 2008)
Hassine, Juliette (2006), 'Correspondance des arts: Rembrandt-Dostoïevski dans l'Europe du vingtième siècle (In memoriam Jo Yoshida)'. (Department Bulletin Paper, Kyoto University, 2006/06/20). doi:10.14989/138068

^ *IJpma, Frank F.A.; van de Graaf, Robert C.; Nicolai, J.-P. A.; Meek, M. F. (2006), 'The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp by Rembrandt (1632): A Comparison of the Painting With a Dissected Left Forearm of a Dutch Male Cadaver,'. The Journal of Hand Surgery 31(6): 882–91. doi:10.1016/j.jhsa.2006.02.014
Ijpma, Frank F.A.; van Gulik, T. M. (2018), 'Anatomy lesson of the brain and cerebral membranes captured on canvas by Rembrandt in 1656,'. British Journal of Surgery 105(5): 1–7. doi:10.1002/bjs.10610
Fernández, F. J. de Paz (2018), 'Rembrandt's Anatomy lessons,'. Neurosciences and History 6(1): 1–9

^ *Harris, P. (1995), 'Rembrandt and medicine,'. J R Coll Surg Edinb. 40(2): 81–3
Marcus, Esther-Lee; Clarfield, A. Mark (2002), 'Rembrandt's Late Self-Portraits: Psychological and Medical Aspects,'. The International Journal of Aging and Human Development 55(1): 25–49. doi:10.2190/8LQ5-CC7W-UJDF-TNM0
Livingstone, M. S.; Conway, B. R. (2004), 'Was Rembrandt stereoblind?,'. New England Journal of Medicine 351(12): 1264–1265. doi:10.1056/NEJM200409163511224
Friedman, Tal; Lurie, Doron; Westreich, Melvyn; Golik, A. (2007), 'Rembrandt – Aging and Sickness: A Combined Look by Plastic Surgeons, an Art Researcher and an Internal Medicine Specialist,'. Israel Medical Association Journal 9(2): 67–71
Friedman, Tal; Lurie, Doron; Shalom, A. (2012), 'Authentication of Rembrandt's self-portraits through the use of facial aging analysis,'. Isr Med Assoc J. 14(10): 591–4
Hage, J. Joris; Lange, Jan; Karim, Refaat B. (2019), 'Rembrandt's Aging Face in Plastic Surgical Perspective,'. Annals of Plastic Surgery 83(2): 123–131. doi:10.1097/SAP.0000000000001917

^ *Zell, Michael: Reframing Rembrandt: Jews and the Christian Image in Seventeenth-Century Amsterdam. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002)
Durham, John: The Biblical Rembrandt: Human Painter in a Landscape of Faith. (Macon, GA.: Mercer University Press, 2004) ISBN 978-0-86554-886-2
Perlove, Shelley; Silver, Larry: Rembrandt's Faith: Church and Temple in the Dutch Golden Age. (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2009) ISBN 978-0-271-03406-5
Perlove, Shelley; Silver, Larry (2007), 'Rembrandt and the Dutch Catholics,'. Canadian Journal of Netherlandic Studies / Revue canadienne d'études néerlandaises 28: 53–75
Squarzina, Silvia Danesi: Giovinezza di Rembrandt. La committenza mennonita. (Roma: De Luca Editori d'Arte, 2013) ISBN 88-6557-137-3

^ *Joby, Christopher (2004), 'How Does the Work of Rembrandt van Rijn Represent a Calvinist Aesthetic?,'. Theology 107(835): 22–29
Marsh, Clive (1997), 'Rembrandt Reads the Gospels: Form, Context and Theological Responsibility in New Testament Interpretation,'. Scottish Journal of Theology 50(4): 399–413

^ *Seghers, Anna (Reiling Radványi, Netty): Jude und Judentum im Werke Rembrandts. (PhD diss., Universität Heidelberg, 1924; Leipzig: Reclam, 1981)
Nadler, Steven: Rembrandt's Jews. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003)

^ *Van Breda, Jacobus (1997), 'Rembrandt Etchings on Oriental Papers: Papers in the Collection of the National Gallery of Victoria,'. Art Bulletin of Victoria 38 (1997): 25–38
Kalmar, Ivan (2012), 'Rembrandt's Orient: where Earth met Heaven,'. Chapter 6, in: Ivan Kalmar, Early Orientalism: Imagined Islam and the Notion of Sublime Power. (New York: Routledge, 2012), pp. 56–66
"Rembrandt's Etchings and Japanese Washi Paper from Echizen". Washi Arts (www.washiarts.com). 2 June 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020.
Schrader, Stephanie; et al. (eds.): Rembrandt and the Inspiration of India. (Los Angeles, CA: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2018)
Westheider, Ortrud; Helfenstein, Joseph; Brinkmann, Bodo; Philipp, Michael (eds.): Rembrandt's Orient: West Meets East in Dutch Art of the 17th Century. (Munich: Prestel, 2020)

^ *Scallen, Catherine B. (2009), 'The Global Rembrandt,'. In: Crossing Cultures: Conflict, Migration and Convergence: The Proceedings of the 32nd International Congress in the History of Art, edited by Jaynie Anderson. (Carlton: Miegunyah Press, 2009), pp. 263–267
Behpoor, Bavand (2010), 'How Moghul Was Rembrandt? A Critique on a Global Laboratory of Infinite Multiplicities,'. Third Text 24(4): 501–504. doi:10.1080/09528822.2010.491389
Chung, Jina: Rembrandt Redefined: Making the "Global Artist" in Seventeenth-Century Amsterdam. (MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin, 2011)

^ *Alpers, Svetlana: Rembrandt's Enterprise: The Studio and the Market. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988) ISBN 978-0-226-01518-7
Bok, Marten Jan (2004), 'Rembrandt's Fame and Rembrandt's Failure: The Market for History Paintings in the Dutch Republic,'. In: A. Kofuku (ed.), Rembrandt and Dutch History Painting in the 17th Century. (Tokyo, 2004), pp. 159–180
Bok, Marten Jan; van der Molen, Tom (2009), 'Productivity Levels of Rembrandt and His Main Competitors in the Amsterdam Art Market,'. Jahrbuch der Berliner Museen 51. Bd., Beiheft. Rembrandt — Wissenschaft auf der Suche. Beiträge des Internationalen Symposiums Berlin — 4. und 5. November 2006: 61–68
Crenshaw, Paul: Rembrandt's Bankruptcy: The Artist, his Patrons, and the Art market in Seventeenth-Century Netherlands. (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006) ISBN 978-0-521-85825-0
Tummers, Annaand; Jonckheere, Koenraad (eds.): Art market and Connoisseurship: A Closer Look at Paintings by Rembrandt, Rubens and Their Contemporaries. (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2008)

^ Schwartz, Gary (11 July 2017). "How I became a Rembrandt scholar". garyschwartzarthistorian.nl. Archived from the original on 16 July 2020. Retrieved 11 July 2020.

^ Chalard-Fillaudeau, Anne: Rembrandt, l'artiste au fil des textes: Rembrandt dans la littérature et la philosophie européennes depuis 1669. (Paris: L'Harmattan, 2004)

^ Münz, Ludwig: Die Kunst Rembrandts und Goethes Sehen. (Leipzig: Verlag Heinrich Keller, 1934)

^ Van den Boogert, B.; et al.: Goethe en Rembrandt. Tekeningen uit Weimar. Uit de grafische bestanden van de Kunstsammlungen zu Weimar, aangevuld met werken uit het Goethe-Nationalmuseum. (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1999)

^ Protter, Eric (ed.): Painters on Painting. (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications, 1997, ISBN 0-486-29941-4), p. 98

^ "La luz en la sombra (de Rembrandt a Goya)". RealGoya.com. 7 January 2017. Archived from the original on 14 May 2020. Retrieved 17 May 2020.

^ Rodriguez, Angel (16 April 2020). "Rembrandt en España". Arsmagazine.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020.

^ McQueen, Alison: The Rise of the Cult of Rembrandt: Reinventing an Old Master in Nineteenth-Century France. (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2003)

^ Prigot, Aude: La réception de Rembrandt à travers les estampes en France au XVIIIe siècle. (Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes, 2018) ISBN 978-2-7535-7552-3

^ Langbehn, Julius: Rembrandt als Erzieher [Rembrandt as Teacher/Rembrandt as Educator]. (Leipzig: C.L. Hirschfeld, 1890)

^ Heenk, Liesbeth: Rembrandt and his Influence on Eighteenth-century German and Austrian Printmakers. (Amsterdam: Museum het Rembrandthuis – Rembrandt Information Centre, 1998)

^ Chalard-Fillaudeau, Anne: Rembrandt ou le génie du dépassement. Essai sur l'artiste hollandais dans l'histoire de l'art allemande. (Saarbrücken: Editions Universitaires Européennes, 2010)

^ Hoff, Ursula: Rembrandt und England. (Hamburg: Kleinert, 1935)

^ White, Christopher; Alexander, David; D'Oench, Ellen: Rembrandt in Eighteenth-Century England. (New Haven: Yale Center for British Art, 1983)

^ Seifert, Christian Tico; Dickey, Stephanie S.; et al.: Rembrandt: Britain's Discovery of the Master. (Edinburgh: National Galleries of Scotland, 2018) ISBN 978-1-911054-19-1

^ Seifert, Christian Tico: Rembrandt & Britain. (Edinburgh: Trustees of the National Galleries of Scotland, 2018)

^ Scallen, Catherine B.: Rembrandt, Reputation, and the Practice of Connoisseurship. (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2004)

^ Wessels, Anton: Van Gogh and the Art of Living: The Gospel According to Vincent van Gogh. (Wipf & Stock, 2013, ISBN 978-1-62564-109-0)

^ Golahny, Amy (April 2004). "Book Review: Rembrandt's Jews by Steven Nadler". Historians of Netherlandish Art Reviews (hnanews.org/hnar/reviews). Archived from the original on 17 July 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2020.

^ Derman, Ushi (13 July 2020). "Was Rembrandt "One of ours"? How The Dutch Genius Became a Jew of Honor". Beit Hatfutsot (bh.org.il). Archived from the original on 18 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020.

^ Molina Cortón, Juan (2014). "Chap. IX". Dánae – Mito, poder y erotismo en la pintura occidental (in Spanish). Madrid, Spain: Cultiva Libros.

^ Wullschlager, Jackie: Chagall: A Biography. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2008), p. 274

^ Masters, Tim (14 October 2014). "Exhibition paints Rembrandt as 'modern' artist". BBC.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2020.

^ Landsberger, Franz: Rembrandt, the Jews, and the Bible. Translated from the German by Felix N. Gerson. (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1946)

^ Zell, Michael: Reframing Rembrandt: Jews and the Christian Image in Seventeenth-Century Amsterdam. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002), pp. 45–46

^ a b c Białostocki, Jan (1972), 'Rembrandt and Posterity,'. Nederlands Kunsthistorisch Jaarboek 23 (1972): 131–157. JSTOR 24705655

^ a b c Von Sandrart, Joachim; Baldinucci, Filippo; Houbraken, Arnold: Lives of Rembrandt [Lives of the Artists]. Introduced by Charles Ford. (Los Angeles, CA: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2018) ISBN 978-1-60606-562-4

^ Muller, Sheila D. (ed.): Dutch Art: An Encyclopedia. (New York: Garland Pub., 1997), p. 178

^ Nichols, Aidan: All Great Art is Praise: Art and Religion in John Ruskin. (Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2016), p. 454. In Ruskin' words, "It is the aim of the best painters to paint the noblest things they can see by sunlight. It was the aim of Rembrandt to paint the foulest things he could see – by rushlight."

^ Cecil B. De Mille Foundation. "The Legacy of Cecil B. DeMille". Cecil B. De Mille Foundation (cecilbdemille.com). Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020.

^ Stinebring, Anna-Claire. "Head of Christ by Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn (cat. 480)". The John G. Johnson Collection: A History and Selected Works. A Philadelphia Museum of Art free digital publication.[permanent dead link]

^ "The National Museum of Art of Romania – Rembrandt – Haman before Esther". www.mnar.arts.ro. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2020.

^ a b "Rembrandt tentoonstilling". www.nga.gov. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2019.

^ "Rembrandt and the Face of Jesus". Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015.

^ "Rembrandt: The Consummate Etcher". Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015.

^ "From Rembrandt to Rosenquist: Works on Paper from the NAC's Permanent Collection". Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "MutualArt.com". Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015.

^ "Rembrandt, Rubens, Gainsborough and the Golden Age of Painting in Europe". Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "MutualArt.com". Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015.

^ "Rembrandt: The Late Works". Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "MutualArt.com". Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Promoted in Rembrandt: From the National Gallery, London and Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam 2014 at IMDb

^ "MutualArt – Auctions, Exhibitions and Analysis for over 400,000 artists". www.mutualart.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018.

^ "MutualArt.com – The Web's Largest Art Information Service". www.mutualart.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018.

^ "Leiden circa 1630: Rembrandt Emerges | Agnes Etherington Art Centre". agnes.queensu.ca. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019.

^ "Rembrandt's Light | Dulwich Picture Gallery". www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 12 February 2020.

^ "Exhibitions Rembrandt and Amsterdam portraiture, 1590–1670". Madrid: Museo Nacional Thyssen Bornemisza. 2020. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2020.

^ "Welcome | Ashmolean Museum". Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020.

^ White, 200

^ Starcky, Emmanuel (1990). Rembrandt. Hazan. p. 45. ISBN 978-2-85025-212-9.


Works cited[edit]

Ackley, Clifford, et al., Rembrandt's Journey, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 2004. ISBN 0-87846-677-0
Adams, Laurie Schneider (1999). Art Across Time. Volume II. New York: McGraw-Hill College.
Bomford, D. et al., Art in the making: Rembrandt, New edition, Yale University Press, 2006
Bull, Duncan, et al., Rembrandt-Caravaggio, Rijksmuseum, 2006.
Buvelot, Quentin, White, Christopher (eds), Rembrandt by himself, 1999, National Gallery
Clark, Kenneth (1969). Civilisation: a personal view. New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-010801-4.
Clark, Kenneth, An Introduction to Rembrandt, 1978, London, John Murray/Readers Union, 1978
Clough, Shepard B. (1975). European History in a World Perspective. D.C. Heath and Company, Los Lexington, MA. ISBN 978-0-669-85555-5.
Driessen, Christoph, Rembrandts vrouwen, Bert Bakker, Amsterdam, 2012. ISBN 978-90-351-3690-8
Durham, John I. (2004). Biblical Rembrandt: Human Painter in a Landscape of Faith. Mercer University Press. ISBN 978-0-86554-886-2.
Gombrich, E.H., The Story of Art, Phaidon, 1995. ISBN 0-7148-3355-X
Hughes, Robert (2006), "The God of Realism", The New York Review of Books, vol. 53, no. 6
The Complete Etchings of Rembrandt Reproduced in Original Size, Gary Schwartz (editor). New York: Dover, 1988. ISBN 0-486-28181-7
Slive, Seymour, Dutch Painting, 1600–1800, Yale UP, 1995, ISBN 0-300-07451-4
van de Wetering, Ernst in Rembrandt by himself, 1999 National Gallery, London/Mauritshuis, The Hague, ISBN 1-85709-270-8
van de Wetering, Ernst, Rembrandt: The Painter at Work, Amsterdam University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-520-22668-2
White, Christopher, The Late Etchings of Rembrandt, 1999, British Museum/Lund Humphries, London ISBN 978-90-400-9315-9

Further reading[edit]
Further information: List of works about Rembrandt

Catalogue raisonné: Stichting Foundation Rembrandt Research Project:
A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings – Volume I, which deals with works from Rembrandt's early years in Leiden (1629–1631), 1982
A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings – Volume II: 1631–1634. Bruyn, J., Haak, B. (et al.), Band 2, 1986, ISBN 978-90-247-3339-2
A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings – Volume III, 1635–1642. Bruyn, J., Haak, B., Levie, S.H., van Thiel, P.J.J., van de Wetering, E. (Ed. Hrsg.), Band 3, 1990, ISBN 978-90-247-3781-9
A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings – Volume IV. Ernst van de Wetering, Karin Groen et al. Springer, Dordrecht, the Netherlands. ISBN 1-4020-3280-3. p. 692. (Self-Portraits)
Rembrandt. Images and metaphors, Christian and Astrid Tümpel (editors), Haus Books London 2006 ISBN 978-1-904950-92-9
Anthony M. Amore; Tom Mashberg (2012). Stealing Rembrandts: The Untold Stories of Notorious Art Heists. ISBN 978-0-230-33990-3.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rembrandt.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Rembrandt.

A biography of the artist Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn from the National Gallery, London
Works and literature on Rembrandt from Pubhist.com
The Drawings of Rembrandt: a revision of Otto Benesch's catalogue raisonné by Martin Royalton-Kisch (in progress)
Rembrandt's house in Amsterdam Site of the Rembrandt House Museum in Amsterdam, with images of many of his etchings
114 artworks by or after Rembrandt at the Art UK site
Works by or about Rembrandt at Internet Archive
Rembrandt van Rijn, General Resources
Gary Schwartz The transparent connoisseur 3: the 30 million pound question
Rembrandt
The Rembrandt Database research data on the paintings, including the full contents of the first volumes of A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings by the Rembrandt Research Project
vteRembrandtLists of drawings, etchings, paintings, self-portraitsPaintings
The Senses (1624–25)
The Stoning of Saint Stephen (1625)
Suffer little children to come unto me (1620s)
History Painting (1626)
Balaam and the Ass (1626)
The Baptism of the Eunuch (1626)
Bust of a Man Wearing a Gorget and Plumed Beret (1626)
The Flight into Egypt (1627)
The Parable of the Rich Fool (1627)
The Artist in his Studio (1628)
Samson and Delilah (1629–30)
The Raising of Lazarus (c. 1630–1632)
Andromeda Chained to the Rocks (1631)
The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp (1631)
Christ with a Staff (1631)
Christ on the Cross (1631)
Old Man with a Gold Chain (c. 1631)
Philosopher in Meditation (1632)
The Abduction of Europa (1632)
Adoration of the Magi (1632–1633)
The Shipbuilder and his Wife (1633)
The Storm on the Sea of Galilee (1633) 2
A Lady and Gentleman in Black (1633)
Descent from the Cross (1633)
Diana Bathing with her Nymphs with Actaeon and Callisto (1634)
Flora (1634)
Artemisia (1634)
Pendant portraits of Maerten Soolmans and Oopjen Coppit (1634)
Descent from the Cross (1634)
Belshazzar's Feast (1635)
Minerva (1635)
The Prodigal Son in the Brothel (c. 1635)
The Abduction of Ganymede (1635)
The Entombment of Christ (1635)
Samson Threatening His Father-In-Law (1635)
The Standard Bearer (1636)
Danaë (1636)
The Blinding of Samson (1636)
The Preacher Eleazar Swalmius (1637)
The Archangel Raphael Leaving Tobias' Family (1637)
A Polish Nobleman (1637)
The Stone Bridge (1637)
The Wedding Feast of Samson (1638)
Landscape with the Good Samaritan (1638)
Still Life with Peacocks (c. 1639)
The Girl in a Picture Frame (1641)
The Night Watch (1642)
Concord of the State (1642)
David and Jonathan (1642)
Boaz and Ruth (1643)
The Woman Taken in Adultery (1644)
Joseph's Dream (1645)
The Holy Family with Angels (1645)
The Mill (1645–1648)
Abraham Serving the Three Angels (1646)
Susanna and the Elders (1647)
Head of Christ (1648)
The Kitchen Maid (1651)
Descent from the Cross (1650–1652)
Saul and David (c. 1652) 1
Aristotle with a Bust of Homer (1653)
A Woman Bathing in a Stream (1654)
Bathsheba at Her Bath (1654)
Virgin and Child with a Cat (1654)
The Polish Rider (1655) 1
Slaughtered Ox (1655)
Pallas Athene (c. 1655)
The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Deijman (1656)
Jacob Blessing the Sons of Joseph (1656)
Courtesan at her Mirror (1657)
Saint Bartholomew (1657)
Moses Breaking the Tablets of the Law (1659)
Ahasuerus and Haman at the Feast of Esther (1660)
The Denial of Saint Peter (1660)
Titus as a Monk (1660)
The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis (1661)
St. Matthew and the Angel (1661)
Syndics of the Drapers' Guild (1662)
Homer Dictating his Verses  (1663)
The Jewish Bride (1664)
Lucretia (1664) 1
David and Uriah (c. 1665)
Young Woman with a Lapdog (1665)
Lucretia (1666)
The Return of the Prodigal Son (1662–1669)
Landscape with a Castle
Portraits
Portrait of Nicolaes Ruts (1631)
Portrait of a Man (1632)
Portrait of a Woman (1632)
Portrait of Jacob de Gheyn III (1632)
Aeltje Pietersdr Uylenburgh (1632)
Portrait of a Man Rising from His Chair (1633)
Oval Portrait of a Woman (1633)
Portrait of Marten Soolmans (1634)
Portrait of Oopjen Coppit (1634)
Portrait of Petronella Buys (1635)
Portrait of Maria Trip (1639)
Portrait of Jan Six (1654)
Portrait of Catharina Hooghsaet (1657)
Portrait of a Man (1657)
Portrait of a Man with Arms Akimbo (1658)
Portrait of Dirck van Os (c. 1662)
Self-portraits
Self-Portrait with Dishevelled Hair (1628)
Rembrandt Laughing (1628)
Self-Portrait (1629)
Self-Portrait in a Gorget (c.1629)
Portrait of a Young Man with a Golden Chain (1635) (disputed)
Self-Portrait Wearing a White Feathered Bonnet (1635)
Self-Portrait at the Age of 34 (1640)
Self-Portrait (1652)
Self-Portrait in a Black Beret and Gold Chain (1654)
Self-Portrait (1658)
Self-Portrait with Beret and Turned-Up Collar (1659)
Self-Portrait (1660)
Self-Portrait as the Apostle Paul (1662)
Self-Portrait as Zeuxis Laughing (1662)
Self-Portrait with Two Circles (1665–1669)
Self-Portrait (c. 1669)
Self-Portrait at the Age of 63 (1669)
Drawings and prints (including etchings)
Joseph and Potiphar's Wife (1634)
The Artist and his Model (1639)
The Death of the Virgin (1639)
The Mill (1641)
The Three Trees (1643)
The State Bed (1646)
Portrait of Jan Six (1647)
Hundred Guilder Print (1647–1649)
Conus Marmoreus (1650)
Goldweigher's Field (1651)
Doctor Fautrieus (1652)
Descent from the Cross by Torchlight (1652)
The Three Crosses (1653)
Virgin and Child with a Cat (1654)
Christ Presented to the People (1655)
Mughal drawings
General topics
Dutch Golden Age painting
Dutch School (painting)
Netherlandish art
Netherlandish Baroque art
Flemish Baroque art
Art of the Dutch Golden Age
Rembrandt lighting
Tronie
Surface tone
Old master print
Naturalism
Utrecht Caravaggism
Caravaggisti
Chiaroscuro
Etching revival
Rembrandt studies
Connoisseurs and scholars
Rembrandt Research Project
Rembrandt catalogues raisonnés
1908
1935
1968
1986
Related people
Pupils and followers
Saskia van Uylenburgh (wife, model)
Titus van Rijn (son, model)
Geertje Dircx (mistress, model)
Hendrickje Stoffels (mistress, model)
Jacob Isaacsz. van Swanenburg (teacher)
Pieter Lastman (teacher)
Jan Lievens (colleague and friend)
Hendrick van Uylenburgh (art dealer, patron)
Jan Six (art collector, patron)
Henry Clay Frick (art collector)
Thomas Kaplan (art collector)
Notable collectionsand exhibitions
Rembrandt House Museum
Rijksmuseum Amsterdam
Mauritshuis
Kupferstichkabinett Berlin
British Museum
Metropolitan Museum of Art
Frick Collection
Rembrandt in Southern California (2008 virtual exhibition)
Works about
Bibliography of Rembrandt
Cultural depictions of Rembrandt
Rembrandt (1936 film)
Rembrandt (1940 film)
Rembrandt (1942 film)
Rembrandt: A Self-Portrait (1954 documentary film)
Rembrandt fecit 1669 (1977 film)
The Anatomy Lesson (1995 novel)
Rembrandt (1999 film)
Stealing Rembrandt (2003 film)
Nightwatching (2007 film )
Rembrandt's J'Accuse (2008 documentary)
I Am Rembrandt's Daughter (2008 novel)
The Rembrandt Affair (2010 novel)
Named after
Rembrandt, Iowa
Rembrandtplein
Rembrandtpark
Rembrandt (crater)
Rembrandt (train)

1 Contested
2 Stolen in 1990

Authority control General
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Argentina
Germany
United States
Australia
Art galleries and museums
Auckland
South Australia
Victoria
Te Papa (New Zealand)
Art research institutes
Scientific illustrators
KulturNav (Norway)
RKD Artists (Netherlands)
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Netherlands
Germany
Other
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
1
Trove (Australia)
1







Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rembrandt&oldid=1114297124"
Categories: Rembrandt1606 births1669 deathsArt collectors from AmsterdamArtists from LeidenDutch art dealersDutch ChristiansDutch draughtsmenDutch etchersDutch Golden Age paintersDutch Golden Age printmakersDutch male paintersDutch portrait paintersDutch printmakersEngravers from AmsterdamLeiden University alumniPainters from AmsterdamPeople celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendarHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with Dutch-language sources (nl)CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2018Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Articles with dead external links from November 2021IMDb ID different from WikidataArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataGood articlesUse dmy dates from August 2020Articles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles needing additional references from July 2022All articles needing additional referencesCommons link from WikidataArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNMM identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with AAG identifiersArticles with AGSA identifiersArticles with NGV identifiersArticles with TePapa identifiersArticles with DSI identifiersArticles with KULTURNAV identifiersArticles with RKDartists identifiersArticles with ULAN identifiersArticles with BPN identifiersArticles with DTBIO identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersArticles with suppressed authority control identifiersACArt with 23 suppressed elements



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikisource




Languages


АдыгэбзэAfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésܐܪܡܝܐԱրեւմտահայերէնঅসমীয়াAsturianuAvañe'ẽAymar aruAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBislamaБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiTumbukaCymraegDanskDavvisámegiellaDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語ગુજરાતી한국어HausaHawaiʻiՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛಕನ್ನಡKapampanganქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenКыргызчаLadinLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLimburgsLingálaLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiMāoriमराठीმარგალურიمصرىဘာသာ မန်Bahasa MelayuMinangkabauMirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာDorerin NaoeroNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanОлык марийOromooOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPatoisភាសាខ្មែរPicardPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaQırımtatarcaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaไทยTürkçeTyapТыва дылУкраїнськаاردوVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWinaray吴语ייִדישYorùbá粵語Žemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 5 October 2022, at 20:06 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










