



Rumi - Wikipedia










































Rumi

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Sufi scholar and poet (1207–1273)
For other uses, see Rumi (disambiguation).


RumiStatue of Rumi in Buca, TurkeyTitleMevlânâ, Mawlānā,[1] Mevlevî, MawlawīPersonalBorn30 September 1207Balkh (present-day Afghanistan),[2] or Wakhsh (present-day Tajikistan),[3][4] Khwarezmian EmpireDied17 December 1273 (aged 66)Konya (present-day Turkey), Sultanate of RumResting placeTomb of Mevlana Rumi, Mevlana Museum, Konya, TurkeyReligionIslamChildrenSultan WaladEraIslamic Golden Age  (7th Islamic century)RegionKhwarezmian Empire (Balkh: 1207–1212, 1213–1217; Samarkand: 1212–1213)[5][6]Sultanate of Rum (Malatya: 1217–1219; Akşehir: 1219–1222; Larende: 1222–1228; Konya: 1228–1273)[5]DenominationSunni[7]JurisprudenceHanafiCreedMaturidi[8][9]Main interest(s)Sufi poetry, Hanafi jurisprudence, Maturidi theologyNotable idea(s)Sufi whirling, MuraqabaNotable work(s)Mathnawī-ī ma'nawī, Dīwān-ī Shams-ī Tabrīzī, Fīhi mā fīhiTariqaMevleviMuslim leader
Influenced by
Muhammad, Abu Hanifa, al-Maturidi, Al-Ghazali, Muhaqqeq Termezi, Baha-ud-din Zakariya, Attār, Sanā'ī, Abu Sa'īd Abulḫayr, Ḫaraqānī, Bayazīd Bistāmī, Sultan Walad, Shams Tabrizi, Lal Shahbaz Qalandar, Ibn Arabi, Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi

Influenced
Jami, Shah Abdul Latif Bhittai, Kazi Nazrul Islam, Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob, Abdolkarim Soroush, Hossein Elahi Ghomshei, Muhammad Iqbal, Hossein Nasr[10] Yunus Emre, Eva de Vitray-Meyerovitch, Annemarie Schimmel

Part of a series on IslamSufismTomb of Abdul Qadir Gilani, Baghdad, Iraq
Ideas
Abdal
Al-Insān al-Kāmil
Baqaa
Dervish
Dhawq
Fakir
Fanaa
Haal
Haqiqa
Ihsan
Irfan
Ishq
Karamat
Kashf
Lataif
Manzil
Ma'rifa
Maqaam
Nafs
Nūr
Qalandar
Qutb
Silsila
Sufi cosmology
Sufi metaphysics
Sufi philosophy
Sufi poetry
Sufi psychology
Salik
Tazkiah
Wali
Yaqeen

Practices
Anasheed
Dhikr
Haḍra
Muraqabah
Qawwali
Sama
Whirling
Ziyarat

Sufi ordersSunni
Qadiri
Shadhili
Naqshbandi
Chishti
Suhrawardi
Rifa`i
Khalwati
Rahmani
Badawi
Desuqi
Ba 'Alawi
Tijani
Darqawi
Idrisi
Senusi
Bayrami
Jelveti
Maizbhandari
Malamati
Mouridi
Sülaymaniyya
Salihiyya
Azeemia
Kubrawi
Ashrafia
Mevlevi
Shattari
Uwaisi
Fultali
Shi'a

Alians
Bektashi
Hurufi
Ni'matullāhī
Nuqtavi
Qalandari
Safavi
Zahabiya
Non-denominational

Akbari
Galibi
Haqqani Anjuman
Issawiyya
Jerrahi
Madari
Mahdavi
Noorbakshi
Zahedi
Zikri

List of sufis
Notable early
Notable modern
Singers

Topics in Sufism
Tawhid
Sharia
Tariqa
Haqiqa
Ma'rifa
Art
History
Sufi music
Persecution
Ziyarat

 Islam portalvte



This article contains Persian text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.

Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad Rūmī (Persian: جلال‌الدین محمد رومی), also known as Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad Balkhī (جلال‌الدین محمد بلخى), Mevlânâ/Mawlānā (Persian: مولانا, lit. 'our master') and Mevlevî/Mawlawī (Persian: مولوی, lit. 'my master'), but more popularly known simply as Rumi (30 September 1207 – 17 December 1273), was a 13th-century Persian[11][1][12] poet, Hanafi faqih, Islamic scholar, Maturidi theologian and Sufi mystic originally from Greater Khorasan in Greater Iran.[12][13] Rumi's influence transcends national borders and ethnic divisions: Iranians, Tajiks, Turks, Greeks, Pashtuns, other Central Asian Muslims, as well as Muslims of the Indian subcontinent have greatly appreciated his spiritual legacy for the past seven centuries.[14] His poems have been widely translated into many of the world's languages and transposed into various formats. Rumi has been described as the "most popular poet"[15] and the "best selling poet" in the United States.[16][17]
Rumi's works are written mostly in Persian, but occasionally he also used Turkish,[18] Arabic[19] and Greek[20][21][22] in his verse. His Masnavi (Mathnawi), composed in Konya, is considered one of the greatest poems of the Persian language.[23][24] His works are widely read today in their original language across Greater Iran and the Persian-speaking world.[25][26] Translations of his works are very popular, most notably in Turkey, Azerbaijan, the United States and South Asia.[27] His poetry has influenced not only Persian literature, but also the literary traditions of the Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai, Urdu, Bengali and Pashto languages.[28][29]

Contents

1 Name
2 Life

2.1 Overview
2.2 Childhood and emigration
2.3 Education and encounters with Shams-e Tabrizi
2.4 Later life and death


3 Teachings
4 Major works

4.1 Poetic works
4.2 Prose works


5 Religious outlook
6 Legacy

6.1 Universality
6.2 Iranian world
6.3 Mewlewī Sufi Order; Rumi and Turkey
6.4 Religious denomination
6.5 Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations
6.6 Mawlana Rumi Review


7 See also

7.1 General
7.2 Poems by Rumi
7.3 On Persian culture
7.4 Rumi scholars and writers
7.5 English translators of Rumi poetry


8 References
9 Further reading

9.1 English translations
9.2 Life and work
9.3 Persian literature


10 External links


Name
He is most commonly called Rumi in English. His full name is given by his contemporary Sipahsalar as Muhammad bin Muhammad bin al-Husayn al-Khatibi al-Balkhi al-Bakri (Arabic: محمد بن محمد بن الحسين الخطيبي البلخي البكري).[30] He is more commonly known as Jalāl ad-Dīn Muḥammad Rūmī (جلال‌الدین محمد رومی). Jalal ad-Din is an Arabic name meaning "Glory of the Faith". Balkhī and Rūmī are his nisbas, meaning, respectively, "from Balkh" and "from Rûm" ('Roman,' what European history now calls Byzantine Anatolia[31]). According to the authoritative Rumi biographer Franklin Lewis of the University of Chicago, "[t]he Anatolian peninsula which had belonged to the Byzantine, or eastern Roman empire, had only relatively recently been conquered by Muslims and even when it came to be controlled by Turkish Muslim rulers, it was still known to Arabs, Persians and Turks as the geographical area of Rum. As such, there are a number of historical personages born in or associated with Anatolia known as Rumi, a word borrowed from Arabic literally meaning 'Roman,' in which context Roman refers to subjects of the Byzantine Empire or simply to people living in or things associated with Anatolia."[32] He was also known as "Mullah of Rum" (ملای روم mullā-yi Rūm or ملای رومی mullā-yi Rūmī).[33]
He is widely known by the sobriquet Mawlānā/Molānā[1][5] (Persian: مولانا Persian pronunciation: [moulɒːnɒ]) in Iran and popularly known as Mevlânâ in Turkey. Mawlānā (مولانا) is a term of Arabic origin, meaning "our master".
The term مولوی Mawlawī/Mowlavi (Persian) and Mevlevi (Turkish), also of Arabic origin, meaning "my master", is also frequently used for him.[34]

Life
 Jalal ad-Din Rumi gathers Sufi mystics.
 Double-page illuminated frontispiece, 1st book (daftar) of the Collection of poems (Masnavi-i ma'navi), 1461 manuscript
 Bowl of Reflections with Rumi's poetry, early 13th century. Brooklyn Museum.
Overview
Rumi was born to native Persian-speaking parents,[18][19][35] originally from the Balkh, which at the time was part of the Khwarezmian Empire, but is now in present-day Afghanistan. He was born either in Wakhsh,[4] a village on the Vakhsh River in present-day Tajikistan,[4] or in the city of Balkh, in present-day Afghanistan.[2][36]
Greater Balkh was at that time a major centre of Persian culture[24][35][37] and Sufism had developed there for several centuries. The most important influences upon Rumi, besides his father, were the Persian poets Attar and Sanai.[38] Rumi expresses his appreciation: "Attar was the spirit, Sanai his eyes twain, And in time thereafter, Came we in their train"[39] and mentions in another poem: "Attar has traversed the seven cities of Love, We are still at the turn of one street".[40] His father was also connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra.[14]
Rumi lived most of his life under the Persianate[41][42][43] Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, where he produced his works[44] and died in 1273 AD. He was buried in Konya, and his shrine became a place of pilgrimage.[45] Upon his death, his followers and his son Sultan Walad founded the Mevlevi Order, also known as the Order of the Whirling Dervishes, famous for the Sufi dance known as the Sama ceremony. He was laid to rest beside his father, and over his remains a shrine was erected. A hagiographical account of him is described in Shams ud-Din Ahmad Aflāki's Manāqib ul-Ārifīn (written between 1318 and 1353). This biography needs to be treated with care as it contains both legends and facts about Rumi.[46] For example, Professor Franklin Lewis of the University of Chicago, author of the most complete biography on Rumi, has separate sections for the hagiographical biography of Rumi and the actual biography about him.[47]

Childhood and emigration
Rumi's father was Bahā ud-Dīn Walad, a theologian, jurist and a mystic from Balkh, who was also known by the followers of Rumi as Sultan al-Ulama or "Sultan of the Scholars". According to Sultan Walad's Ibadetname and Shamsuddin Aflaki (c.1286 to 1291), Rumi was a descendant of Abu Bakr.[48] Some modern scholars, however, reject this claim and state it does not hold on closer examination. The claim of maternal descent from the Khwarazmshah for Rumi or his father is also seen as a non-historical hagiographical tradition designed to connect the family with royalty, but this claim is rejected for chronological and historical reasons. The most complete genealogy offered for the family stretches back to six or seven generations to famous Hanafi jurists.[47][49][50]
We do not learn the name of Baha al-Din's mother in the sources, only that he referred to her as "Māmi" (colloquial Persian for Māma),[51] and that she was a simple woman who lived to the 1200s. The mother of Rumi was Mu'mina Khātūn. The profession of the family for several generations was that of Islamic preachers of the relatively liberal Hanafi Maturidi school, and this family tradition was continued by Rumi (see his Fihi Ma Fih and Seven Sermons) and Sultan Walad (see Ma'rif Waladi for examples of his everyday sermons and lectures).
When the Mongols invaded Central Asia sometime between 1215 and 1220, Baha ud-Din Walad, with his whole family and a group of disciples, set out westwards. According to hagiographical account which is not agreed upon by all Rumi scholars, Rumi encountered one of the most famous mystic Persian poets, Attar, in the Iranian city of Nishapur, located in the province of Khorāsān. Attar immediately recognized Rumi's spiritual eminence. He saw the father walking ahead of the son and said, "Here comes a sea followed by an ocean."[52][53] Attar gave the boy his Asrārnāma, a book about the entanglement of the soul in the material world. This meeting had a deep impact on the eighteen-year-old Rumi and later on became the inspiration for his works.
From Nishapur, Walad and his entourage set out for Baghdad, meeting many of the scholars and Sufis of the city.[citation needed] From Baghdad they went to Hejaz and performed the pilgrimage at Mecca. The migrating caravan then passed through Damascus, Malatya, Erzincan, Sivas, Kayseri and Nigde. They finally settled in Karaman for seven years; Rumi's mother and brother both died there. In 1225, Rumi married Gowhar Khatun in Karaman. They had two sons: Sultan Walad and Ala-eddin Chalabi. When his wife died, Rumi married again and had a son, Amir Alim Chalabi, and a daughter, Malakeh Khatun.
On 1 May 1228, most likely as a result of the insistent invitation of 'Alā' ud-Dīn Key-Qobād, ruler of Anatolia, Baha' ud-Din came and finally settled in Konya in Anatolia within the westernmost territories of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm.

Education and encounters with Shams-e Tabrizi
Baha' ud-Din became the head of a madrassa (religious school) and when he died, Rumi, aged twenty-five, inherited his position as the Islamic molvi. One of Baha' ud-Din's students, Sayyed Burhan ud-Din Muhaqqiq Termazi, continued to train Rumi in the Shariah as well as the Tariqa, especially that of Rumi's father. For nine years, Rumi practised Sufism as a disciple of Burhan ud-Din until the latter died in 1240 or 1241. Rumi's public life then began: he became an Islamic Jurist, issuing fatwas and giving sermons in the mosques of Konya. He also served as a Molvi (Islamic teacher) and taught his adherents in the madrassa.
During this period, Rumi also travelled to Damascus and is said to have spent four years there.
It was his meeting with the dervish Shams-e Tabrizi on 15 November 1244 that completely changed his life. From an accomplished teacher and jurist, Rumi was transformed into an ascetic.

 Tomb shrine of Shams Tabrizi, Khoy
Shams had travelled throughout the Middle East searching and praying for someone who could "endure my company". A voice said to him, "What will you give in return?" Shams replied, "My head!" The voice then said, "The one you seek is Jalal ud-Din of Konya." On the night of 5 December 1248, as Rumi and Shams were talking, Shams was called to the back door. He went out, never to be seen again. It is rumoured that Shams was murdered with the connivance of Rumi's son, 'Ala' ud-Din; if so, Shams indeed gave his head for the privilege of mystical friendship.[54]
Rumi's love for, and his bereavement at the death of, Shams found their expression in an outpouring of lyric poems, Divan-e Shams-e Tabrizi. He himself went out searching for Shams and journeyed again to Damascus. There, he realised:


Why should I seek? I am the same as
He. His essence speaks through me.
I have been looking for myself![55]


Later life and death
 Tomb shrine of Rumi, Konya
Mewlana had been spontaneously composing ghazals (Persian poems), and these had been collected in the Divan-i Kabir or Diwan Shams Tabrizi. Rumi found another companion in Salaḥ ud-Din-e Zarkub, a goldsmith. After Salah ud-Din's death, Rumi's scribe and favourite student, Hussam-e Chalabi, assumed the role of Rumi's companion. One day, the two of them were wandering through the Meram vineyards outside Konya when Hussam described to Rumi an idea he had had: "If you were to write a book like the Ilāhīnāma of Sanai or the Mantiq ut-Tayr of 'Attar, it would become the companion of many troubadours. They would fill their hearts from your work and compose music to accompany it." Rumi smiled and took out a piece of paper on which were written the opening eighteen lines of his Masnavi, beginning with:


Listen to the reed and the tale it tells,
How it sings of separation...[56]


Hussam implored Rumi to write more. Rumi spent the next twelve years of his life in Anatolia dictating the six volumes of this masterwork, the Masnavi, to Hussam.
In December 1273, Rumi fell ill; he predicted his own death and composed the well-known ghazal, which begins with the verse:


How doest thou know what sort of king I have within me as companion?
Do not cast thy glance upon my golden face, for I have iron legs.[57]


Rumi died on 17 December 1273 in Konya. His death was mourned by the diverse community of Konya, with local Christians and Jews joining the crowd that converged to bid farewell as his body was carried through the city.[58] Rumi's body was interred beside that of his father, and a splendid shrine, the Yeşil Türbe (Green Tomb, قبه الخضراء; today the Mevlâna Museum), was erected over his place of burial. His epitaph reads:


When we are dead, seek not our tomb in the earth,
but find it in the hearts of men.[59]


Georgian princess and Seljuq queen Gurju Khatun was a close friend of Rumi. She was the one who sponsored the construction of his tomb in Konya.[60] The 13th century Mevlâna Mausoleum, with its mosque, dance hall, schools and living quarters for dervishes, remains a destination of pilgrimage to this day, and is probably the most popular pilgrimage site to be regularly visited by adherents of every major religion.[58]

Teachings
 A page of a copy c. 1503 of the Diwan-e Shams-e Tabriz-i. See Rumi ghazal 163.
Like other mystic and Sufi poets of Persian literature, Rumi's poetry speaks of love which infuses the world. Rumi's teachings also express the tenets summarized in the Quranic verse which Shams-e Tabrizi cited as the essence of prophetic guidance: "Know that ‘There is no god but He,’ and ask forgiveness for your sin" (Q. 47:19). In the interpretation attributed to Shams, the first part of the verse commands the humanity to seek knowledge of tawhid (oneness of God), while the second instructs them to negate their own existence. In Rumi's terms, tawhid is lived most fully through love, with the connection being made explicit in his verse that describes love as "that flame which, when it blazes up, burns away everything except the Everlasting Beloved."[61] Rumi's longing and desire to attain this ideal is evident in the following poem from his book the Masnavi:[62]





از جمادی مُردم و نامی شدم
وز نما مُردم به حیوان برزدم
مُردم از حیوانی و آدم شدم
پس چه ترسم کی ز مردن کم شدم؟
حملهٔ دیگر بمیرم از بشر
تا برآرم از ملائک بال و پر
وز ملک هم بایدم جستن ز جو
کل شیء هالک الا وجهه
بار دیگر از ملک پران شوم
آنچ اندر وهم ناید آن شوم
پس عدم گردم عدم چون ارغنون
گویدم که انا الیه راجعون




I died to the mineral state and became a plant,
I died to the vegetal state and reached animality,
I died to the animal state and became a man,
Then what should I fear? I have never become less from dying.
At the next charge (forward) I will die to human nature,
So that I may lift up (my) head and wings (and soar) among the angels,
And I must (also) jump from the river of (the state of) the angel,
Everything perishes except His Face,
Once again I will become sacrificed from (the state of) the angel,
I will become that which cannot come into the imagination,
Then I will become non-existent; non-existence says to me (in tones) like an organ,
Truly, to Him is our return.








The Masnavi weaves fables, scenes from everyday life, Qur'anic revelations and exegesis, and metaphysics into a vast and intricate tapestry.
Rumi believed passionately in the use of music, poetry and dance as a path for reaching God. For Rumi, music helped devotees to focus their whole being on the divine and to do this so intensely that the soul was both destroyed and resurrected. It was from these ideas that the practice of whirling Dervishes developed into a ritual form. His teachings became the base for the order of the Mevlevi, which his son Sultan Walad organised. Rumi encouraged Sama, listening to music and turning or doing the sacred dance. In the Mevlevi tradition, samāʿ represents a mystical journey of spiritual ascent through mind and love to the Perfect One. In this journey, the seeker symbolically turns towards the truth, grows through love, abandons the ego, finds the truth and arrives at the Perfect. The seeker then returns from this spiritual journey, with greater maturity, to love and to be of service to the whole of creation without discrimination with regard to beliefs, races, classes and nations.[citation needed]
In other verses in the Masnavi, Rumi describes in detail the universal message of love:


The lover's cause is separate from all other causes
Love is the astrolabe of God's mysteries.[63]


Rumi's favourite musical instrument was the ney (reed flute).[15]

Major works
 An Ottoman era manuscript depicting Rumi and Shams-e Tabrizi.
Rumi's poetry is often divided into various categories: the quatrains (rubayāt) and odes (ghazal) of the Divan, the six books of the Masnavi. The prose works are divided into The Discourses, The Letters, and the Seven Sermons.

Poetic works
 Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī Mevlâna Museum, Konya, Turkey 
Rumi's best-known work is the Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī (Spiritual Couplets; مثنوی معنوی). The six-volume poem holds a distinguished place within the rich tradition of Persian Sufi literature, and has been commonly called "the Quran in Persian".[64][65] Many commentators have regarded it as the greatest mystical poem in world literature.[66] It contains approximately 27,000 lines,[67] each consisting of a couplet with an internal rhyme.[58] While the mathnawi genre of poetry may use a variety of different metres, after Rumi composed his poem, the metre he used became the mathnawi metre par excellence. The first recorded use of this metre for a mathnawi poem took place at the Nizari Ismaili fortress of Girdkuh between 1131–1139. It likely set the stage for later poetry in this style by mystics such as Attar and Rumi.[68]
Rumi's other major work is the Dīwān-e Kabīr (Great Work) or Dīwān-e Shams-e Tabrīzī (The Works of Shams of Tabriz; دیوان شمس تبریزی), named in honour of Rumi's master Shams. Besides approximately 35000 Persian couplets and 2000 Persian quatrains,[69] the Divan contains 90 Ghazals and 19 quatrains in Arabic,[70] a couple of dozen or so couplets in Turkish (mainly macaronic poems of mixed Persian and Turkish)[71][72] and 14 couplets in Greek (all of them in three macaronic poems of Greek-Persian).[20][73][74]
Prose works
Fihi Ma Fihi (In It What's in It, Persian: فیه ما فیه) provides a record of seventy-one talks and lectures given by Rumi on various occasions to his disciples. It was compiled from the notes of his various disciples, so Rumi did not author the work directly.[75] An English translation from the Persian was first published by A.J. Arberry as Discourses of Rumi (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972), and a translation of the second book by Wheeler Thackston, Sign of the Unseen (Putney, VT: Threshold Books, 1994). The style of the Fihi ma fihi is colloquial and meant for middle-class men and women, and lack the sophisticated wordplay.[76]
Majāles-e Sab'a (Seven Sessions, Persian: مجالس سبعه) contains seven Persian sermons (as the name implies) or lectures given in seven different assemblies. The sermons themselves give a commentary on the deeper meaning of Qur'an and Hadith. The sermons also include quotations from poems of Sana'i, 'Attar, and other poets, including Rumi himself. As Aflakī relates, after Shams-e Tabrīzī, Rumi gave sermons at the request of notables, especially Salāh al-Dīn Zarkūb. The style of Persian is rather simple, but quotation of Arabic and knowledge of history and the Hadith show Rumi's knowledge in the Islamic sciences. His style is typical of the genre of lectures given by Sufis and spiritual teachers.[77]
Makatib (The Letters, Persian: مکاتیب) or Maktubat (مکتوبات) is the collection of letters written in Persian by Rumi to his disciples, family members, and men of state and of influence. The letters testify that Rumi kept very busy helping family members and administering a community of disciples that had grown up around them. Unlike the Persian style of the previous two mentioned works (which are lectures and sermons), the letters are consciously sophisticated and epistolary in style, which is in conformity with the expectations of correspondence directed to nobles, statesmen and kings.[78]
Religious outlook
Rumi belongs to the class of Islamic philosophers which include Ibn Arabi.[citation needed] These transcendental philosophers are often studied together in traditional schools of irfan, philosophy and theosophy throughout the Muslim world.[79]
Rumi embeds his theosophy (transcendental philosophy) like a string through the beads of his poems and stories. His main point and emphasis is the unity of being.
It is undeniable that Rumi was a Muslim scholar and took Islam seriously. Nonetheless, the depth of his spiritual vision extended beyond narrow understanding sectarian concerns. One quatrain reads:





در راه طلب عاقل و دیوانه یکی است
در شیوه‌ی عشق خویش و بیگانه یکی است
آن را که شراب وصل جانان دادند
در مذهب او کعبه و بتخانه یکی است




On the seeker's path, the wise and crazed are one.
In the way of love, kin and strangers are one.
The one who they gave the wine of the beloved's union,
in his path, the Kaaba and house of idols are one.[80]




—Quatrain 305



According to the Quran, Muhammad is a mercy sent by God.[81] In regards to this, Rumi states:

"The Light of Muhammad does not abandon a Zoroastrian or Jew in the world. May the shade of his good fortune shine upon everyone! He brings all of those who are led astray into the Way out of the desert."[82]
Rumi, however, asserts the supremacy of Islam by stating:

"The Light of Muhammad has become a thousand branches (of knowledge), a thousand, so that both this world and the next have been seized from end to end. If Muhammad rips the veil open from a single such branch, thousands of monks and priests will tear the string of false belief from around their waists."[83]
Many of Rumi's poems suggest the importance of outward religious observance and the primacy of the Qur'an.[84]


Flee to God's Qur'an, take refuge in it
there with the spirits of the prophets merge.
The Book conveys the prophets' circumstances
those fish of the pure sea of Majesty.[85]


Rumi states:


I am the servant of the Qur'an as long as I have life.
I am the dust on the path of Muhammad, the Chosen one.
If anyone quotes anything except this from my sayings,
I am quit of him and outraged by these words.[86]


Rumi also states:

"I "sewed" my two eyes shut from [desires for] this world and the next – this I learned from Muhammad."[87]
On the first page of the Masnavi, Rumi states:

 "Hadha kitâbu 'l- mathnawîy wa huwa uSûlu uSûli uSûli 'd-dîn wa kashshâfu 'l-qur'ân."
"This is the book of the Masnavi, and it is the roots of the roots of the roots of the (Islamic) Religion and it is the Explainer of the Qur'ân."[88]
Hadi Sabzavari, one of Iran's most important 19th-century philosophers, makes the following connection between the Masnavi and Islam, in the introduction to his philosophical commentary on the book:

It is a commentary on the versified exegesis [of the Qur’ān] and its occult mystery, since all of it [all of the Mathnawī] is, as you will see, an elucidation of the clear verses [of the Qur’ān], a clarification of prophetic utterances, a glimmer of the light of the luminous Qur’ān, and burning embers irradiating their rays from its shining lamp. As respects to hunting through the treasure-trove of the Qur’ān, one can find in it [the Mathnawī] all [the Qur’ān's] ancient philosophical wisdom; it [the Mathnawī] is all entirely eloquent philosophy. In truth, the pearly verse of the poem combines the Canon Law of Islam (sharīʿa) with the Sufi Path (ṭarīqa) and the Divine Reality (ḥaqīqa); the author's [Rūmī] achievement belongs to God in his bringing together of the Law (sharīʿa), the Path, and the Truth in a way that includes critical intellect, profound thought, a brilliant natural temperament, and integrity of character that is endowed with power, insight, inspiration, and illumination.[89]
Seyyed Hossein Nasr states:

One of the greatest living authorities on Rûmî in Persia today, Hâdî Hâ'irî, has shown in an unpublished work that some 6,000 verses of the Dîwân and the Mathnawî are practically direct translations of Qur'ânic verses into Persian poetry.[90]
Rumi states in his Dīwān:

The Sufi is hanging on to Muhammad, like Abu Bakr.[91]
His Masnavi contains anecdotes and stories derived largely from the Quran and the hadith, as well as everyday tales.

Legacy
Universality
Shahram Shiva asserts that "Rumi is able to verbalise the highly personal and often confusing world of personal growth and development in a very clear and direct fashion. He does not offend anyone, and he includes everyone.... Today Rumi's poems can be heard in churches, synagogues, Zen monasteries, as well as in the downtown New York art/performance/music scene."
To many modern Westerners, his teachings are one of the best introductions to the philosophy and practice of Sufism. In the West Shahram Shiva has been teaching, performing and sharing the translations of the poetry of Rumi for nearly twenty years and has been instrumental in spreading Rumi's legacy in the English-speaking parts of the world.
According to Professor Majid M. Naini,[92] "Rumi's life and transformation provide true testimony and proof that people of all religions and backgrounds can live together in peace and harmony. Rumi’s visions, words, and life teach us how to reach inner peace and happiness so we can finally stop the continual stream of hostility and hatred and achieve true global peace and harmony.”
Rumi's work has been translated into many of the world's languages, including Russian, German, Urdu, Turkish, Arabic, Bengali, French, Italian, and Spanish, and is being presented in a growing number of formats, including concerts, workshops, readings, dance performances, and other artistic creations.[93] The English interpretations of Rumi's poetry by Coleman Barks have sold more than half a million copies worldwide,[94] and Rumi is one of the most widely read poets in the United States.[95] Shahram Shiva book "Rending the Veil: Literal and Poetic Translations of Rumi" (1995, HOHM Press) is the recipient of the Benjamin Franklin Award.
Recordings of Rumi poems have made it to the USA's Billboard's Top 20 list. A selection of American author Deepak Chopra's editing of the translations by Fereydoun Kia of Rumi's love poems has been performed by Hollywood personalities such as Madonna, Goldie Hawn, Philip Glass and Demi Moore.

 Rumi and his mausoleum on the reverse of the 5000 Turkish lira banknotes of 1981–1994
Rumi and his mausoleum were depicted on the reverse of the 5000 Turkish lira banknotes of 1981–1994.[96]
There is a famous landmark in Northern India, known as Rumi Gate, situated in Lucknow (the capital of Uttar Pradesh) named for Rumi. Indian filmmaker Muzaffar Ali who is from Lucknow made a documentary, titled Rumi in the Land of Khusrau (2001), which presents concerts based on the works of Rumi and Amir Khusrau and highlights parallels between the lives of the poets.[97]

Iranian world
پارسی گو گرچه تازی خوشتر است — عشق را خود صد زبان دیگر است
Say it in Persian although in Arabic sounds better—Love, however, has its own many other dialects
These cultural, historical and linguistic ties between Rumi and Iran have made Rumi an iconic Iranian poet, and some of the most important Rumi scholars including Foruzanfar, Naini, Sabzewari, etc., have come from modern Iran.[98] Rumi's poetry is displayed on the walls of many cities across Iran, sung in Persian music,[98] and read in school books.[99]
Rumi's poetry forms the basis of much classical Iranian and Afghan music.[100][101] Contemporary classical interpretations of his poetry are made by Muhammad Reza Shajarian, Shahram Nazeri, Davood Azad (the three from Iran) and Ustad Mohammad Hashem Cheshti (Afghanistan).

Mewlewī Sufi Order; Rumi and Turkey
Main articles: Mevlevi Order and Sama (Sufism)
The Mewlewī Sufi order was founded in 1273 by Rumi's followers after his death.[102] His first successor in the rectorship of the order was "Husam Chalabi" himself, after whose death in 1284 Rumi's younger and only surviving son, Sultan Walad (died 1312), popularly known as author of the mystical Maṭnawī Rabābnāma, or the Book of the Rabab was installed as grand master of the order.[103] The leadership of the order has been kept within Rumi's family in Konya uninterruptedly since then.[104]
The Mewlewī Sufis, also known as Whirling Dervishes, believe in performing their dhikr in the form of Sama. During the time of Rumi (as attested in the Manāqib ul-Ārefīn of Aflākī), his followers gathered for musical and "turning" practices.
According to tradition, Rumi was himself a notable musician who played the robāb, although his favourite instrument was the ney or reed flute.[105] The music accompanying the samāʿ consists of settings of poems from the Maṭnawī and Dīwān-e Kabīr, or of Sultan Walad's poems.[105] The Mawlawīyah was a well-established Sufi order in the Ottoman Empire, and many of the members of the order served in various official positions of the Caliphate. The centre for the Mevlevi was in Konya. There is also a Mewlewī monastery (درگاه, dargāh) in Istanbul near the Galata Tower in which the samāʿ is performed and accessible to the public. The Mewlewī order issues an invitation to people of all backgrounds:


Come, come, whoever you are,
Wanderer, idolater, worshiper of fire,
Come even though you have broken your vows a thousand times,
Come, and come yet again.
Ours is not a caravan of despair.[106]


 Rumi's tomb in Konya, Turkey.
During Ottoman times, the Mevlevi produced a number of notable poets and musicians, including Sheikh Ghalib, Ismail Rusuhi Dede of Ankara, Esrar Dede, Halet Efendi, and Gavsi Dede, who are all buried at the Galata Mewlewī Khāna (Turkish: Mevlevi-Hane) in Istanbul.[107] Music, especially that of the ney, plays an important part in the Mevlevi.
With the foundation of the modern, secular Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk removed religion from the sphere of public policy and restricted it exclusively to that of personal morals, behaviour and faith. On 13 December 1925, a law was passed closing all the tekkes (dervish lodges) and zāwiyas (chief dervish lodges), and the centres of veneration to which visits (ziyārat) were made. Istanbul alone had more than 250 tekkes as well as small centres for gatherings of various fraternities; this law dissolved the Sufi Orders, prohibited the use of mystical names, titles and costumes pertaining to their titles, impounded the Orders' assets, and banned their ceremonies and meetings. The law also provided penalties for those who tried to re-establish the Orders. Two years later, in 1927, the Mausoleum of Mevlâna in Konya was allowed to reopen as a Museum.[108]
In the 1950s, the Turkish government began allowing the Whirling Dervishes to perform once a year in Konya. The Mewlānā festival is held over two weeks in December; its culmination is on 17 December, the Urs of Mewlānā (anniversary of Rumi's death), called Šabe Arūs (شب عروس) (Persian meaning "nuptial night"), the night of Rumi's union with God.[109] In 1974, the Whirling Dervishes were permitted to travel to the West for the first time. In 2005, UNESCO proclaimed "The Mevlevi Sama Ceremony" of Turkey as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.[110]

Religious denomination
As Edward G. Browne noted, the three most prominent mystical Persian poets Rumi, Sanai and Attar were all Sunni Muslims and their poetry abounds with praise for the first two caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattāb.[111] According to Annemarie Schimmel, the tendency among Shia authors to anachronistically include leading mystical poets such as Rumi and Attar among their own ranks, became stronger after the introduction of Twelver Shia as the state religion in the Safavid Empire in 1501.[112]

Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations
 Rumi in Stamp of Afghanistan, 1968
In Afghanistan, Rumi is known as Mawlānā, in Turkey as Mevlâna, and in Iran as Molavī.
At the proposal of the Permanent Delegations of Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey, and as approved by its executive board and General Conference in conformity with its mission of "constructing in the minds of men the defences of peace", UNESCO was associated with the celebration, in 2007, of the eight hundredth anniversary of Rumi's birth.[113] The commemoration at UNESCO itself took place on 6 September 2007;[2] UNESCO issued a medal in Rumi's name in the hope that it would prove an encouragement to those who are engaged in research on and dissemination of Rumi's ideas and ideals, which would, in turn, enhance the diffusion of the ideals of UNESCO.[36]
On 30 September 2007, Iranian school bells were rung throughout the country in honour of Mewlana.[114] Also in that year, Iran held a Rumi Week from 26 October to 2 November. An international ceremony and conference were held in Tehran; the event was opened by the Iranian president and the chairman of the Iranian parliament. Scholars from twenty-nine countries attended the events, and 450 articles were presented at the conference.[115] Iranian musician Shahram Nazeri was awarded the Légion d'honneur and Iran's House of Music Award in 2007 for his renowned works on Rumi masterpieces.[116] 2007 was declared as the "International Rumi Year" by UNESCO.[117][118]
Also on 30 September 2007, Turkey celebrated Rumi's eight-hundredth birthday with a giant Whirling Dervish ritual performance of the samāʿ, which was televised using forty-eight cameras and broadcast live in eight countries. Ertugrul Gunay, of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism, stated, "Three hundred dervishes are scheduled to take part in this ritual, making it the largest performance of sema in history."[119]

Mawlana Rumi Review
The Mawlana Rumi Review[120] is published annually by The Centre for Persian and Iranian Studies at the University of Exeter in collaboration with The Rumi Institute in Nicosia, Cyprus, and Archetype Books[121] in Cambridge.[121] The first volume was published in 2010, and it has come out annually since then. According to the principal editor of the journal, Leonard Lewisohn: "Although a number of major Islamic poets easily rival the likes of Dante, Shakespeare and Milton in importance and output, they still enjoy only a marginal literary fame in the West because the works of Arabic and Persian thinkers, writers and poets are considered as negligible, frivolous, tawdry sideshows beside the grand narrative of the Western Canon. It is the aim of the Mawlana Rumi Review to redress this carelessly inattentive approach to world literature, which is something far more serious than a minor faux pas committed by the Western literary imagination."[122]

See also


Poetry portal
Islam portal
General
Blind men and an elephant
Sant Mat
Symphony No. 3 (Szymanowski)
Poems by Rumi
Rumi ghazal 163
On Persian culture

Iranian philosophy
List of Persian poets and authors
Ferdowsi (c. 940–1020), poet, arguably the most influential figure in Persian literature
Hafez, Persian poet
Persian literature
Persian mysticism
Tajik people

Rumi scholars and writers

Hamid Algar
Rahim Arbab
William Chittick
Badiozzaman Forouzanfar
Hossein Elahi Ghomshei
Fatemeh Keshavarz
Majid M. Naini
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
Franklin Lewis
François Pétis de la Croix
Annemarie Schimmel
Dariush Shayegan
Abdolkarim Soroush
Abdolhossein Zarinkoob

English translators of Rumi poetry

Arthur John Arberry
William Chittick
Ravan A.G. Farhadi
Nader Khalili
Daniel Ladinsky
Franklin Lewis
Majid M. Naini
Reynold A. Nicholson
James Redhouse
Shahriar Shahriari[123]
Shahram Shiva

References


^ a b c Ritter, H.; Bausani, A. "ḎJ̲alāl al-Dīn Rūmī b. Bahāʾ al-Dīn Sulṭān al-ʿulamāʾ Walad b. Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad Ḵh̲aṭībī." Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2007. Brill Online. Excerpt: "known by the sobriquet Mewlānā, persian poet and founder of the Mewlewiyya order of dervishes"

^ a b c "UNESCO: 800th Anniversary of the Birth of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi". UNESCO. 6 September 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009. Retrieved 25 June 2014. The prominent Persian language poet, thinker and spiritual master, Mevlana Celaleddin Belhi-Rumi was born in 1207 in Balkh, presently Afghanistan.

^ Harmless, William (2007). Mystics. Oxford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-19-804110-8.

^ a b c Annemarie Schimmel, "I Am Wind, You Are Fire," p. 11. She refers to a 1989 article by Fritz Meier:Tajiks and Persian admirers still prefer to call Jalaluddin 'Balkhi' because his family lived in Balkh, current day in Afghanistan before migrating westward. However, their home was not in the actual city of Balkh, since the mid-eighth century a center of Muslim culture in (Greater) Khorasan (Iran and Central Asia). Rather, as Meier has shown, it was in the small town of Wakhsh north of the Oxus that Baha'uddin Walad, Jalaluddin's father, lived and worked as a jurist and preacher with mystical inclinations. Franklin Lewis, Rumi : Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, 2000, pp. 47–49. Lewis has devoted two pages of his book to the topic of Wakhsh, which he states has been identified with the medieval town of Lêwkand (or Lâvakand) or Sangtude, which is about 65 kilometers southeast of Dushanbe, the capital of present-day Tajikistan. He says it is on the east bank of the Vakhshâb river, a major tributary that joins the Amu Daryâ river (also called Jayhun, and named the Oxus by the Greeks). He further states: "Bahâ al-Din may have been born in Balkh, but at least between June 1204 and 1210 (Shavvâl 600 and 607), during which time Rumi was born, Bahâ al-Din resided in a house in Vakhsh (Bah 2:143 [= Bahâ' uddîn Walad's] book, "Ma`ârif."). Vakhsh, rather than Balkh was the permanent base of Bahâ al-Din and his family until Rumi was around five years old (mei 16–35) [= from a book in German by the scholar Fritz Meier—note inserted here]. At that time, in about the year 1212 (A.H. 608–609), the Valads moved to Samarqand (Fih 333; Mei 29–30, 36) [= reference to Rumi's "Discourses" and to Fritz Meier's book—note inserted here], leaving behind Baâ al-Din's mother, who must have been at least seventy-five years old."

^ a b c H. Ritter, 1991, DJALĀL al-DĪN RŪMĪ, The Encyclopaedia of Islam (Volume II: C–G), 393.

^ C. E. Bosworth, 1988, BALḴ, city and province in northern Afghanistan, Encyclopaedia Iranica: Later, suzerainty over it passed to the Qarā Ḵetāy of Transoxania, until in 594/1198 the Ghurid Bahāʾ-al-Dīn Sām b. Moḥammad of Bāmīān occupied it when its Turkish governor, a vassal of the Qarā Ḵetāy, had died, and incorporated it briefly into the Ghurid empire. Yet within a decade, Balḵ and Termeḏ passed to the Ghurids’ rival, the Ḵᵛārazmšāh ʿAlāʾ-al-Dīn Moḥammad[what language is this?], who seized it in 602/1205-06 and appointed as governor there a Turkish commander, Čaḡri or Jaʿfar. In summer of 617/1220 the Mongols first appeared at Balḵ.

^ The Complete Idiot's Guide to Rumi Meditations, Penguin Group, 2008, p. 48, ISBN 9781592577361

^ Lewis, Franklin D. (2014). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi. Simon and Schuster. pp. 15–16, 52, 60, 89.

^ Zarrinkoob, Abdolhossein (2005). Serr-e Ney. Vol. 1. Instisharat-i Ilmi. p. 447.

^ Ramin Jahanbegloo, In Search of the Sacred : A Conversation with Seyyed Hossein Nasr on His Life and Thought, ABC-CLIO (2010), p. 141

^ Yalman, Suzan (7 July 2016). "Badr al-Dīn Tabrīzī". Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE. Badr al-Dīn Tabrīzī was the architect of the original tomb built for Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (d. 672/1273, in Konya), the great Persian mystic and poet.

^ a b Lewis, Franklin D. (2008). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi. Oneworld Publication. p. 9. How is that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as in Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in what is now Turkey, some 1,500 miles to the west?

^ Schimmel, Annemarie (7 April 1994). The Mystery of Numbers. Oxford University Press. p. 51. These examples are taken from the Persian mystic Rumi's work, not from Chinese, but they express the yang-yin [sic] relationship with perfect lucidity.

^ a b Seyyed, Hossein Nasr (1987). Islamic Art and Spirituality. Suny Press. p. 115. Jalal al-Din was born in a major center of Persian culture, Balkh, from Persian speaking parents, and is the product of that Islamic Persian culture which in the 7th/13th century dominated the 'whole of the eastern lands of Islam and to which present day Persians as well as Turks, Afghans, Central Asian Muslims and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani subcontinent are heir. It is precisely in this world that the sun of his spiritual legacy has shone most brillianty during the past seven centuries. The father of Jalal al-Din, Muhammad ibn Husayn Khatibi, known as Baha al-Din Walad and entitled Sultan al-'ulama', was an outstanding Sufi in Balkh connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra.

^ a b Charles Haviland (30 September 2007). "The roar of Rumi—800 years on". BBC News. Retrieved 30 September 2007.

^ Ciabattari, Jane (21 October 2014). "Why is Rumi the best-selling poet in the US?". BBC News. Retrieved 22 August 2016.

^ Tompkins, Ptolemy (29 October 2002). "Rumi Rules!". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 22 August 2016.

^ a b Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, SUNY Press, 1993, p. 193: "Rumi's mother tongue was Persian, but he had learned during his stay in Konya, enough Turkish and Greek to use it, now and then, in his verse."

^ a b Franklin Lewis: "On the question of Rumi's multilingualism (pp. 315–317), we may still say that he spoke and wrote in Persian as a native language, wrote and conversed in Arabic as a learned "foreign" language and could at least get by at the market in Turkish and Greek (although some wildly extravagant claims have been made about his command of Attic Greek, or his native tongue being Turkish) (Lewis 2008:xxi). (Franklin Lewis, "Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi," One World Publication Limited, 2008).
Franklin also points out that: "Living among Turks, Rumi also picked up some colloquial Turkish."(Franklin Lewis, "Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi," One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 315). He also mentions Rumi composed thirteen lines in Greek (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 316). On Rumi's son, Sultan Walad, Franklin mentions: "Sultan Walad elsewhere admits that he has little knowledge of Turkish" (Sultan Walad): Franklin Lewis, Rumi, "Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 239) and
"Sultan Valad did not feel confident about his command of Turkish" (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000, p. 240)

^ a b Δέδες, Δ. (1993). "Ποιήματα του Μαυλανά Ρουμή" [Poems by Mowlānā Rūmī]. Τα Ιστορικά. 10 (18–19): 3–22.

^ Meyer, Gustav (1895). "Die griechischen Verse im Rabâbnâma". Byzantinische Zeitschrift. 4 (3). doi:10.1515/byzs.1895.4.3.401. S2CID 191615267.

^ "Greek Verses of Rumi & Sultan Walad". uci.edu. 22 April 2009. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012.

^ Gardet, Louis (1977). "Religion and Culture".  In Holt, P.M.; Lambton, Ann K.S.; Lewis, Bernard (eds.). The Cambridge History of Islam, Part VIII: Islamic Society and Civilization. Cambridge University Press. p. 586. It is sufficient to mention 'Aziz al-Din Nasafi, Farid al-Din 'Attar and Sa'adi, and above all Jalal al-Din Rumi, whose Mathnawi remains one of the purest literary glories of Persia

^ a b C.E. Bosworth, "Turkmen Expansion towards the west" in UNESCO History of Humanity, Volume IV, titled "From the Seventh to the Sixteenth Century", UNESCO Publishing / Routledge, p. 391: "While the Arabic language retained its primacy in such spheres as law, theology and science, the culture of the Seljuk court and secular literature within the sultanate became largely Persianized; this is seen in the early adoption of Persian epic names by the Seljuk rulers (Qubād, Kay Khusraw and so on) and in the use of Persian as a literary language (Turkmen must have been essentially a vehicle for everyday speech at this time). The process of Persianization accelerated in the 13th century with the presence in Konya of two of the most distinguished refugees fleeing before the Mongols, Bahā' al-Dīn Walad and his son Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, whose Mathnawī, composed in Konya, constitutes one of the crowning glories of classical Persian literature."

^ "Interview: 'Many Americans Love Rumi...But They Prefer He Not Be Muslim'". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. 9 August 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2016.

^ "Interview: A mystical journey with Rumi". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 16 August 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)

^ "Dîvân-i Kebîr Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī". OMI – Old Manuscripts & Incunabula. Retrieved 22 August 2016.

^ Rahman, Aziz (27 August 2015). "Nazrul: The rebel and the romantic". The Daily Sun. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2016.

^ Khan, Mahmudur Rahman (30 September 2018). "A tribute to Jalaluddin Rumi". The Daily Sun.

^ Sipahsalar, Faridun bin Ahmad (1946).  Sa'id Nafisi (ed.). Risala-yi Ahwal-i Mawlana. Tehran. p. 5.

^ Rumi (2015). Selected Poems. Penguin Books. p. 350. ISBN 978-0-14-196911-4.

^ Franklin Lewis (2008). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi. One World Publication Limited. p. 9.

^ "ملای روم" in Dehkhoda Dictionary

^ Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (Maulana), Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Islam: Selections from His Stories, Poems, and Discourses, Annotated & Explained, SkyLight Paths Publishing, 2004.

^ a b Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Art and Spirituality, SUNY Press, 1987. p. 115: "Jalal al-Din was born in a major center of Persian culture, Balkh, from Persian speaking parents, and is the product of that Islamic Persian culture which in the 7th/13th century dominated the 'whole of the eastern lands of Islam and to which present day Persians as well as Turks, Afghans, Central Asian Muslims and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani subcontinent are heir. It is precisely in this world that the sun of his spiritual legacy has shone most brilliantly during the past seven centuries. The father of Jalal al-Din, Muhammad ibn Husayn Khatibi, known as Baha al-Din Walad and entitled Sultan al-'ulama', was an outstanding Sufi in Balkh connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra."

^ a b "UNESCO. Executive Board; 175th; UNESCO Medal in honour of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi; 2006" (PDF). UNESDOC – UNESCO Documents and Publications. October 2006. Retrieved 25 June 2014.

^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publication Limited, 2008 p. 9: "How is that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere"

^ Maqsood Jafrī, The gleam of wisdom, Sigma Press, 2003. p. 238: "Rumi has influenced a large number of writers while on the other hand he himself was under the great influence of Sanai and Attar.

^ A.J. Arberry, Sufism: An Account of the Mystics of Islam, Courier Dover Publications, Nov 9, 2001. p. 141

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, The Garden of Truth: The Vision and Promise of Sufism, Islam's Mystical Tradition HarperCollins, Sep 2, 2008. page 130: "Attar has traversed the seven cities of Love, We are still at the turn of one street!"

^ Grousset, Rene, The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia, (Rutgers University Press, 2002), 157; "...the Seljuk court at Konya adopted Persian as its official language".

^ Aḥmad of Niǧde's "al-Walad al-Shafīq" and the Seljuk Past, A.C.S. Peacock, Anatolian Studies, Vol. 54, (2004), 97; With the growth of Seljuk power in Rum, a more highly developed Muslim cultural life, based on the Persianate culture of the Great Seljuk court, was able to take root in Anatolia

^ Carter Vaughn Findley, The Turks in World History, Oxford University Press, 11 November 2004. p. 72: Meanwhile, amid the migratory swarm that Turkified Anatolia, the dispersion of learned men from the Persian-speaking east paradoxically made the Seljuks court at Konya a new center for Persian court culture, as exemplified by the great mystical poet Jelaleddin Rumi (1207–1273).

^ Barks, Coleman, Rumi: The Book of Love: Poems of Ecstasy and Longing, HarperCollins, 2005, p. xxv, ISBN 978-0-06-075050-3

^ Note: Rumi's shrine is now known as the "Mevlâna Museum" in Turkey.

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000.How is it that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the Greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in Central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in which is now Turkey

^ a b Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). pp. 90–92: "Baha al-Din’s disciples also traced his family lineage to the first caliph, Abu Bakr (Sep 9; Af 7; JNO 457; Dow 213). This probably stems from willful confusion over his paternal great grandmother, who was the daughter of Abu Bakr of Sarakhs, a noted jurist (d. 1090). The most complete genealogy offered for family stretches back only six or seven generations and cannot reach to Abu Bakr, the companion and first caliph of the Prophet, who died two years after the Prophet, in C.E. 634 (FB 5–6 n.3)."

^ FUNDAMENTALS OF RUMI'S THOUGHT, Tughra Books, 2006, ISBN 9781597846134

^ H. Algar, “BAHĀʾ-AL-DĪN MOḤAMMAD WALAD“, Encyclopedia Iranica. There is no reference to such descent in the works of Bahāʾ-e Walad and Mawlānā Jalāl-al-Dīn or in the inscriptions on their sarcophagi. The attribution may have arisen from confusion between the caliph and another Abū Bakr, Šams-al-Aʾemma Abū Bakr Saraḵsī (d. 483/1090), the well-known Hanafite jurist, whose daughter, Ferdows Ḵātūn, was the mother of Aḥmad Ḵaṭīb, Bahāʾ-e Walad's grandfather (see Forūzānfar, Resāla, p. 6). Tradition also links Bahāʾ-e Walad's lineage to the Ḵᵛārazmšāh[check spelling] dynasty. His mother is said to have been the daughter of ʿAlāʾ-al-Dīn Moḥammad Ḵārazmšāh[check spelling] (d. 596/1200), but this appears to be excluded for chronological reasons (Forūzānfar, Resāla, p. 7)

^ (Ritter, H.; Bausani, A. "ḎJalāl al- Dīn Rūmī b. Bahāʾ al-Dīn Sulṭān al-ʿulamāʾ Walad b. Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad Ḵhaṭībī ." Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2009. Brill Online. Excerpt: "known by the sobriquet Mawlānā (Mevlâna), Persian poet and founder of the Mawlawiyya order of dervishes"): "The assertions that his family tree goes back to Abū Bakr, and that his mother was a daughter of the Ḵhwārizmshāh ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad (Aflākī, i, 8–9) do not hold on closer examination (B. Furūzānfarr, Mawlānā Ḏjalāl Dīn, Tehrān 1315, 7; ʿAlīnaḳī Sharīʿatmadārī, Naḳd-i matn-i mathnawī, in Yaghmā, xii (1338), 164; Aḥmad Aflākī, Ariflerin menkibeleri, trans. Tahsin Yazıcı, Ankara 1953, i, Önsöz, 44).")

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 44:“Baha al-Din’s father, Hosayn, had been a religious scholar with a bent for asceticism, occupied like his own father before him, Ahmad, with the family profession of preacher (khatib). Of the four canonical schools of Sunni Islam, the family adhered to the relatively liberal Hanafi fiqh. Hosayn-e Khatibi enjoyed such renown in his youth—so says Aflaki with characteristic exaggeration—that Razi al-Din Nayshapuri and other famous scholars came to study with him (Af 9; for the legend about Baha al-Din, see below, "The Mythical Baha al-Din"). Another report indicates that Baha al-Din's grandfather, Ahmad al-Khatibi, was born to Ferdows Khatun, a daughter of the reputed Hanafite jurist and author Shams al-A’emma Abu Bakr of Sarakhs, who died circa 1088 (Af 75; FB 6 n.4; Mei 74 n. 17). This is far from implausible and, if true, would tend to suggest that Ahmad al-Khatabi had studied under Shams al-A’emma. Prior to that the family could supposedly trace its roots back to Isfahan. We do not learn the name of Baha al-Din's mother in the sources, only that he referred to her as "Mama" (Mami), and that she lived to the 1200s." (p. 44)

^ Ahmed, Akbar (2011). Suspended Somewhere Between: A Book of Verse. PM Press. pp. i. ISBN 978-1-60486-485-4.

^ El-Fers, Mohamed (2009). Mevlana Celaleddin Rumi. MokumTV. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-4092-9291-3.

^ "Hz. Mawlana and Shams". semazen.net.

^ The Essential Rumi. Translations by Coleman Barks, p. xx.

^ Rumi: Daylight: A Daybook of Spiritual Guidance. Shambhala Publications. 1999. ISBN 978-0-8348-2517-8.

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1987). Islamic Art and Spirituality. SUNY Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-88706-174-5.

^ a b c Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). p. xix.

^ "Anatolia: Dot com to Paradise". 2 February 2002. Archived from the original on 2 February 2002.

^ Crane, H. (1993). "Notes on Saldjūq Architectural Patronage in Thirteenth Century Anatolia". Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient. 36 (1): 1–57. doi:10.1163/156852093X00010. JSTOR 3632470. ProQuest 1304344524.

^ William C. Chittick (2017). "RUMI, JALĀL-AL-DIN vii. Philosophy". Encyclopaedia Iranica.

^ Ibrahim Gamard (with gratitude for R.A. Nicholson's 1930 British translation). The Mathnawî-yé Ma'nawî – Rhymed Couplets of Deep Spiritual Meaning of Jalaluddin Rumi.

^ Naini, Majid. The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love.

^ Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). p. xix. Rumi’s Masnavi holds an exalted status in the rich canon of Persian Sufi literature as the greatest mystical poem ever written. It is even referred to commonly as ‘the Koran in Persian’.

^ Abdul Rahman Jami notes:


من چه گویم وصف آن عالی‌جناب — نیست پیغمبر ولی دارد کتاب
مثنوی معنوی مولوی — هست قرآن در زبان پهلوی



What can I say in praise of that great one?
He is not a Prophet but has come with a book;
The Spiritual Masnavi of Mowlavi
Is the Qur'an in the language of Pahlavi (Persian).


(Khawaja Abdul Hamid Irfani, "The Sayings of Rumi and Iqbal", Bazm-e-Rumi, 1976.)


^ Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). pp. xii–xiii. Towards the end of his life he presented the fruit of his experience of Sufism in the form of the Masnavi, which has been judged by many commentators, both within the Sufi tradition and outside it, to be the greatest mystical poem ever written.

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 306: "The manuscripts versions differ greatly in the size of the text and orthography. Nicholson’s text has 25,577 lines though the average medieval and early modern manuscripts contained around 27,000 lines, meaning the scribes added two thousand lines or about eight percent more to the poem composed by Rumi. Some manuscripts give as many as 32,000!"

^ Virani, Shafique N. (January 2019). "Persian Poetry, Sufism and Ismailism: The Testimony of Khwājah Qāsim Tushtarī's Recognizing God". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 29 (1): 17–49. doi:10.1017/S1356186318000494. S2CID 165288246. ProQuest 2300038453.

^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008). p. 314: “The Foruzanfar’s edition of the Divan-e Shams compromises 3229 ghazals and qasidas making a total of almost 35000 lines, not including several hundred lines of stanzaic poems and nearly two thousand quatrains attributed to him”

^ Dar al-Masnavi Website, accessed December 2009: According to the Dar al-Masnavi website: “In Forûzânfar's edition of Rumi's Divan, there are 90 ghazals (Vol. 1, 29; Vol. 2, 1; Vol. 3, 6; Vol. 4, 8; Vol. 5, 19, Vol. 6, 0; Vol. 7, 27) and 19 quatrains entirely in Arabic. In addition, there are ghazals which are all Arabic except for the final line; many have one or two lines in Arabic within the body of the poem; some have as many as 9–13 consecutive lines in Arabic, with Persian verses preceding and following; some have alternating lines in Persian, then Arabic; some have the first half of the verse in Persian, the second half in Arabic.”

^ Mecdut MensurOghlu: “The Divan of Jalal al-Din Rumi contains 35 couplets in Turkish and Turkish-Persian which have recently been published me” (Celal al-Din Rumi’s turkische Verse: UJb. XXIV (1952), pp. 106–115)

^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008): "“a couple of dozen at most of the 35,000 lines of the Divan-I Shams are in Turkish, and almost all of these lines occur in poems that are predominantly in Persian”"

^ "Untitled Document".

^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008): "Three poems have bits of demotic Greek; these have been identified and translated into French, along with some Greek verses of Sultan Valad. Golpinarli (GM 416–417) indicates according to Vladimir Mir Mirughli, the Greek used in some of Rumi's macaronic poems reflects the demotic Greek of the inhabitants of Anatolia. Golpinarli then argues that Rumi knew classical Persian and Arabic with precision, but typically composes poems in a more popular or colloquial Persian and Arabic.".

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West — The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publications, 2000, Chapter 7.

^ “As Safa points out (Saf 2:1206) the Discourse reflect the stylistics of oral speech and lacks the sophisticated word plays, Arabic vocabulary and sound patterning that we would except from a consciously literary text of this period. Once again, the style of Rumi as lecturer or orator in these discourses does not reflect an audience of great intellectual pretensions, but rather middle-class men and women, along with number of statesmen and rulers”” (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 292)

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 293

^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 295:“In contrast with the prose of his Discourses and sermons, the style of the letters is consciously sophisticated and epistolary, in conformity with the expectations of correspondence directed to nobles, statesmen and kings"

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2000) Transcendent Theosophy of Mulla Sadra ISBN 964-426-034-1

^ Rumi: 53 Secrets from the Tavern of Love, trans. by Amin Banani and Anthony A. Lee, p. 3

^ Verse (21:107) – English Translation

^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, p. 163, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3

^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, p. 177, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3

^ Lewis 2000, pp. 407–408 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLewis2000 (help)

^ Lewis 2000, p. 408 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLewis2000 (help)

^ Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Self Discovery, Dar al Masnavi

^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, SkyLight Paths, p. 169, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3

^ About the Masnavi, Dar Al-Masnavi

^ Tasbihi, Eliza (2016). "Sabzawārī's Sharḥ-i Asrār: A Philosophical Commentary on Rūmīʾs 'Mathnawī'". Mawlana Rumi Review. 7: 175–196. doi:10.1163/25898566-00701009. JSTOR 45236376.

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "Rumi and the Sufi Tradition," in Chelkowski (ed.), The Scholar and the Saint, p. 183

^ Quoted in Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Islam: Selections from His Stories, Poems, and Discourses — Annotated and Explained, p. 171.

^ "index". naini.net.

^ "Rumi Network by Shahram Shiva – The World's Most Popular Website on Rumi". rumi.net.

^ "University of Tehran". ut.ac.ir. Archived from the original on 7 May 2006.

^ Curiel, Jonathan, San Francisco Chronicle Staff Writer, Islamic verses: The influence of Muslim literature in the United States has grown stronger since the 11 Sep attacks (6 February 2005), Available online (Retrieved Aug 2006)

^ Banknote Museum: 7. Emission Group—Five Thousand Turkish Lira—I. Series Archived 2 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine, II. Series Archived 2 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine & III. Series. Retrieved on 20 April 2009. Archived 3 June 2009 at WebCite

^ "Rumi in the Land of Khusrau (Full Movie )". Indian Diplomacy. 2 June 2012. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021.

^ a b Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000.

^ See for example 4th grade Iranian school book where the story of the Parrot and Merchant from the Mathnawi is taught to students[verification needed]

^ Hiro, Dilip (1 November 2011). Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History of Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz stan, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Iran. The Overlook Press. ISBN 978-1-59020-378-1.[page needed]

^ Uyar, Yaprak Melike; Beşiroğlu, Ş. Şehvar (2014). "Recent representations of the music of the Mevlevi Order of Sufism". Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies. 6 (2): 137–150. doi:10.4407/jims.2014.02.002.

^ "Sufism". gmu.edu.

^ "Islamic Supreme Council of America – Islamic Supreme Council of America". www.islamicsupremecouncil.org. Archived from the original on 27 August 2013.

^ "Mevlâna Celâleddin Rumi". Archived from the original on 6 May 2007. Retrieved 19 May 2007.

^ a b "About the Mevlevi Order of America". hayatidede.org. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013.

^ Hanut, Eryk (2000). Rumi: The Card and Book Pack : Meditation, Inspiration, Self-discovery. The Rumi Card Book. Tuttle Publishing. xiii. ISBN 978-1-885203-95-3.

^ "Web Page Under Construction". Archived from the original on 25 March 2006.

^ Mango, Andrew, Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey, (2002), ISBN 978-1-58567-011-6.

^ "Intro". Archived from the original on 4 September 2006.

^ The Mevlevi Sema Ceremony UNESCO.

^ Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia from the Earliest Times Until Firdawsh, 543 pp., Adamant Media Corporation, 2002, ISBN 978-1-4021-6045-5, 978-1-4021-6045-5 (see p. 437)

^ Annemarie Schimmel, Deciphering the Signs of God, 302 pp., SUNY Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-7914-1982-3, 978-0-7914-1982-3 (see p. 210)

^ "Haber, Haberler, Güncel Haberler, Ekonomi, Dünya, Gündem Haberleri, Son Dakika, – Zaman Gazetesi". zaman.com. Archived from the original on 17 March 2006.

^ "همشهری آنلاین". Archived from the original on 30 October 2007.

^ "Int'l congress on Molana opens in Tehran". Archived from the original on 20 December 2007.

^ Iran Daily — Arts & Culture — 10/03/06 Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine

^ "News | Chnpress". www.chnpress.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.

^ "Podcast Episode: Living Dialogues: Coleman Barks: The Soul of Rumi (Thought-Leaders in Transforming Ourselves and Our Global Community with Duncan Campbell, Visionary Conversationalist, Living Dialogues.com". personallifemedia.com.

^ "300 dervishes whirl for Rumi in Turkey". Tehran Times. 29 September 2007.

^ "Mawlana Rumi Review". ISSN 2042-3357.

^ a b "archetypebooks.com". Archived from the original on 17 December 2004.

^ Lewisohn, Leonard. "Editor's Note". Mawlana Rumi Review.

^ Rumi, Jalaloddin. "Rumi on fire". translated by Shahriar Shahriari. Retrieved 2 January 2020.


Further reading
English translations
Ma-Aarif-E-Mathnavi A commentary of the Mathnavi of Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi (R.A.), by Hazrat Maulana Hakim Muhammad Akhtar Saheb (D.B.), 1997.
The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi, by William Chittick, Albany: SUNY Press, 1983.
The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, by Majid M. Naini, Universal Vision & Research, 2002 ISBN 978-0-9714600-0-3 www.naini.net
The Mesnevi of Mevlâna Jelālu'd-dīn er-Rūmī. Book first, together with some account of the life and acts of the Author, of his ancestors, and of his descendants, illustrated by a selection of characteristic anecdotes, as collected by their historian, Mevlâna Shemsu'd-dīn Ahmed el-Eflākī el-'Arifī, translated and the poetry versified by James W. Redhouse, London: 1881. Contains the translation of the first book only.
Masnaví-i Ma'naví, the Spiritual Couplets of Mauláná Jalálu'd-din Muhammad Rúmí, translated and abridged by E.H. Whinfield, London: 1887; 1989. Abridged version from the complete poem. On-line editions at sacred-texts.com, archive.org and on wikisource.
The Masnavī by Jalālu'd-din Rūmī. Book II, translated for the first time from the Persian into prose, with a Commentary, by C.E. Wilson, London: 1910.
The Mathnawí of Jalálu'ddín Rúmí, edited from the oldest manuscripts available, with critical notes, translation and commentary by Reynold A. Nicholson, in 8 volumes, London: Messrs Luzac & Co., 1925–1940. Contains the text in Persian. First complete English translation of the Mathnawí.
Rending The Veil: Literal and Poetic Translations of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Hohm Press, 1995 ISBN 978-0-934252-46-1. Recipient of Benjamin Franklin Award.
Hush, Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Jain Publishing, 1999 ISBN 978-0-87573-084-4.
The Essential Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks with John Moyne, A.J. Arberry, Reynold Nicholson, San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1996 ISBN 978-0-06-250959-8; Edison (NJ) and New York: Castle Books, 1997 ISBN 978-0-7858-0871-8. Selections. Description of 2010 expanded edition. A much-cited poem therein is "The Guest House found in, for example, Mark Williams and Danny Penman (2011), Mindfulness, pp. 165–167. The poem is also at The Guest House by Rumi.
The Illuminated Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks, Michael Green contributor, New York: Broadway Books, 1997 ISBN 978-0-7679-0002-7.
The Masnavi: Book One, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2004 ISBN 978-0-19-280438-9. Translated for the first time from the Persian edition prepared by Mohammad Estelami with an introduction and explanatory notes. Awarded the 2004 Lois Roth Prize for excellence in translation of Persian literature by the American Institute of Iranian Studies.
Divani Shamsi Tabriz, translated by Nevit Oguz Ergin as Divan-i-kebir, published by Echo Publications, 2003 ISBN 978-1-887991-28-5.
The rubais of Rumi: insane with love, translations and commentary by Nevit Oguz Ergin and Will Johnson, Inner Traditions, Rochester, Vermont, 2007, ISBN 978-1-59477-183-5.
The Masnavi: Book Two, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-19-921259-0. The first ever verse translation of the unabridged text of Book Two, with an introduction and explanatory notes.
The Rubai'yat of Jalal Al-Din Rumi: Select Translations Into English Verse, Translated by A.J. Arberry, (Emery Walker, London, 1949)
Mystical Poems of Rumi, Translated by A.J. Arberry, (University of Chicago Press, 2009)
The quatrains of Rumi: Complete translation with Persian text, Islamic mystical commentary, manual of terms, and concordance, translated by Ibrahim W. Gamard and A.G. Rawan Farhadi, 2008.
The Soul of Rumi: A New Collection of Ecstatic Poems, translations by Coleman Barks, Harper One, 2002.
The Hundred Tales of Wisdom, a translation by Idries Shah of the Manāqib ul-Ārefīn of Aflākī, Octagon Press 1978. Episodes from the life of Rumi and some of his teaching stories.
Rumi: 53 Secrets from the Tavern of Love: Poems from the Rubaiyat of Mowlana Rumi, translated by Amin Banani and Anthony A. Lee (White Cloud Press, 2014) ISBN 978-1-940468-00-6.
Life and work
RUMI, JALĀL-AL-DIN. Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition, 2014.
Dr Khalifa Abdul Hakim, "The metaphysics of Rumi: A critical and historical sketch", Lahore: The Institute of Islamic Culture, 1959. ISBN 978-81-7435-475-4
Afzal Iqbal, The Life and thought of Mohammad Jalal-ud-Din Rumi, Lahore: Bazm-i-Iqbal, 1959 (latest edition, The life and work of Jalal-ud-Din Rumi, Kuala Lumpur: The Other Press, 2014). Endorsed by the famous Rumi scholar, A.J. Arberry, who penned the foreword.
Abdol Reza Arasteh, Rumi the Persian: Rebirth in Creativity and Love, Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1963 (latest edition, Rumi the Persian, the Sufi, New York: Routledge, 2013). The author was a US-trained Iranian psychiatrist influenced by Erich Fromm and C.G. Jung.
Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, Albany: SUNY Press, 1993.
Fatemeh Keshavarz, "Reading Mystical Lyric: The Case of Jalal al-Din Rumi", University of South Carolina Press, 1998. ISBN 978-1-57003-180-9.
Mawlana Rumi Review mawlanarumireview.com. An annual review devoted to Rumi. Archetype, 2010. ISBN 978-1-901383-38-6.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Art and Spirituality, Albany: SUNY Press, 1987, chapters 7 and 8.
Majid M. Naini, The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, Universal Vision & Research, 2002, ISBN 978-0-9714600-0-3
Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. ISBN 978-1-85168-214-0
Leslie Wines, Rumi: A Spiritual Biography, New York: Crossroads, 2001 ISBN 978-0-8245-2352-7.
Rumi's Thoughts, edited by Seyed G Safavi, London: London Academy of Iranian Studies, 2003.
William Chittick, The Sufi Doctrine of Rumi: Illustrated Edition, Bloomington: World Wisdom, 2005.
Şefik Can, Fundamentals of Rumi's Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective, Sommerset (NJ): The Light Inc., 2004 ISBN 978-1-932099-79-9.
Rumi's Tasawwuf and Vedanta by R.M. Chopra in Indo Iranica Vol. 60
Athanasios Sideris, "Mevlana Celaleddin Rumi", an entry on Rumi's connections to the Greek element in Asia Minor, in the Encyclopedia of the Hellenic World – Asia Minor, 2003.
Waley, Muhammad Isa (2017). The Stanzaic Poems (Tarjī'āt) of Rumi. Critical Edition, Translation, and Commentary, with Additional Chapters on Aspects of His Divan. (School of Oriental and African Studies, London.)
Persian literature
E.G. Browne, History of Persia, four volumes, first published 1902–1924.
Jan Rypka, History of Iranian Literature, Reidel Publishing Company; 1968 OCLC 460598. ISBN 978-90-277-0143-5
"RUMI: His Teachings And Philosophy" by R.M. Chopra, Iran Society, Kolkata (2007).
External links


Rumi  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource

Works by Rumi at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Rumi at Internet Archive
Works by Rumi at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Rumi at Open Library 
Dar al Masnavi, several English versions of selections by different translators.
Poems by Rumi in English at the Academy of American Poets
Masnavi-e Ma'navi, recited in Persian by Mohammad Ghanbar
vteRumiWorks
Masnavi
Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi
Fihi Ma Fihi
People
Shams Tabrizi
Sultan Walad (son)
Gurju Khatun (patron)
Other
Mevlana Museum
Mevlevi Order
Category
Articles related to Rumi
vteMuslim scholars of the Hanafi School
by century (AH
CE)
2nd/8th
Abu Hanifa (founder of the school; 699–767)
Abu Yusuf (738–798)
Ibn al-Mubarak (726–797)
Muhammad al-Shaybani (749–805)
Yahya ibn Ma'in (774–807)
Waki' ibn al-Jarrah (d. 812)
3rd/9th
Isa ibn Aban (d. 836)
Ahmad ibn Abi Du'ad (777–854)
Yahya ibn Aktham (d. 857)
Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi (d. 869)
Al-Ḫaṣṣāf (d. 874)
Abu Bakr al-Samarqandi (d. 882)
4th/10th
Al-Tahawi (843–933)
Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (853–944)
Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi (b. 874)
Al-Jassas (917-981)
Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (944-983)
5th/11th
Abu al-Husayn al-Basri (d. 1044)
Ali Hujwiri (1009-1072)
Al-Bazdawi (1010-1089)
Al-Sarakhsi (d. 1090)
Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (1030-1100)
Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi (d. 1115)
6th/12th
Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari (d. 1139)
Ibn al-Malāḥimī (d. 1141)
Yusuf Hamadani (1062-1141)
Abu Hafs Umar al-Nasafi (1067-1142)
Al-Zamakhshari (1074-1143)
Siraj al-Din al-Ushi (d. 1180)
Nur al-Din al-Sabuni (d. 1184)
Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi (d. 1197)
Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani (1135-1197)
7th/13th
Rumi (1207-1273)
Jalaluddin Tabrizi (d. 1228)
Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki (1173-1235)
Mu'in al-Din Chishti (1143-1236)
Fariduddin Ganjshakar (1173-1266)
Abu Tawwama (d. 1300)
Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi (d. 1310)
8th/14th
Nizamuddin Auliya (1238-1325)
Uthman bin Ali Zayla'i (d. 1342)
Shah Jalal Mujarrad (1271-1346)
Uthman Siraj ad-Din (1258-1357)
Ala al-Haq (1301-1384)
Jahaniyan Jahangasht (1308-1384)
Akmal al-Din al-Babarti (d. 1384)
Al-Taftazani (1322-1390)
Ibn Abi al-Izz (1331-1390)
Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi (1350-1410)
Al-Sharif al-Jurjani (1339-1414)
9th/15th
Nur Qutb Alam (d. 1416)
Shams al-Din al-Fanari (1350-1431)
'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari (1377-1438)
Badr al-Din al-Ayni (1361-1451)
Al-Kamal ibn al-Humam (1388-1457)
Ali Qushji (1403-1474)
Khidr Bey (b. 1407)
10th/16th
Ibn Kemal (1468-1536)
Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī (1460-1549)
Usman Bengali (d. 1573)
Muhammad Birgivi (1522-1573)
Ebussuud Efendi (1490-1574)
Ali al-Qari (d. 1606)
11th/17th
Ahmad Sirhindi (1564-1624)
'Abd al-Haqq al-Dehlawi (1551-1642)
Kâtip Çelebi (1609-1657)
Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji (1569-1659)
Khayr al-Din al-Ramli (1585-1671)
Syed Rafi Mohammad (d. 1679)
Mir Zahid Harawi (d. 1689)
Syed Inayatullah (d. 1713)
12th/18th
Shah Abdur Rahim (1644-1719)
Muhammad Salih Bengali (fl. 1700s)
Syed Hayatullah (d. 1722)
Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi (1641-1731)
Syed Mohammad Zaman (d. 1756)
Hashim Thattvi (1692-1761)
Shah Waliullah Dehlawi (1703-1762)
Shah Nuri Bengali (died 1785)
Murtada al-Zabidi (1732-1790)
Sanaullah Panipati (1730-1810)
Mawlana Murad (fl. 1790s)
Syed Mohammad Rafi (d. 1803)
Majduddin (d. 1813)
13th/19th
Shah Abdul Aziz (1746-1824)
Syed Ahmad Barelvi (1786-1831)
Ibn Abidin (1784-1836)
Haji Shariatullah (1781-1840)
Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (1796-1861)
Dudu Miyan (1819-1862)
Karamat Ali Jaunpuri (1800-1873)
Al-Maydani (1807-1861)
Haji Dost Muhammad Qandhari (1801-1868)
Yusuf Ma Dexin (1794-1874)
Yaqub Nanautawi (1833-1884)
Hafiz Ahmad Jaunpuri (1834-1899)
Abd al-Hayy al-Lucknawi (1848-1886)
Abdul Wahid Bengali (1850-1905)
Syed Ahmadullah Maizbhandari (1826-1906)
Abd Allah ibn Abbas ibn Siddiq (1854-1907)
Shibli Nomani (1857-1914)
Najib Ali Choudhury (fl. 1870s)
14th/20th
Abdul Hamid Madarshahi (1869-1920)
Mahmud Hasan Deobandi (1851-1920)
Abdul Awwal Jaunpuri (1867-1921)
Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi (1856-1921)
Sufi Azizur Rahman (1862-1922)
Muhammad Amjad (d. 1927)
Aziz-ul-Rahman Usmani (d. 1928)
Hamiduddin Farahi (1863-1930)
Ibrahim Ali Tashna (1872-1931)
Anwar Shah Kashmiri (1875-1933)
Abdur Rab Jaunpuri (1875-1835)
Meher Ali Shah (1859-1937)
Ghulamur Rahman Maizbhandari (1865-1937)
Mohammad Abu Bakr Siddique (1845-1939)
Ashraf Ali Thanwi (1863-1943)
Ibrahim Ujani (1863-1943)
Habibullah Qurayshi (1865-1943)
Hamid Raza Khan (1875-1943)
Muhammad Sahool Bhagalpuri (d. 1948)
Amjad Ali Aazmi (1882-1948)
Naeem-ud-Deen Muradabadi (1887-1948)
Abd Allah Siraj (1876-1949)
Shabbir Ahmad Usmani (1887-1949)
Jamaat Ali Shah (1834-1951)
Khwaja Yunus Ali (1886-1951)
Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari (1879-1952)
Shihabuddeen Ahmed Koya Shaliyathi (1885-1954)
Izaz Ali Amrohi (1882-1955)
Hussain Ahmed Madani (1879-1957)
Ahmed Ali Enayetpuri (1898-1959)
Azizul Haq (1903-1961)
Sardar Ahmad Chishti (1903-1962)
Yusuf Kandhlawi (1917-1965)
Ibrahim Raza Khan (1907-1965)
Shah Ahmad Hasan (1882-1967)
Shamsul Haque Faridpuri (1896-1969)
Abdul Hamid Qadri Badayuni (1898-1970)
Mohammad Abdul Ghafoor Hazarvi (1909-1970)
Mushahid Ahmad Bayampuri (1907-1971)
Abdur Rahman Kashgarhi (d. 1971)
Muhammad Abu Zahra (1898-1974)
​Fazlur Rahman Ansari (1914-1974)
Deen Muhammad Khan (1900-1974)
Amimul Ehsan Barkati (1911-1974)
Abul Wafa Al Afghani (1893-1975)
Muhammad Faizullah (1892-1976)
Athar Ali Bengali (1891-1976)
Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani (1880-1976)
Muhammad Shafi Deobandi (1897-1976)
Abul A'la Maududi (1903-1979)
Mustafa Raza Khan Qadri (1892-1981)
Muhammad Muslehuddin Siddiqui (1918-1983)
Ibrahim Chatuli (1894-1984)
Faiz-ul Hassan Shah (1911-1984)
Shafee Okarvi (1930-1984)
Saeed Ahmad Akbarabadi (1908-1985)
Harun Babunagari (1902-1986)
Ahmad Saeed Kazmi (1913-1986)
Abdur Rahim Firozpuri (1918-1987)
Muhammadullah Hafezzi (1895-1987)
Shamsul Huda Panchbagi (1897-1988)
Abdul Haq Akorwi (1912-1988)
Abdul Jalil Choudhury (1925-1989)
Muntakhib al-Haqq (fl. 1980s)
Abu Zafar Mohammad Saleh (1915-1990)
Abdul Matin Chowdhury (1915-1990)
Muhammad Taqi Amini (1926-1991)
Masihullah Khan (1912-1992)
Syed Shujaat Ali Qadri (1941-1993)
Abul Hasan Jashori (1918-1993)
Waqaruddin Qadri (1915-1993)
Inamul Hasan Kandhlawi (1918-1995)
Mukhtar Ashraf (1916-1996)
Abdul Haque Faridi (1903-1996)
Mahmood Hasan Gangohi (1907-1996)
Shamsuddin Qasemi (1935-1996)
Shamsul-hasan Shams Barelvi (1917-1997)
Sultan Ahmad Nanupuri (1914-1997)
Amin Ahsan Islahi (1904-1997)
Karam Shah al-Azhari (1918-1998)
Abul Hasan Ali Hasani Nadwi (1913-1999)
Rashid Ahmed Jaunpuri (1889-2001)
Arshadul Qadri (1925-2002)
Shah Ahmad Noorani (1926-2003)
Nur Uddin Gohorpuri (1924-2005)
Ashraf Ali Bishwanathi (1928-2005)
Syed Fazlul Karim (1935-2006)
Abrarul Haq Haqqi (1920-2006)
Ubaidul Haq (1928-2007)
Obaidul Haque Wazirpuri (1934-2008)
Abdul Latif Chowdhury Fultali (1913-2008)
Sarfraz Ahmed Naeemi (1948-2009)
Naseeruddin Naseer Gilani (1949-2009)
15th/21st
Azizul Haque (1919-2012)
Abdus Sattar Akon (1929-2012)
Shah Saeed Ahmed Raipuri (1926-2012)
Fazlul Haque Amini (1945-2012)
Muhammad Fazal Karim (1954-2013)
Qazi Mu'tasim Billah (1933-2013)
Nurul Islam Farooqi (1959-2014)
Asad Muhammad Saeed as-Sagharji (d. 2015)
Abdur Rahman Chatgami (1920-2015)
Muhiuddin Khan (1935-2016)
Abdul Jabbar Jahanabadi (1937-2016)
Yunus Jaunpuri (1937-2017)
Akhtar Raza Khan (1943-2018)
Iftikhar-ul-Hasan Kandhlawi (1922-2019)
Yusuf Motala (1946-2019)
Tafazzul Haque Habiganji (1938-2020)
Muhammad Abdus Sobhan (1936-2020)
Abdul Momin Imambari (1930-2020)
Saeed Ahmad Palanpuri (1940-2020)
Shah Ahmad Shafi (1945-2020)
Khadim Hussain Rizvi (1966-2020)
Nur Hossain Kasemi (1945-2020)
Muhammad Ali al-Sabuni (1930-2021)
Muhammad Wakkas (1952-2021)
Noor Alam Khalil Amini (1952-2021)
Junaid Babunagari (1953-2021)
Abdus Salam Chatgami (1943-2021)
Nurul Islam Jihadi (1916-2021)
Abdul Halim Bukhari (1945–2022)
Saifur Rahman Nizami (b. 1916)
Ghulam Rasool Jamaati (b. 1923)
Syed Abdul Qadir Jilani (b. 1935)
Muhibbullah Babunagari (b. 1935)
Ziaul Mustafa Razvi Qadri (b. 1935)
Yusuf Ziya Kavakçı (b. 1938)
Madni Miyan (b. 1938)
Sultan Zauq Nadvi (b. 1939)
Delwar Hossain Sayeedi (b. 1940)
Zia Uddin (b. 1941)
Muhammad Taqi Usmani (b. 1943)
Sayed Kamaluddin Zafree (b. 1945)
Muneeb-ur-Rehman (b. 1945)
Qamaruzzaman Azmi (b. 1946)
Muhammad Idrees Dahiri (b. 1947)
Farid Uddin Chowdhury (b. 1947)
Ilyas Qadri (b. 1950)
Mahmudul Hasan (b. 1950)
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri (b. 1951)
Nurul Islam Walipuri (b. 1955)
Ameen Mian Qaudri (b. 1955)
Kaukab Noorani Okarvi (b. 1957)
Hamid Saeed Kazmi (b. 1957)
AFM Khalid Hossain (b. 1959)
Najibul Bashar Maizbhandari (b. 1959)
Shahidul Islam (b. 1960)
Shakir Ali Noori (b. 1960)
Ruhul Amin (b. 1962)
Mizanur Rahman Sayed (b. 1963)
Sajidur Rahman (b. 1964)
Ibrahim Mogra (b. 1965)
Muhammad Arshad Misbahi (b. 1968)
Muhammad Abdul Malek (b. 1969)
Mahfuzul Haque (b. 1969)
Asjad Raza Khan (b. 1970)
Rezaul Karim (b. 1971)
Riyadh ul Haq (b. 1971)
Obaidullah Hamzah (b. 1972)
Raza Saqib Mustafai (b. 1972)
Mamunul Haque (b. 1973)
Saiful Islam (b. 1974)
Abdur Rahman Mangera (b. 1974)
Faraz Rabbani (b. 1974)
Amer Jamil (b. 1977)
Shahinur Pasha Chowdhury (b. 1985)
Abdul Malek Halim
Izharul Islam
Qasim Rashid Ahmad
Muhammad al-Kawthari
Yaseen Akhtar Misbahi
Scholars of other Sunni Islamic schools of jurisprudence
Hanbali
Maliki
Shafi'i
Zahiri
vteMaturidi school of Sunni theologyMaturidi scholars3rd AH/9th AD
Abu Bakr al-Samarqandi (d. 268 AH)
Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (d. 333 AH)
Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi (d. 342 AH)
Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. 379 AH)
Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (d. 396 AH)
4th AH/10th AD
Abu Zayd al-Dabusi (d. 429 AH)
Ali Hujwiri (d. 464 AH)
Yūsuf Balasaguni (d. 469 AH)
Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawi (d. 482 AH)
Al-Sarakhsi (d. 483 AH)
Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (d. 493 AH)
5th AH/11th AD
Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi (d. 508 AH)
Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari (d. 534 AH)
Yusuf Hamadani (d. 535 AH)
Sheikh Ahmad-e Jami (d. 536 AH)
Abu Hafs Umar al-Nasafi (d. 537 AH)
Ahmad Yasawi (d. 561 AH)
Nur al-Din Zengi (d. 569 AH)
Siraj al-Din al-Ushi (d. 575 AH)
Nur al-Din al-Sabuni (d. 580 AH)
Fatima al-Samarqandi (d. 581 AH)
Al-Kasani (d. 587 AH)
Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi (d. 593 AH)
6th AH/12th AD
Abu al-Thana' al-Lamishi (d. beginning of the 6th century AH)
Al-Mu'azzam 'Isa (d. 624 AH)
Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki (d. 632 AH)
Mu'in al-Din Chishti (d. 633 AH)
Saif ed-Din al-Boharsi (d. 659 AH)
Fariduddin Ganjshakar (d. 664 AH)
Rumi (d. 671 AH)
Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi (d. after 690 AH)
7th AH/13th AD
Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi (d. 710 AH)
Sultan Walad (d. 711 AH)
Nizamuddin Auliya (d. 725 AH)
Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar (d. 747 AH)
Akmal al-Din al-Babarti (d. 786 AH)
Baha' al-Din Naqshband (d. 791 AH)
Kadi Burhan al-Din (d. 800 AH)
8th AH/14th AD
Al-Sharif al-Jurjani (d. 816 AH)
Bande Nawaz (d. 825 AH)
Shams al-Din al-Fanari (d. 834 AH)
'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari (d. 841 AH)
Yaqub al-Charkhi (d. 851 AH)
Ahmad ibn Arabshah (d. 861 AH)
Badr al-Din al-'Ayni (d. 855 AH)
Al-Kamal ibn al-Humam (d. 861 AH)
Khidr Bey (d. 863 AH)
Ali al-Bistami (d. 874 AH)
'Ali al-Qushji (d. 879 AH)
Mehmed II (d. 886 AH)
Khwaja Ahrar (d. 895 AH)
9th AH/15th AD
Ali-Shir Nava'i (d. 906 AH)
Husayn Kashifi (d. 910 AH)
Ibn Kemal (d. 940 AH)
Abdul Quddus Gangohi (d. 943 AH)
Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī (d. 955 AH)
Taşköprüzade (d. 968 AH)
Muhammad Birgivi (d. 980 AH)
Ebussuud Efendi (d. 982 AH)
10th AH/16th AD
Khwaja Baqi Billah (d. 1011 AH)
'Ali al-Qari (d. 1014 AH)
Hasan Kafi al-Aqhisari (d. 1025 AH)
Ahmad Sirhindi (d. 1034 AH)
Mahmud Hudayi (d. 1037 AH)
'Abd al-Haqq al-Dehlawi (d. 1052 AH)
Mulla Mahmud Jaunpuri (d. 1061 AH)
'Abd al-Hakim al-Siyalkoti (d. 1067 AH)
Wang Daiyu (d. around 1068 AH)
Kâtip Çelebi (d. 1068 AH)
Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji (d. 1069 AH)
Khayr al-Din al-Ramli (d. 1081 AH)
11th AH/17th AD
Aurangzeb (d. 1118 AH)
Ma Zhu (d. around 1123 AH)
Ismail Haqqi Bursevi (d. 1127 AH)
Shah Abdur Rahim (d. 1131 AH)
Liu Zhi of Nanjing (d. 1158 AH, or 1178 AH)
Nizamuddin Sihalivi (d. 1161 AH)
Makhdoom Muhammad Hashim Thattvi (d. 1174 AH)
Shah Waliullah Dehlawi (d. 1176 AH)
'Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi (d. 1176 AH)
İbrahim Hakkı Erzurumi (d. 1193 AH)
Mirza Mazhar Jan-e-Janaan (d. 1195 AH)
12th AH/18th AD
Gelenbevi Ismail Efendi (d. 1204 AH)
Murtada al-Zabidi (d. 1205 AH)
Sanaullah Panipati (d. 1225 AH)
Ghabdennasir Qursawi (d. 1226 AH)
Ghulam Ali Dehlavi (d. 1239 AH)
Shah Abdul Aziz (d. 1239 AH)
Shah Ismail Dehlvi (d. 1246 AH)
Syed Ahmad Barelvi (d. 1246 AH)
Ibn 'Abidin (d. 1252 AH)
Muhammad 'Abid al-Sindi (d. 1257 AH)
Mamluk Ali Nanautawi (d. 1267 AH)
Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (d. 1278 AH)
Yusuf Ma Dexin (d. 1291 AH)
Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi (d. 1297 AH)
Naqi Ali Khan (d. 1297 AH)
'Abd al-Ghani al-Maydani (d. 1298 AH)
13th AH/19th AD
'Abd al-Hayy al-Lucknawi (d. 1304 AH)
Shihab al-Din al-Marjani (d. 1306 AH)
Rahmatullah al-Kairanawi (d. 1308 AH)
Giritli Sırrı Pasha (d. 1312 AH)
Ahmed Cevdet Pasha (d. 1312 AH)
Imdadullah Muhajir Makki (d. 1317 AH)
Abai Qunanbaiuly (d. 1321 AH)
Rashid Ahmad Gangohi (d. 1323 AH)
Ahmad Hasan Amrohi (d. 1330 AH)
Muhammad Anwaarullah Farooqui (d. 1335 AH)
Mahmud Hasan Deobandi (d. 1338 AH)
Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi (d. 1340 AH)
Shakarim Qudayberdiuli (d. 1344 AH)
Muhammad Ali Mungeri (d. 1346 AH)
Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri (d. 1346 AH)
Anwar Shah Kashmiri (d. 1352 AH)
Muhammad Bakhit al-Muti'i (d. 1354 AH)
Fatma Aliye Topuz (d. 1354 AH)
Meher Ali Shah (d. 1356 AH)
Muhammed Hamdi Yazır (d. 1361 AH)
Ashraf Ali Thanwi (d. 1361 AH)
Ubaidullah Sindhi (d. 1364 AH)
Shabbir Ahmad Usmani (d. 1368 AH)
Musa Bigiev (d. 1368 AH)
Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari (d. 1371 AH)
Kifayatullah Dehlawi (d. 1371 AH)
Mustafa Sabri (d. 1373 AH)
Husayn Ahmad al-Madani (d. 1377 AH)
Süleyman Hilmi Tunahan (d. 1378 AH)
Ömer Nasuhi Bilmen (d. 1391 AH)
Muhammad Abu Zahra (d. 1394 AH)
Muhammad Shafi' Deobandi (d. 1395 AH)
Abul Wafa Al Afghani (d. 1395 AH)
Abdul Majid Daryabadi (d. 1397 AH)
14th AH/20th AD
Muhammad Zakariyya al-Kandhlawi (d. 1402 AH)
Muhammad Tayyib Qasmi (d. 1403 AH)
Abdul Haq Akorwi (d. 1409 AH)
Habib al-Rahman al-'Azmi (d. 1412 AH)
Anzar Shah Kashmiri (d. 1428 AH)
Wahbah al-Zuhayli (d. 1436 AH)
Muhammad Salim Qasmi (d. 1439 AH)
Saeed Ahmad Palanpuri (d. 1441 AH)
Muhammad Ali al-Sabuni (d. 1442 AH)
Nur Hossain Kasemi (d. 1442 AH)
Usmankhan Alimov (d. 1443 AH)
Muhammad Rafi' Usmani
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri
Muhammad Taqi Usmani
Husein Kavazović
Salah Mezhiev
Theology books
Al-Fiqh al-Akbar
Kitab al-Tawhid
Tafsir al-Maturidi
Al-'Aqida al-Tahawiyya
Al-Sawad al-A'zam
Kutadgu Bilig
Tabsirat al-Adilla
'Aqa'id al-Nasafi
Masnavi
Fihi Ma Fihi
Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi
Han Kitab
Tafsir al-Mazhari
Izhar ul-Haqq
Al-Muhannad ala al-Mufannad
Hak Dīni Kur'an Dili
See also
2016 international conference on Sunni Islam in Grozny
2020 International Maturidi Conference
Ahl al-Ra'y
Kalam
Tawhid
Gedimu
Deobandi
Barelvi
Maturidi-related templates
Hanafi
Ash'ari
Sufi
Islamic theology
vteIslamic theologyFieldsTheologiansBooksFieldsAqidah
Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam
Philosophy
‘Aql
Education
Logic
Peace
Science
Astronomy
Cosmology
Physics
Sufism
Cosmology
Metaphysics
Philosophy
TheologiansAsh'ari (Al-Ash'ari)
Al-Bayhaqi
Al-Baqillani
Al-Juwayni
Al-Qushayri
Al-Shahrastani
Al-Ghazali
Al-Taftazani
Al-Maziri
Ibn Furak
Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani
Zakariyya al-Ansari
Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi
Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini
Ibn Aqil
Ibn Tumart
Abdul Qadir Gilani
Abu al-Walid al-Baji
Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi
Ibn al-Jawzi
Qadi Ayyad
Ahmad al-Rifa'i
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
Sayf al-Din al-Amidi
Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam
Taqi al-Din al-Subki
Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi
Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati
Al-Baydawi
Ibn Khaldun
Ibn Arafa
Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi
Ibn Hajar al-Haytami
Al-Sha'rani
Jalal al-Din al-Dawani
Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani
Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi
Ibn Ashir
Al-Bahūtī
Muhammad Mayyara
Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi
'Illish
Ibrahim al-Bajuri
Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad
Ahmad al-Dardir
Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki
Ahmad Zayni Dahlan
Early Sunni
Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit (Hanafiyah)
Malik ibn Anas (Maliki)
Al-Shafi‘i (Shafi‘i)
Maturidi (Al-Maturidi)
Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi
Al-Sarakhsi
Al-Bazdawi
Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi
Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi
Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari
Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi
'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari
Al-Sharif al-Jurjani
Akmal al-Din al-Babarti
Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi
Nur al-Din al-Sabuni
Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi
Siraj al-Din al-Ushi
Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi
Khidr Bey
Ibn Kemal
Ali Qushji
Ali al-Qari
Al-Maydani
Ahmad Sirhindi
Anwar Shah Kashmiri
Shah Waliullah Dehlawi
Shah Abdul Aziz
Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri
Muhammad Zakariya Kandhlawi
Rahmatullah Kairanawi
Murtada al-Zabidi
Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi
Muhammad Abu Zahra
Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar
Rumi
Mu'attila
Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham
Mu'jbira
Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī
Jahmīyya
Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī
Mu'jassimā
Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al-Balkhī (Muqātilīyya)
Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al-Juzjanī al-Kūfī
Jawālikīyya
Rum Abdals
Ibn Karram (Karramiyya)
Murji'ah
Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad-Dimashqī an-Nabati al-Qībtī (Murjī-Qadariyah)
Mu'tazila (Wasil ibn 'Ata')
Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya)
Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm
Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya)
Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya)
Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī
Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya)
Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya)
Ja'far ibn Harb
Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr
Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya)
Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar
Abu al-Husayn al-Basri
Al-Zamakhshari
Amr ibn Ubayd
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid
Sahib ibn Abbad
Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya)
Najjārīyya
Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī
Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard
Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya)
Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya)
Mustadrakīyya
Salafi Theologians
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibnul Qayyim
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Wahhabism
Al-Shawkani
Rashid Rida
Bin Baz
Ibn al-Uthaymeen
Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i
Al-Albani
Saleh Al-Fawzan
Rabee al-Madkhali
Madkhalism
Syed Nazeer Husain
Ahl-i Hadith
Siddiq Hasan Khan
Zubair Ali Zai
Safar Al-Hawali
Sahwa movement
Salman al-Ouda
Osama bin Laden
Salafi Jihadism
Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi
Hazimism
Yasir Qadhi
Post-Salafism
Shi’a-Imamiyyah(Wilayat al-faqih)
The Twelve Imams
Ali
Hasan ibn Ali
Husayn ibn Ali
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammad al-Baqir
Ja'far al-Sadiq
Musa al-Kadhim
Ali al-Ridha
Muhammad al-Jawad
Ali al-Hadi
Hasan al-Askari
Muhammad al-Mahdi
Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid
Sharif al-Murtaza
Shaykh Tusi
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Allamah Al-Hilli
Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi
Zurarah ibn A'yan
Hisham ibn Hakam
Agha Zia ol Din Araghi
Ja'far Sobhani
Ruhollah Khomeini
Shi’a-Ismailiyyah (Ibn Maymūn)
Ibn Ismāʿīl
Maymūn al-Qaddāḥ's Ismā'īlī doctrine
Al-Qadi al-Nu'man
Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani
Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani
Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi
Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi
Arwa al-Sulayhi
Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine
Dhu'ayb ibn Musa
Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam
Nizārī Ismāʿīlī doctrine
Idris Imad al-Din
Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid
Key booksSunni books
Asas al-Taqdis
Al-Baz al-Ashhab
Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq
Al-Milal wa al-Nihal
Al-Irshad
Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah
Al-Sawad al-A'zam
Kitab al-Tawhid
Tabsirat al-Adilla
Masnavi
Fihi Ma Fihi
Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi
The Moderation in Belief
Shia books
Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya
Al-Amali
Al-Khisal
Awail Al Maqalat
Tashih al-I'tiqad
Tajrid al-I'tiqad
Independent
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity
Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis
Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya
Rasa'il al-Hikma of Druze
Umm al-Kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism

Early Muslim scholars
List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam
Islamic schools and branchesAhl us-Sunnahwa’l-Jama’ahAhl al-Hadith (Traditionalism)
Kullabiyya
Ibn Kullab
Hanbalis
Ibn Hanbal
Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la
Khwaja Abdullah Ansari
Zahiris
Dawud al-Zahiri
Salafism
Ahl-i Hadith
Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan
Wahhabism
Ibn Abd al-Wahhab
Ibn Baz
Ibn al Uthaymeen
Nasiruddin al-Albani
Other Salafi trends
Jihadism
Madkhalism
Sahwa
Salafi Modernism
Muhammad bin Dawud
Maqrizi
Ahl ar-Ra'y (Ilm al-Kalam)
Ashʿari
Malikis
Shafi'is
Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash
Maturidi
Hanafis
Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi
Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi
Necmettin Erbakan – Millî Görüş
Shia IslamZaydi Shi'a
Zayd ibn Ali
Jarudi
Batriyya
Alid dynasties of northern Iran
Hasan al-Utrush
Yahya ibn Umar
Imams of Yemen
Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects
Dukayniyya
Khalafiyya
ImamiMahdiistShi'iteSects inIslamImamiTwelver
Theology of Twelvers
Ja'fari
Akhbari
Usuli
Shaykhism
Qizilbash
Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam
Ghulat
al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites
Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism
Baktāshism
Demir Bābā – Alians
Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs
ImamiIsma'ilism
Fathite
Abdullah al-Aftah
Batiniyyah
Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians
Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes
Fatimids
Musta'li
Tayyibi
Alavi
Dawoodi
Sulaymani
Hafizi
Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism
Nizari
Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins
Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas
Pir Sadardin – Satpanth
KaysanitesShia
Mukhtār
Abū ʿAmra Kaysān
Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya
Hārbīyya
ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi
Janāhiyya
Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya
Hārithīyya
Riyāhīyya
Sam‘ānīyya
Bayān ibn Sam‘ān
Rawendis
Rezāmīyya
Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Muḥammirah
Khurramites
Babak
Mazyar
al-Muqanna
Ishaq al-Turk
Khashabiyya Shia
Other Mahdiists
An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah
Hurufiyya
Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya
Shayki
Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya
Tawussite Shia
ʿAjlan ibn Nawus
Waqifite Shia
Muhakkima(Arbitration)Kharijites
Ajardi
Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād
Maymunīyyah
Sa'labīyyah
Azariqa
Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī
Bayhasīyyah
Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir
Najdat
Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī
Sufri
Abu Qurra
Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al-Nukkari
Ibadism
'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi
Jābir ibn Zayd
Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al-Ifrani
Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi
Wahbiyyah
Azzabas
Murji'ah(Hasan ibnMuḥāmmadibn al-Hanafiyyah)Karrāmīyya
Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī
ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid)
Dhīmmīyya
Hakāiqīyya
Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam)
Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif)
Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh)
Maʿīyya
Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir)
Nūnīyya
Razīnīyya
Sauwāqīyya
Sūramīyya
Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī)
Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh)
Wāhidīyya
Zarībīyya
Other sects
Gaylānīyya
Gaylān ibn Marwān
Yūnusīyya
Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī
Gassānīyya
Gassān al-Kūfī
Tūmanīyya
Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī
Sawbānīyya
Abū Sawbān al-Murjī
Sālehīyya
Sāleh ibn Umar
Shamrīyya
Abū Shamr
Ubaydīyya
Ubayd al-Mūktaib
Ziyādīyya
Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī
Other Murjīs
Al-Harith ibn Surayj
Sa'id ibn Jubayr
Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān
Muhārīb ibn Dithār
Sābit Kutna
Awn ibn Abdullāh
Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr
Umar ibn Zar
Salm ibn Sālem
Hālaf ibn Ayyūb
Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf
Nusayr ibn Yahyā
Ahmad ibn Hārb
Amr ibn Murrah
Mu'shabbihaTamsīl
Jawārībīyya
Dāwūd al-Jawāribî
Hāshwīyya
Hulmānīyya
Abū Hulmān al-Fārisī ad-Dimashqī
Kalandars
Bārāq Bābā
Tasjīm
Khāttabīyya
Bāzīghīyya
Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā
Muʿāmmarīyya
Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar
ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya
Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī
Mufāddālīyya
Mufāddāl ibn Umār as-Sāyrāfī
Ghurābīyya
Mānsūrīyya
Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī
Mughīrīyya
Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī
Mukhāmmīsa
Namiriya
‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya
Saba'īyya
Qadariyah (Ma'badal-Juhani)Alevism
Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya
Baba Ishak – Babai revolt
Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order
Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Rifa`i / Galibi Order
Muʿtazila(Rationalism)
Mā’marīyya
Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī
Bishriyya
Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī
Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī
Bahshamiyya
Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī
Huzaylīyya
Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī
Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī
Ikhshīdiyya
Nazzāmīyya
Ali al-Aswarī
Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī
Hābītīyya
Ahmad ibn Hābīt
Sumamīyya
Sumāma ibn Ashras
Kā‘bīyya
Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī
Quranism
Ahle Qur'an
Kala Kato
Tolu-e-Islam
Muhammad Iqbal
Ghulam Ahmed Pervez
United Submitters International
Rashad Khalifa
Edip Yüksel
IndependentMuslimbeliefsMessianism
Ahmadiyya
Mirza Ghulam
Qadiani
Lahori
Kabbalist Dönmes
Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean
Mahdavīyya
Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris
Nation of Islam
Wallace Fard Muhammad's doctrine
Nur movement
Said Nursî / Fethullah Gülen – Hizmet
Modernism
Modernist Salafism
Muhammad Abduh
Muhammad Asad
Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani
Rashid Rida
Other Islamic modernists
Taṣawwuf
Ṭarīqah
Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi
Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı
Other orders
Tawassul
Other beliefs
Sadaqah
Sunnah
Taqwa
Tawakkul
Tewafuq
Thawab

Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence:
Hanafi
Hanbali
Maliki
Shafi'i
Zahiri

vteJurisprudence
Index
Legal theory
Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Economic analysis
Legal norms
International legal theory
Legal history
Philosophy of law
Sociology of law
Philosophers
Alexy
Allan
Aquinas
Aristotle
Austin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Betti
Bickel
Blackstone
Bobbio
Bork
Brożek
Cardozo
Castanheira Neves
Chafee
Coleman
Del Vecchio
Diniz
Durkheim
Dworkin
Ehrlich
Feinberg
Fineman
Finnis
Frank
Fuller
Gardner
George
Green
Grisez
Grotius
Gurvitch
Habermas
Han
Hart
Hegel
Hobbes
Hohfeld
Hägerström
Jellinek
Jhering
Kant
Kelsen
Köchler
Kramer
Leoni
Llewellyn
Lombardía
Luhmann
Lundstedt
Lyons
MacCormick
Marx
Nussbaum
Olivecrona
Pashukanis
Perelman
Petrażycki
Pontes de Miranda
Posner
Pound
Puchta
Pufendorf
Radbruch
Rawls
Raz
Reale
Reinach
Renner
Ross
Rumi
Savigny
Scaevola
Schauer
Schmitt
Shang
Simmonds
Somló
Suárez
Tribe
Unger
Voegelin
Waldron
Walzer
Weber
Wronkowska
Ziembiński
Znamierowski
Theories
Analytical jurisprudence
Deontological ethics
Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law
Interpretivism
Legalism
Legal moralism
Legal positivism
Legal realism
Libertarian theories of law
Natural law
Paternalism
Utilitarianism
Virtue jurisprudence
Concepts
Dharma
Fa
Judicial interpretation
Justice
Legal system
Li
Question of law
Rational-legal authority
Usul al-Fiqh

 Category
 Law portal
Philosophy portal
 WikiProject Law
WikiProject Philosophy
changes

vtePersian literatureOld
Behistun Inscription
Old Persian inscriptions
Ganjnameh
Inscription of Xerxes the Great in Van Fortress
Achaemenid inscription in the Kharg Island
Middle
Ayadgar-i Zariran
Counsels of Adurbad-e Mahrspandan
Dēnkard
Book of Jamasp
Book of Arda Viraf
Karnamak-i Artaxshir-i Papakan
Cube of Zoroaster
Dana-i Menog Khrat
Shabuhragan of Mani
Shahrestanha-ye Eranshahr
Bundahishn
Menog-i Khrad
Jamasp Namag
Dadestan-i Denig
Anthology of Zadspram
Warshtmansr
Zand-i Wahman yasn
Drakht-i Asurig
Shikand-gumanig Vizar
Classical800s
Muhammad ibn Wasif
900s
Rudaki
Daqiqi
Ferdowsi (Shahnameh)
Abu Shakur Balkhi
Abu Tahir Khosrovani
Shahid Balkhi
Bal'ami
Rabia Balkhi
Abusaeid Abolkheir (967–1049)
Avicenna (980–1037)
Unsuri
Asjadi
Kisai Marvazi
Ayyuqi
1000s
Bābā Tāher
Nasir Khusraw (1004–1088)
Al-Ghazali (1058–1111)
Khwaja Abdullah Ansari (1006–1088)
Asadi Tusi
Qatran Tabrizi (1009–1072)
Nizam al-Mulk (1018–1092)
Masud Sa'd Salman (1046–1121)
Moezi Neyshapuri
Omar Khayyam (1048–1131)
Fakhruddin As'ad Gurgani
Ahmad Ghazali
Hujwiri
Manuchehri
Ayn-al-Quzat Hamadani (1098–1131)
Uthman Mukhtari
Abu-al-Faraj Runi
Sanai
Banu Goshasp
Borzu-Nama
Afdal al-Din Kashani
Abu'l Hasan Mihyar al-Daylami
Mu'izzi
Mahsati Ganjavi
1100s
Iranshah
Suzani Samarqandi
Hassan Ghaznavi
Faramarz Nama
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191)
Adib Sabir
Falaki Shirvani
Am'aq
Najm al-Din Razi
Attār (1142–c.1220)
Khaghani (1120–1190)
Anvari (1126–1189)
Faramarz-e Khodadad
Nizami Ganjavi (1141–1209)
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209)
Kamal al-Din Esfahani
Shams Tabrizi (d.1248)
1200s
Abu Tahir Tarsusi
Awhadi Maraghai
Shams al-Din Qays Razi
Sultan Walad
Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī
Afdal al-Din Kashani
Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi
Mahmud Shabistari (1288–1320s)
Abu'l Majd Tabrizi
Amir Khusrau (1253–1325)
Saadi (Bustan / Golestān)
Bahram-e-Pazhdo
Pur-Baha Jami
Zartosht Bahram e Pazhdo
Rumi
Homam Tabrizi (1238–1314)
Nozhat al-Majales
Khwaju Kermani
Sultan Walad
Badr Shirvani
Zu'l-Fiqar Shirvani
1300s
Ibn Yamin
Shah Ni'matullah Wali
Hafez
Abu Ali Qalandar
Fazlallah Astarabadi
Nasimi
Emad al-Din Faqih Kermani
1400s
Ubayd Zakani
Salman Savaji
Hatefi
Jami
Kamal Khujandi
Ahli Shirazi (1454–1535)
Fuzûlî (1483–1556)
Ismail I (1487–1524)
Baba Faghani
1500s
Vahshi Bafqi (1523–1583)
Muhtasham Kashani (1500–1588)
'Orfi Shirazi
1600s
Taleb Amoli
Saib Tabrizi (1607–1670)
Asir-e Esfahani (c. 1620–1648)
Kalim Kashani
Hazin Lāhiji (1692–1766)
Saba Kashani
Abdul-Qādir Bēdil (1642–1720)
Naw'i Khabushani
Mohammad Qoli Salim Tehrani
Rasa Salim Tehrani
1700s
Hatef Esfahani
Azar Bigdeli (1722–1781)
Neshat Esfahani
Abbas Foroughi Bastami (1798–1857)
1800s
Mirza Ghalib (1797–1869)
Zayn al-Abidin Shirvani (1779–1837)
Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat (1800–1871)
Mirza Mohammad Taqi Sepehr (1801–1880)
Qaani (1808–1854)
Mahmud Saba Kashani (1813–1893)
ContemporaryPoetry
Iran
Ahmadreza Ahmadi
Mehdi Akhavan-Sales
Hormoz Alipour
Qeysar Aminpour
Mohammad Reza Aslani
Aref Qazvini
Ahmad NikTalab
Aminollah Rezaei
Manouchehr Atashi
Mahmoud Mosharraf Azad Tehrani
Mohammad-Taqi Bahar
Reza Baraheni
Simin Behbahani
Dehkhoda
Hushang Ebtehaj
Bijan Elahi
Parviz Eslampour
Parvin E'tesami
Forugh Farrokhzad
Hossein Monzavi
Hushang Irani
Iraj Mirza
Bijan Jalali
Siavash Kasraie
Esmail Khoi
Shams Langeroodi
Mohammad Mokhtari
Nosrat Rahmani
Yadollah Royaee
Tahereh Saffarzadeh
Sohrab Sepehri
Mohammad-Reza Shafiei Kadkani
Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar
Ahmad Shamlou
Manouchehr Sheybani
Nima Yooshij (She'r-e Nimaa'i)
Fereydoon Moshiri
Armenia
Edward Haghverdian
Afghanistan
Nadia Anjuman
Wasef Bakhtari
Raziq Faani
Khalilullah Khalili
Youssof Kohzad
Massoud Nawabi
Abdul Ali Mustaghni
Tajikistan
Sadriddin Ayni
Farzona
Iskandar Khatloni
Abolqasem Lahouti
Gulrukhsor Safieva
Loiq Sher-Ali
Payrav Sulaymoni
Mirzo Tursunzoda
Satim Ulugzade
Uzbekistan
Asad Gulzoda
Pakistan
Muhammad Iqbal

Novels
Ali Mohammad Afghani
Ghazaleh Alizadeh
Bozorg Alavi
Reza Amirkhani
Mahshid Amirshahi
Ghassem Hashemi Nezhad
Reza Baraheni
Simin Daneshvar
Mahmoud Dowlatabadi
Soudabeh Fazaeli
Reza Ghassemi
Mohammad Hanif (Iranian writer)
Houshang Golshiri
Aboutorab Khosravi
Zeyn al-Abedin Maraghei
Ahmad Mahmoud
Shahriyar Mandanipour
Abbas Maroufi
Mansour Koushan
Iraj Pezeshkzad
Short stories
Jalal Al-e-Ahmad
Shamim Bahar
Sadeq Chubak
Abolhassan Etessami
Javad Mojabi
Simin Daneshvar
Nader Ebrahimi
Ebrahim Golestan
Houshang Golshiri
Sadegh Hedayat
Mohammad-Ali Jamalzadeh
Aboutorab Khosravi
Mostafa Mastoor
Jaafar Modarres-Sadeghi
Houshang Moradi Kermani
Bijan Najdi
Shahrnush Parsipur
Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi
Bahram Sadeghi
Goli Taraqqi
Plays
Reza Abdoh
Mirza Fatali Akhundzadeh
Mohsen Yalfani
Bahram Beyzai
Bahman Forsi
Amir Reza Koohestani
Alireza Koushk Jalali
Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi
Bijan Mofid
Hengameh Mofid
Abbas Nalbandian
Akbar Radi
Pari Saberi
Mirza Aqa Tabrizi
Mohammad Yaghoubi
Screenplays
Saeed Aghighi
Mohammad Reza Aslani
Rakhshan Bani-E'temad
Bahram Beyzai
Hajir Darioush
Pouran Derakhshandeh
Asghar Farhadi
Bahman Farmanara
Farrokh Ghaffari
Behrouz Gharibpour
Bahman Ghobadi
Fereydun Gole
Ebrahim Golestan
Ali Hatami
Abolfazl Jalili
Ebrahim Hatamikia
Abdolreza Kahani
Varuzh Karim-Masihi
Samuel Khachikian
Abbas Kiarostami
Majid Majidi
Mohsen Makhmalbaf
Dariush Mehrjui
Reza Mirkarimi
Rasoul Mollagholipour
Amir Naderi
Jafar Panahi
Kambuzia Partovi
Fereydoun Rahnema
Rasul Sadr Ameli
Mohammad Sadri
Parviz Shahbazi
Sohrab Shahid-Saless
Translators
Amrollah Abjadian
Jaleh Amouzgar
Najaf Daryabandari
Mohammad Ghazi
Lili Golestan
Sadegh Hedayat
Saleh Hosseini
Ahmad Kamyabi Mask
Ahmad Shamlou
Mohammad Moin
Ebrahim Pourdavoud
Hamid Samandarian
Jalal Sattari
Jafar Shahidi
Ahmad Tafazzoli
Abbas Zaryab
Children's literature
Samad Behrangi
Houshang Moradi Kermani
Babak NikTalab
Hengameh Mofid
Poopak NikTalab
Farhad Hasanzadeh
Essayists
Aydin Aghdashloo
Mohammad Ebrahim Bastani Parizi
Ehsan Yarshater
Ahmad Kasravi
Contemporary Persian and Classical Persian are the same language, but writers since 1900 are classified as contemporary. At one time, Persian was a common cultural language of much of the non-Arabic Islamic world.  Today it is the official language of Iran, Tajikistan and one of the two official languages of Afghanistan.
vtePeople of KhorasanScientists
Abu Hatam Isfizari
Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi
Abu Wafa
Abu Ubayd Juzjani
Abu Zayd Balkhi
Alfraganus
Ali Qushji
Avicenna
Birjandi
Biruni
Hasib Marwazi
Ibn Hayyan
Abu Ja'far al-Khazin
Khazini
Khojandi
Khwarizmi
Nasawi
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Omar Khayyam
Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi
Sijzi
Philosophers
Algazel
Amiri
Avicenna
Farabi
Haji Bektash Veli
Nasir Khusraw
Sijistani
Shahrastani
Islamic scholars
Abu Dawud al-Sijistani
Abu Barakat Nasafi
Abu Hanifa
Abu Hafs Nasafi
Abu Layth Samarqandi
Abu Mu'in Nasafi
Abu Qasim Samarqandi
Ansari
Baghavi
Bayhaqi
Bazdawi
Bukhari
Dabusi
Fatima Samarqandi
Ghazali
Ghaznawi
Hakim Tirmidhi
Hakim Nishapuri
Ibn Hibban
Ibn Mubarak
Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi
Juwayni
Kasani
Kashifi
Lamishi
Marghinani
Maturidi
Mulla al-Qari
Muqatil
Muslim
Nasa'i
Qushayri
Razi
Sabuni
Sajawandi
Sarakhsi
Shaykh Tusi
Taftazani
Tha'labi Nishapuri
Tirmidhi
Zamakhshari
Poets and artists
Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr
Anvari
Aruzi Samarqandi
Asadi Tusi
Attar Nishapuri
Behzad
Daqiqi
Farrukhi Sistani
Ferdowsi
Jami
Kashifi
Nasir Khusraw
Rabia Balkhi
Rudaki
Rumi
Sanā'ī
Historians andpolitical figures
Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi
Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini
Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah
Abu Muslim Khorasani
Gardizi
Ali-Shir Nava'i
Ata-Malik Juvayni
Aufi
Abu Ali Bal'ami
Gawhar Shad
Ibn Khordadbeh
Khalid ibn Barmak
Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani
Nizam al-Mulk
Tahir ibn Husayn
Yahya Barmaki
Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk
Shihab al-Nasawi

Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
2
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Sweden
Vatican
2
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
2
3
RISM (France)
1
RERO (Switzerland)
1
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
1
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
Trove (Australia)
1





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rumi&oldid=1114686176"
Categories: Rumi1207 births1273 deathsIranian SufisIranian Sunni MuslimsHanafisMaturidis13th-century Muslim theologiansIslamic philosophersSimple living advocatesPersian spiritual writersBurials in TurkeySufi poets13th-century Persian-language writersMevlevi Order13th-century Iranian philosophersMystic poetsPeople from the Sultanate of Rum13th-century Persian-language poets13th-century Islamic religious leadersIranian Sufi saintsPeople from BalkhSufi mysticsMystics from IranAbu BakrHidden categories: Articles containing Persian-language textAll articles with unidentified wordsArticles with unidentified words from June 2022CS1 maint: unfit URLHarv and Sfn no-target errorsWebarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template webcite linksAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2022Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2022Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from January 2021EngvarB from September 2016Pages using infobox religious biography with unsupported parametersArticles having different image on Wikidata and WikipediaArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Turkish-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2020Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019Pages incorrectly using the Blockquote templatePages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles with Open Library linksArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BIBSYS identifiersArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with CANTICN identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with ICCU identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with LNB identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with NLA identifiersArticles with NLG identifiersArticles with NLK identifiersArticles with NSK identifiersArticles with NTA identifiersArticles with PLWABN identifiersArticles with SELIBR identifiersArticles with VcBA identifiersArticles with ULAN identifiersArticles with DTBIO identifiersArticles with CINII identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with MusicBrainz identifiersArticles with RISM identifiersArticles with RERO identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with TDVİA identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersAC with 33 elementsArticles with multiple identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource




Languages


AfrikaansአማርኛالعربيةAragonésAsturianuAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাБашҡортсаभोजपुरीБългарскиBosanskiCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChiTumbukaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGalego贛語ગુજરાતી한국어HausaՀայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرҚазақшаKurdîКыргызчаLadinLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLivvinkarjalaMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംمصرىBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsShqipSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheTiếng ViệtWalonWinaray吴语Yorùbá粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 19:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










