



Visual arts - Wikipedia










































Visual arts

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Art forms that create works that are primarily visual in nature
For the video game publisher, see Visual Arts (company).


 The Church at Auvers, an oil painting by Vincent van Gogh (1890)
The visual arts are art forms such as painting, drawing, printmaking, sculpture, ceramics, photography, video, filmmaking, design, crafts and architecture. Many artistic disciplines such as performing arts, conceptual art, and textile arts also involve aspects of visual arts as well as arts of other types. Also included within the visual arts[1] are the applied arts[2] such as industrial design, graphic design, fashion design, interior design and decorative art.[3]
Current usage of the term "visual arts" includes fine art as well as the applied or decorative arts and crafts, but this was not always the case. Before the Arts and Crafts Movement in Britain and elsewhere at the turn of the 20th century, the term 'artist' had for some centuries often been restricted to a person working in the fine arts (such as painting, sculpture, or printmaking) and not the decorative arts, craft, or applied Visual arts media. The distinction was emphasized by artists of the Arts and Crafts Movement, who valued vernacular art forms as much as high forms.[4] Art schools made a distinction between the fine arts and the crafts, maintaining that a craftsperson could not be considered a practitioner of the arts.

 The Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan. Museums constitute a primary forum for the display of visual arts.
The increasing tendency to prefer the painting styles, and to a lesser degree sculpture, of technique or style over another has been a feature of artist throughout the ages. In many instances painting has been seen as relying to the highest degree on the imagination of the artist, and the furthest removed from manual labour – in Chinese painting the most highly valued styles were those of "scholar-painting", at least in theory practiced by gentleman amateurs. The Western hierarchy of genres reflected similar attitudes.

Contents

1 Education and training
2 Drawing
3 Painting

3.1 History

3.1.1 Origins and early history
3.1.2 The Renaissance
3.1.3 Dutch masters
3.1.4 Baroque
3.1.5 Impressionism
3.1.6 Post-impressionism
3.1.7 Symbolism, expressionism and cubism




4 Printmaking

4.1 European history
4.2 Chinese origin and practice
4.3 Development in Japan 1603–1867


5 Photography
6 Architecture
7 Filmmaking
8 Computer art
9 Plastic arts

9.1 Sculpture


10 US copyright definition of visual art
11 See also
12 References
13 Bibliography
14 External links


Education and training[edit]
Main article: Visual arts education
Training in the visual arts has generally been through variations of the apprentice and workshop systems. In Europe the Renaissance movement to increase the prestige of the artist led to the academy system for training artists, and today most of the people who are pursuing a career in arts train in art schools at tertiary levels. Visual arts have now become an elective subject in most education systems.[5][6]

Drawing[edit]
Main article: Drawing
Drawing is a means of making an image, illustration or graphic using any of a wide variety of tools and techniques available online and offline. It generally involves making marks on a surface by applying pressure from a tool, or moving a tool across a surface using dry media such as graphite pencils, pen and ink, inked brushes, wax color pencils, crayons, charcoals, pastels, and markers. Digital tools, including pens, stylus, that simulate the effects of these are also used. The main techniques used in drawing are: line drawing, hatching, crosshatching, random hatching, shading, scribbling, stippling, and blending. An artist who excels in drawing is referred to as a draftsman or draughtsman.[7]
Drawing and painting goes back tens of thousands of years. Art of the Upper Paleolithic includes figurative art beginning between about 40,000 to 35,000 years ago. Non-figurative cave paintings consisting of hand stencils and simple geometric shapes are even older. Paleolithic cave representations of animals are found in areas such as Lascaux, France and Altamira, Spain in Europe, Maros, Sulawesi in Asia, and Gabarnmung, Australia.
In ancient Egypt, ink drawings on papyrus, often depicting people, were used as models for painting or sculpture. Drawings on Greek vases, initially geometric, later developed to the human form with black-figure pottery during the 7th century BC.[8]
With paper becoming common in Europe by the 15th century, drawing was adopted by masters such as Sandro Botticelli, Raphael, Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci who sometimes treated drawing as an art in its own right rather than a preparatory stage for painting or sculpture.[9]

Painting[edit]
 Mosaic of Battle of Issus
Main article: Painting
 Nefertari with Isis
Painting taken literally is the practice of applying pigment suspended in a carrier (or medium) and a binding agent (a glue) to a surface (support) such as paper, canvas or a wall. However, when used in an artistic sense it means the use of this activity in combination with drawing, composition, or other aesthetic considerations in order to manifest the expressive and conceptual intention of the practitioner. Painting is also used to express spiritual motifs and ideas; sites of this kind of painting range from artwork depicting mythological figures on pottery to The Sistine Chapel to the human body itself.[10]

History[edit]
Main article: History of painting
Origins and early history[edit]
Like drawing, painting has its documented origins in caves and on rock faces. The finest examples, believed by some to be 32,000 years old, are in the Chauvet and Lascaux caves in southern France. In shades of red, brown, yellow and black, the paintings on the walls and ceilings are of bison, cattle, horses and deer.

 Raphael: Spasimo (1514–1516)
Paintings of human figures can be found in the tombs of ancient Egypt. In the great temple of Ramses II, Nefertari, his queen, is depicted being led by Isis.[11] The Greeks contributed to painting but much of their work has been lost. One of the best remaining representations are the Hellenistic Fayum mummy portraits. Another example is mosaic of the Battle of Issus at Pompeii, which was probably based on a Greek painting. Greek and Roman art contributed to Byzantine art in the 4th century BC, which initiated a tradition in icon painting.[12]

The Renaissance[edit]
Main article: Italian Renaissance painting
Apart from the illuminated manuscripts produced by monks during the Middle Ages, the next significant contribution to European art was from Italy's renaissance painters. From Giotto in the 13th century to Leonardo da Vinci and Raphael at the beginning of the 16th century, this was the richest period in Italian art as the chiaroscuro techniques were used to create the illusion of 3-D space.[13]

 Rembrandt: The Night Watch, 1642
Painters in northern Europe too were influenced by the Italian school. Jan van Eyck from Belgium, Pieter Bruegel the Elder from the Netherlands and Hans Holbein the Younger from Germany are among the most successful painters of the times. They used the glazing technique with oils to achieve depth and luminosity.

 Claude Monet: Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1866)
Dutch masters[edit]
Main article: Dutch Golden Age painting
The 17th century witnessed the emergence of the great Dutch masters such as the versatile Rembrandt who was especially remembered for his portraits and Bible scenes, and Vermeer who specialized in interior scenes of Dutch life.

Baroque[edit]
Main article: Baroque
The Baroque started after the Renaissance, from the late 16th century to the late 17th century. Main artists of the Baroque included Caravaggio, who made heavy use of tenebrism. Peter Paul Rubens, a Flemish painter who studied in Italy, worked for local churches in Antwerp and also painted a series for Marie de' Medici. Annibale Carracci took influences from the Sistine Chapel and created the genre of illusionistic ceiling painting. Much of the development that happened in the Baroque was because of the Protestant Reformation and the resulting Counter Reformation. Much of what defines the Baroque is dramatic lighting and overall visuals.[14]

Impressionism[edit]
Main article: Impressionism
Impressionism began in France in the 19th century with a loose association of artists including Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Paul Cézanne who brought a new freely brushed style to painting, often choosing to paint realistic scenes of modern life outside rather than in the studio. This was achieved through a new expression of aesthetic features demonstrated by brush strokes and the impression of reality. They achieved intense color vibration by using pure, unmixed colors and short brush strokes. The movement influenced art as a dynamic, moving through time and adjusting to newfound techniques and perception of art. Attention to detail became less of a priority in achieving, whilst exploring a biased view of landscapes and nature to the artist's eye.[15][16]

 Paul Gauguin: The Vision After the Sermon (1888)
 Edvard Munch: The Scream (1893)
Post-impressionism[edit]
Main article: Post-Impressionism
Towards the end of the 19th century, several young painters took impressionism a stage further, using geometric forms and unnatural color to depict emotions while striving for deeper symbolism. Of particular note are Paul Gauguin, who was strongly influenced by Asian, African and Japanese art, Vincent van Gogh, a Dutchman who moved to France where he drew on the strong sunlight of the south, and Toulouse-Lautrec, remembered for his vivid paintings of night life in the Paris district of Montmartre.[17]

Symbolism, expressionism and cubism[edit]
Main article: Modern art
Edvard Munch, a Norwegian artist, developed his symbolistic approach at the end of the 19th century, inspired by the French impressionist Manet. The Scream (1893), his most famous work, is widely interpreted as representing the universal anxiety of modern man. Partly as a result of Munch's influence, the German expressionist movement originated in Germany at the beginning of the 20th century as artists such as Ernst Kirschner and Erich Heckel began to distort reality for an emotional effect.
In parallel, the style known as cubism developed in France as artists focused on the volume and space of sharp structures within a composition. Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque were the leading proponents of the movement. Objects are broken up, analyzed, and re-assembled in an abstracted form. By the 1920s, the style had developed into surrealism with Dali and Magritte.[18]

Printmaking[edit]
 Ancient Chinese engraving of female instrumentalists
Main article: Printmaking
Printmaking is creating, for artistic purposes, an image on a matrix that is then transferred to a two-dimensional (flat) surface by means of ink (or another form of pigmentation). Except in the case of a monotype, the same matrix can be used to produce many examples of the print.

 Albrecht Dürer: Melancholia I (1541)
Historically, the major techniques (also called media) involved are woodcut, line engraving, etching, lithography, and screen printing (serigraphy, silk screening) but there are many others, including modern digital techniques. Normally, the print is printed on paper, but other mediums range from cloth and vellum to more modern materials.

European history[edit]
Main article: Old master print
Prints in the Western tradition produced before about 1830 are known as old master prints. In Europe, from around 1400 AD woodcut, was used for master prints on paper by using printing techniques developed in the Byzantine and Islamic worlds. Michael Wolgemut improved German woodcut from about 1475, and Erhard Reuwich, a Dutchman, was the first to use cross-hatching.  At the end of the century Albrecht Dürer brought the Western woodcut to a stage that has never been surpassed, increasing the status of the single-leaf woodcut.[19]

Chinese origin and practice[edit]
 The Chinese Diamond Sutra, the world's oldest printed book (868 CE)
Main article: Woodblock printing
In China, the art of printmaking developed some 1,100 years ago as illustrations alongside text cut in woodblocks for printing on paper. Initially images were mainly religious but in the Song Dynasty, artists began to cut landscapes. During the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1616–1911) dynasties, the technique was perfected for both religious and artistic engravings.[20][21]

Development in Japan 1603–1867[edit]
 Hokusai: Red Fuji from Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji (1830–1832)
Main article: Woodblock printing in Japan
Woodblock printing in Japan (Japanese: 木版画, moku hanga) is a technique best known for its use in the ukiyo-e artistic genre; however, it was also used very widely for printing illustrated books in the same period. Woodblock printing had been used in China for centuries to print books, long before the advent of movable type, but was only widely adopted in Japan during the Edo period (1603–1867). Although similar to woodcut in western printmaking in some regards, moku hanga differs greatly in that water-based inks are used (as opposed to western woodcut, which uses oil-based inks), allowing for a wide range of vivid color, glazes and color transparency.

Photography[edit]
Main article: Photography
Photography is the process of making pictures by means of the action of light. The light patterns reflected or emitted from objects are recorded onto a sensitive medium or storage chip through a timed exposure. The process is done through mechanical shutters or electronically timed exposure of photons into chemical processing or digitizing devices known as cameras.
The word comes from the Greek φως phos ("light"), and γραφις graphis ("stylus", "paintbrush") or γραφη graphê, together meaning "drawing with light" or "representation by means of lines" or "drawing." Traditionally, the product of photography has been called a photograph. The term photo is an abbreviation; many people also call them pictures. In digital photography, the term image has begun to replace photograph. (The term image is traditional in geometric optics.)

Architecture[edit]
Main article: Architecture
Saint Basil's Cathedral from the Red Square in Moscow. Its prominent onion-shaped domes, painted in bright colors, create a memorable skyline, making St. Basil's a symbol both of Moscow and Russia as a whole.Tenements, by Jörg Blobelt, in Dresden (Germany). These buildings are decorated with Neoclassical motifs, giving them elegance, balance and refinement.
Architecture is the process and the product of planning, designing, and constructing buildings or any other structures. Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art. Historical civilizations are often identified with their surviving architectural achievements.
The earliest surviving written work on the subject of architecture is De architectura, by the Roman architect Vitruvius in the early 1st century AD. According to Vitruvius, a good building should satisfy the three principles of firmitas, utilitas, venustas, commonly known by the original translation – firmness, commodity and delight. An equivalent in modern English would be:

Durability – a building should stand up robustly and remain in good condition.
Utility – it should be suitable for the purposes for which it is used.
Beauty – it should be aesthetically pleasing.
Building first evolved out of the dynamics between needs (shelter, security, worship, etc.) and means (available building materials and attendant skills). As human cultures developed and knowledge began to be formalized through oral traditions and practices, building became a craft, and "architecture" is the name given to the most highly formalized and respected versions of that craft.

Filmmaking[edit]
Main article: Filmmaking
Filmmaking is the process of making a motion-picture, from an initial conception and research, through scriptwriting, shooting and recording, animation or other special effects, editing, sound and music work and finally distribution to an audience; it refers broadly to the creation of all types of films, embracing documentary, strains of theatre and literature in film, and poetic or experimental practices, and is often used to refer to video-based processes as well.

Computer art[edit]
Main article: Computer art
 Desmond Paul Henry, Picture by Drawing Machine 1, c. 1960
Visual artists are no longer limited to traditional Visual arts media. Computers have been used as an ever more common tool in the visual arts since the 1960s. Uses include the capturing or creating of images and forms, the editing of those images and forms (including exploring multiple compositions) and the final rendering or printing (including 3D printing).
Computer art is any in which computers played a role in production or display. Such art can be an image, sound, animation, video, CD-ROM, DVD, video game, website, algorithm, performance or gallery installation. 
Many traditional disciplines are now integrating digital technologies and, as a result, the lines between traditional works of art and new media works created using computers have been blurred. For instance, an artist may combine traditional painting with algorithmic art and other digital techniques. As a result, defining computer art by its end product can be difficult. Nevertheless, this type of art is beginning to appear in art museum exhibits, though it has yet to prove its legitimacy as a form unto itself and this technology is widely seen in contemporary art more as a tool rather than a form as with painting. On the other hand, there are computer-based artworks which belong to a new conceptual and postdigital strand, assuming the same technologies, and their social impact, as an object of inquiry.
Computer usage has blurred the distinctions between illustrators, photographers, photo editors, 3-D modelers, and handicraft artists. Sophisticated rendering and editing software has led to multi-skilled image developers. Photographers may become digital artists. Illustrators may become animators. Handicraft may be computer-aided or use computer-generated imagery as a template. Computer clip art usage has also made the clear distinction between visual arts and page layout less obvious due to the easy access and editing of clip art in the process of paginating a document, especially to the unskilled observer.

Plastic arts[edit]
Main article: Plastic arts
Plastic arts is a term for art forms that involve physical manipulation of a plastic medium by moulding or modeling such as sculpture or ceramics. The term has also been applied to all the visual (non-literary, non-musical) arts.[22][23]
Materials that can be carved or shaped, such as stone or wood, concrete or steel, have also been included in the narrower definition, since, with appropriate tools, such materials are also capable of modulation.[citation needed] This use of the term "plastic" in the arts should not be confused with Piet Mondrian's use, nor with the movement he termed, in French and English, "Neoplasticism."

Sculpture[edit]
Main article: Sculpture
Sculpture is three-dimensional artwork created by shaping or combining hard or plastic material, sound, or text and or light, commonly stone (either rock or marble), clay, metal, glass, or wood. Some sculptures are created directly by finding or carving; others are assembled, built together and fired, welded, molded, or cast. Sculptures are often painted.[24]
A person who creates sculptures is called a sculptor.
Because sculpture involves the use of materials that can be moulded or modulated, it is considered one of the plastic arts. The majority of public art is sculpture. Many sculptures together in a garden setting may be referred to as a sculpture garden. Sculptors do not always make sculptures by hand. With increasing technology in the 20th century and the popularity of conceptual art over technical mastery, more sculptors turned to art fabricators to produce their artworks. With fabrication, the artist creates a design and pays a fabricator to produce it. This allows sculptors to create larger and more complex sculptures out of material like cement, metal and plastic, that they would not be able to create by hand. Sculptures can also be made with 3-d printing technology.


US copyright definition of visual art[edit]
In the United States, the law protecting the copyright over a piece of visual art gives a more restrictive definition of "visual art".[25]


A "work of visual art" is —
(1) a painting, drawing, print or sculpture, existing in a single copy, in a limited edition of 200 copies or fewer that are signed and consecutively numbered by the author, or, in the case of a sculpture, in multiple cast, carved, or fabricated sculptures of 200 or fewer that are consecutively numbered by the author and bear the signature or other identifying mark of the author; or
(2) a still photographic image produced for exhibition purposes only, existing in a single copy that is signed by the author, or in a limited edition of 200 copies or fewer that are signed and consecutively numbered by the author.
A work of visual art does not include —
(A)(i) any poster, map, globe, chart, technical drawing, diagram, model, applied art, motion picture or other audiovisual work, book, magazine, newspaper, periodical, data base, electronic information service, electronic publication, or similar publication;
  (ii) any merchandising item or advertising, promotional, descriptive, covering, or packaging material or container;
  (iii) any portion or part of any item described in clause (i) or (ii);
(B) any work made for hire; or
(C) any work not subject to copyright protection under this title.


See also[edit]
Main article: Outline of visual arts


Visual arts portal

Art materials
Asemic writing
Collage
Crowdsourcing creative work
Décollage
Environmental art
Found object
Graffiti
History of art
Illustration
Installation art
Interactive art
Landscape art
Mathematics and art
Mixed media
Portraiture
Process art
Recording medium
Sketch (drawing)
Sound art
Vexillography
Video art
Visual arts and Theosophy
Visual impairment in art
Visual poetry

References[edit]


^ An About.com article by art expert, Shelley Esaak: What Is Visual Art? Archived 2 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine

^ Different Forms of Art – Applied Art Archived 23 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Buzzle.com. Retrieved 11 December 2010.

^ "Centre for Arts and Design in Toronto, Canada". Georgebrown.ca. 15 February 2011. Archived from the original on 28 October 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2011.

^ Art History: Arts and Crafts Movement: (1861–1900). From World Wide Arts Resources Archived 13 October 2009 at the Portuguese Web Archive. Retrieved 24 October 2009.

^ Ulger, Kani (1 March 2016). "The creative training in the visual arts education". Thinking Skills and Creativity. 19: 73–87. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2015.10.007. ISSN 1871-1871.

^ Adrone, Gumisiriza. "School of industrial art and design". Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2020. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ "drawing | Principles, Techniques, & History". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 12 August 2020.

^ History of Drawing. From Dibujos para Pintar. Archived 20 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 23 October 2009.

^ "Drawing". History.com. 2006. Archived from the original on 14 March 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2009.

^ "painting | History, Elements, Techniques, Types, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2020.

^ History of Painting. From History World Archived 12 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 23 October 2009.

^ "Art history | visual arts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 12 August 2020.

^ History of Renaissance Painting. From ART 340 Painting Archived 25 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 24 October 2009.

^ Mutsaers, Inge. "Ashgate Joins Routledge – Routledge" (PDF). Ashgate.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 15 October 2018.

^ "Impressionist art & paintings, What is Impressionist art? Introduction to Impressionism". Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2018.

^ Impressionism. Webmuseum, Paris. Archived 16 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 24 October 2009

^ Post-Impressionism. Metropolitan Museum of Art Archived 7 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 25 October 2009.

^ Modern Art Movements. Irish Art Encyclopedia Archived 26 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 25 October 2009.

^ The Printed Image in the West: History and Techniques. The Metropolitan Museum of Art Archived 8 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 25 October 2009.

^ Engraving in Chinese Art. From Engraving Review Archived 29 July 2012 at archive.today. Retrieved 23 October 2009.

^ The History of Engraving in China. From ChinaVista Archived 17 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 25 October 2009.

^ Art Terminology at KSU[dead link]

^ "Merriam-Webster Online (entry for "plastic arts")". Merriam-webster.com. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2011.

^ Gods in Color: Painted Sculpture of Classical Antiquity 22 September 2007 Through 20 January 2008, The Arthur M. Sackler Museum Archived 4 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Copyright Law of the United States of America – Chapter 1 (101. Definitions)". .gov. Archived from the original on 25 December 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2011.


Bibliography[edit]
Barnes, A. C., The Art in Painting, 3rd ed., 1937, Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., NY.
Bukumirovic, D. (1998). Maga Magazinovic. Biblioteka Fatalne srpkinje knj. br. 4. Beograd: Narodna knj.
Fazenda, M. J. (1997). Between the pictorial and the expression of ideas: the plastic arts and literature in the dance of Paula Massano. n.p.
Gerón, C. (2000). Enciclopedia de las artes plásticas dominicanas: 1844–2000. 4th ed. Dominican Republic s.n.
Oliver Grau (Ed.): MediaArtHistories. MIT-Press, Cambridge 2007. with Rudolf Arnheim, Barbara Stafford, Sean Cubitt, W. J. T. Mitchell, Lev Manovich, Christiane Paul, Peter Weibel a.o. Rezensionen
Laban, R. V. (1976). The language of movement: a guidebook to choreutics. Boston: Plays.
La Farge, O. (1930). Plastic prayers: dances of the Southwestern Indians. n.p.
Restany, P. (1974). Plastics in arts. Paris, New York: n.p.
University of Pennsylvania. (1969). Plastics and new art. Philadelphia: The Falcon Pr.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Visual arts.




Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Visual arts.

ArtLex – online dictionary of visual art terms.
Calendar for Artists – calendar listing of visual art festivals.
Art History Timeline by the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
vteVisual arts
Architecture
Art
Ceramics
Computer art
Craft
Drawing
Design
Filmmaking
Light art
Painting
Photography
Printmaking
Public art
Sculpture
Site-specific art
Street art

List of artistic media

vteVisual arts and the art worldArtwork
Conceptual art
Cultural artifact
Drawing
Fine art
Installation art
Mural
fresco
New media art
digital
virtual
Painting
Plastic arts
Printmaking
Public art
Street art
Sculpture
statue
carving
tallest
Site-specific art
Roles
Artist
Collector
Conservator-restorer
paintings
frescos
Critic
Curator
Dealer
Model
Patron
Visual arts education
Europe
Placesand events
Art auction
Art colony
Art commune
Art exhibition
alternative exhibition space
Art gallery
Contemporary art gallery
Art museum
Single-artist museum
Art school
Europe
Arts centre
Arts festival
Artist collective
Artist cooperative
Artist-in-residence program
Artist-run initiative
Artist-run space
Biennale
Commission
Sculpture garden
Sculpture trail
Virtual museum
History of art
Timeline of art
Art history (academic study)
Art manifesto
Art movements
Criticism
feminist
History of painting
outline
Related
Art market
The arts
Catalogue raisonné
Classificatory disputes
Museum collection management
deaccessioning
Conservation-restoration
paintings
Cultural policy
Destination painting
Eclecticism in art
Economics of art
art finance
art valuation
Elements of art
Index of painting-related articles
Outline of the visual arts
painting
sculpture
Provenance
Sociology of art
Style
Visual design elements and principles
Lists
Art magazines
Art media
Art techniques
Art movements
Art museums
largest
most visited
sculpture parks
single artist
Art reference books
Colossal sculptures
Contemporary artists
Contemporary art galleries
Modern artists
Painters
by name
by nationality
Photographers
Sculptors
female
Stolen paintings
Most expensive paintings, sculptures, works by living artists

Painting portal
Visual arts portal
Arts portal

vteHumanities
Anthropology
Digital humanities
History
Law
Literature
Performing arts
Politics
Philosophy
Religious studies
Visual arts

Portals: Arts Visual arts
Authority control: National libraries 
Germany
Czech Republic
2





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visual_arts&oldid=1111238497"
Categories: Visual artsCommunication designVisual arts mediaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template other archivesCS1 errors: missing periodicalWebarchive template archiveis linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2011Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from July 2020Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2009Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with GND identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with multiple identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAsturianuАварAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGàidhligGalego贛語گیلکی한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaქართულიҚазақшаKernowekKreyòl ayisyenKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLimburgsMagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംმარგალურიمصرىBahasa MelayuMirandésNederlandsNedersaksies日本語NordfriiskNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаPatoisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийSarduSeelterskShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng ViệtVõroWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 20 September 2022, at 00:52 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










