



Zoology - Wikipedia

































Zoology

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Study of the animal kingdom
For other uses, see Zoology (disambiguation).
"Animal biology" and "Zoologist" redirect here. For the journals, see Animal Biology and The Zoologist.
Part of a series onBiologyScience of life

Index
Outline
Glossary


History (timeline)

Key components
Cell theory
Ecosystem
Evolution
 Phylogeny

Properties of life

Adaptation
 Energy processing
Growth
Order
Regulation
Reproduction
Response to environment

 Domains and Kingdoms of life

Archaea
Bacteria
Eukarya (Animals, Fungi, Plants, Protists)

Branches
Anatomy
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Ecology
Evolutionary biology
Genetics
Marine biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Phycology
Physiology
Protistology
Virology
Zoology

Research
Biologist (list)
List of biology awards
List of journals
List of research methods
List of unsolved problems

Applications
Agricultural science
Biomedical sciences
Health technology
 Pharming

 Biology portal
 Categoryvte
Zoology (/zoʊˈɒlədʒi/)[note 1] is the branch of biology that studies the animal kingdom, including the structure, embryology, evolution, classification, habits, and distribution of all animals, both living and extinct, and how they interact with their ecosystems. The term is derived from Ancient Greek ζῷον, zōion ('animal'), and λόγος, logos ('knowledge', 'study').[1]
Although humans have always been interested in the natural history of the animals they saw around them, and made use of this knowledge to domesticate certain species, the formal study of zoology can be said to have originated with Aristotle. He viewed animals as living organisms, studied their structure and development, and considered their adaptations to their surroundings and the function of their parts. The Greek physician Galen studied human anatomy and was one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world, but after the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine and scientific study went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued in the medieval Islamic world. Modern zoology has its origins during the Renaissance and early modern period, with Carl Linnaeus, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, Robert Hooke, Charles Darwin, Gregor Mendel and many others.
The study of animals has largely moved on to deal with form and function, adaptations, relationships between groups, behaviour and ecology. Zoology has increasingly been subdivided into disciplines such as classification, physiology, biochemistry and evolution. With the discovery of the structure of DNA by Francis Crick and James Watson in 1953, the realm of molecular biology opened up, leading to advances in  cell biology, developmental biology and molecular genetics.

Contents

1 History
2 Scope
3 Branches of zoology

3.1 Classification
3.2 Vertebrate and invertebrate zoology
3.3 Structural zoology
3.4 Physiology
3.5 Developmental biology
3.6 Evolutionary biology
3.7 Ethology
3.8 Biogeography
3.9 Molecular biology


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links


History[edit]
Main articles: History of zoology through 1859 and History of zoology (1859–present)
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of zoology.
 Conrad Gessner (1516–1565). His Historiae animalium is considered the beginning of modern zoology.
The history of zoology traces the study of the animal kingdom from ancient to modern times. Prehistoric people needed to study the animals and plants in their environment in order to exploit them and survive. There are cave paintings, engravings and sculptures in France dating back 15,000 years showing bison, horses and deer in carefully rendered detail. Similar images from other parts of the world illustrated mostly the animals hunted for food, but also the savage animals.[2]
The Neolithic Revolution, which is characterized by the domestication of animals, continued over the period of Antiquity. Ancient knowledge of wildlife is illustrated by the realistic depictions of wild and domestic animals in the Near East, Mesopotamia and Egypt, including husbandry practices and techniques, hunting and fishing. The invention of writing is reflected in zoology by the presence of animals in Egyptian hieroglyphics.[3]
Although the concept of zoology as a single coherent field arose much later, the zoological sciences emerged from natural history reaching back to the biological works of Aristotle and Galen in the ancient Greco-Roman world. Aristotle, in the fourth century BC, looked at animals as living organisms, studying their structure, development and vital phenomena. He divided them into two groups: animals with blood, equivalent to our concept of vertebrates, and animals without blood, invertebrates. He spent two years on Lesbos, observing and describing the animals and plants, considering the adaptations of different organisms and the function of their parts.[4] Four hundred years later, Roman physician Galen dissected animals to study their anatomy and the function of the different parts, because the dissection of human cadavers was prohibited at the time.[5] This resulted in some of his conclusions being false, but for many centuries it was considered heretical to challenge any of his views, so the study of anatomy stultified.[6]
During the post-classical era, Middle Eastern science and medicine was the most advanced in the world, integrating concepts from Ancient Greece, Rome, Mesopotamia and Persia as well as the ancient Indian tradition of Ayurveda, while making numerous advances and innovations.[7] In the 13th century, Albertus Magnus produced commentaries and paraphrases of all Aristotle's works; his books on topics like botany, zoology, and minerals included information from ancient sources, but also the results of his own investigations. His general approach was surprisingly modern, and he wrote, "For it is [the task] of natural science not simply to accept what we are told but to inquire into the causes of natural things."[8] An early pioneer was Conrad Gessner, whose monumental 4,500-page encyclopedia of animals, Historia animalium, was published in four volumes between 1551 and 1558.[9]
In Europe, Galen's work on anatomy remained largely unsurpassed and unchallenged up until the 16th century.[10][11] During the Renaissance and early modern period, zoological thought was revolutionized in Europe by a renewed interest in empiricism and the discovery of many novel organisms. Prominent in this movement were Andreas Vesalius and William Harvey, who used experimentation and careful observation in physiology, and naturalists such as Carl Linnaeus, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, and Buffon who began to classify the diversity of life and the fossil record, as well as studying the development and behavior of organisms. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek did pioneering work in microscopy and revealed the previously unknown world of microorganisms, laying the groundwork for cell theory.[12] van Leeuwenhoek's observations were endorsed by Robert Hooke; all living organisms were composed of one or more cells and could not generate spontaneously. Cell theory provided a new perspective on the fundamental basis of life.[13]
Having previously been the realm of gentlemen naturalists, over the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, zoology became an increasingly professional scientific discipline. Explorer-naturalists such as Alexander von Humboldt investigated the interaction between organisms and their environment, and the ways this relationship depends on geography, laying the foundations for biogeography, ecology and ethology. Naturalists began to reject essentialism and consider the importance of extinction and the mutability of species.[14]
These developments, as well as the results from embryology and paleontology, were synthesized in the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection; in this Darwin placed the theory of organic evolution on a new footing, by explaining the processes by which it can occur, and providing observational evidence that it had done so.[15] Darwin's theory was rapidly accepted by the scientific community and soon became a central axiom of the rapidly developing science of biology. The basis for modern genetics began with the work of Gregor Mendel on peas in 1865, although the significance of his work was not realized at the time.[16]
Darwin gave a new direction to morphology and physiology, by uniting them in a common biological theory: the theory of organic evolution. The result was a reconstruction of the classification of animals upon a genealogical basis, fresh investigation of the development of animals, and early attempts to determine their genetic relationships. The end of the 19th century saw the fall of spontaneous generation and the rise of the germ theory of disease, though the mechanism of inheritance remained a mystery. In the early 20th century, the rediscovery of Mendel's work led to the rapid development of genetics, and by the 1930s the combination of population genetics and natural selection in the modern synthesis created evolutionary biology.[17]
Research in cell biology is interconnected to other fields such as genetics, biochemistry, medical microbiology, immunology, and cytochemistry. With the sequencing of the DNA molecule by Francis Crick and James Watson in 1953, the realm of molecular biology opened up, leading to advances in  cell biology, developmental biology and molecular genetics. The study of systematics was transformed as DNA sequencing elucidated the degrees of affinity between different organisms.[18]

Scope[edit]
Zoology is the branch of science dealing with animals. A species can be defined as the largest group of organisms in which any two individuals of the appropriate sex can produce fertile offspring; about 1.5 million species of animal have been described and it has been estimated that as many as 8 million animal species may exist.[19]
An early necessity was to identify the organisms and group them according to their characteristics, differences and relationships, and this is the field of the taxonomist. Originally it was thought that species were immutable, but with the arrival of Darwin's theory of evolution, the field of cladistics came into being, studying the relationships between the different groups or clades. Systematics is the study of the diversification of living forms, the evolutionary history of a group is known as its phylogeny, and the relationship between the clades can be shown diagrammatically in a cladogram.[20]
Although someone who made a scientific study of animals would historically have described themselves as a zoologist, the term has come to refer to those who deal with individual animals, with others describing themselves more specifically as physiologists, ethologists, evolutionary biologists, ecologists, pharmacologists, endocrinologists or parasitologists.[21]

Branches of zoology[edit]
Although the study of animal life is ancient, its scientific incarnation is relatively modern. This mirrors the transition from natural history to biology at the start of the 19th century. Since Hunter and Cuvier, comparative anatomical study has been associated with morphography, shaping the modern areas of zoological investigation:  anatomy, physiology, histology, embryology, teratology and ethology.[22] Modern zoology first arose in German and British universities. In Britain, Thomas Henry Huxley was a prominent figure. His ideas were centered on the morphology of animals. Many consider him the greatest comparative anatomist of the latter half of the 19th century. Similar to Hunter, his courses were composed of lectures and laboratory practical classes in contrast to the previous format of lectures only.

Classification[edit]
Scientific classification in zoology, is a method by which zoologists group and categorize organisms by biological type, such as genus or species. Biological classification is a form of scientific taxonomy. Modern biological classification has its root in the work of Carl Linnaeus, who grouped species according to shared physical characteristics. These groupings have since been revised to improve consistency with the Darwinian principle of common descent. Molecular phylogenetics, which uses nucleic acid sequence as data, has driven many recent revisions and is likely to continue to do so. Biological classification belongs to the science of zoological systematics.[23]

 Linnaeus's table of the animal kingdom from the first edition of Systema Naturae (1735)
Many scientists now consider the five-kingdom system outdated. Modern alternative classification systems generally start with the three-domain system: Archaea (originally Archaebacteria); Bacteria (originally Eubacteria); Eukaryota (including protists, fungi, plants, and animals)[24]  These domains reflect whether the cells have nuclei or not, as well as differences in the chemical composition of the cell exteriors.[24]
Further, each kingdom is broken down recursively until each species is separately classified. The order is:
Domain; kingdom; phylum; class; order; family; genus; species. The scientific name of an organism is generated from its genus and species. For example, humans are listed as Homo sapiens. Homo is the genus, and sapiens the specific epithet, both of them combined make up the species name. When writing the scientific name of an organism, it is proper to capitalize the first letter in the genus and put all of the specific epithet in lowercase. Additionally, the entire term may be italicized or underlined.[25]
The dominant classification system is called the Linnaean taxonomy. It includes ranks and binomial nomenclature. The classification, taxonomy, and nomenclature of zoological organisms is administered by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. A merging draft, BioCode, was published in 1997 in an attempt to standardize nomenclature, but has yet to be formally adopted.[26]

Vertebrate and invertebrate zoology[edit]
Vertebrate zoology is the biological discipline that consists of the study of vertebrate animals, that is animals with a backbone, such as fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. The various taxonomically oriented disciplines such as mammalogy, biological anthropology, herpetology, ornithology, and ichthyology seek to identify and classify species and study the structures and mechanisms specific to those groups. The rest of the animal kingdom is dealt with by invertebrate zoology, a vast and very diverse group of animals that includes sponges, echinoderms, tunicates, worms, molluscs, arthropods and many other phyla, but single-celled organisms or protists are not usually included.[20]

Structural zoology[edit]
Cell biology studies the structural and physiological properties of cells, including their behavior, interactions, and environment. This is done on both the microscopic and molecular levels for single-celled organisms such as bacteria as well as the specialized cells in multicellular organisms such as humans.  Understanding the structure and function of cells is fundamental to all of the biological sciences. The similarities and differences between cell types are particularly relevant to molecular biology.
Anatomy considers the forms of macroscopic structures such as organs and organ systems.[27] It focuses on how organs and organ systems work together in the bodies of humans and animals, in addition to how they work independently. Anatomy and cell biology are two studies that are closely related, and can be categorized under "structural" studies. Comparative anatomy is the study of similarities and differences in the anatomy of different groups. It is closely related to evolutionary biology and phylogeny (the evolution of species).[28]

Physiology[edit]
 Animal anatomical engraving from Handbuch der Anatomie der Tiere für Künstler.
Physiology studies the mechanical, physical, and biochemical processes of living organisms by attempting to understand how all of the structures function as a whole. The theme of "structure to function" is central to biology. Physiological studies have traditionally been divided into plant physiology and animal physiology, but some principles of physiology are universal, no matter what particular organism is being studied. For example, what is learned about the physiology of yeast cells can also apply to human cells. The field of animal physiology extends the tools and methods of human physiology to non-human species. Physiology studies how, for example, the nervous, immune, endocrine, respiratory, and circulatory systems function and interact.[29]

Developmental biology[edit]
Developmental biology is the study of the processes by which animals and plants reproduce and grow. The discipline includes the study of embryonic development, cellular differentiation, regeneration, asexual and sexual reproduction, metamorphosis, and the growth and differentiation of stem cells in the adult organism.[30] Development of both animals and plants is further considered in the articles on evolution, population genetics, heredity, genetic variability, Mendelian inheritance, and reproduction.

Evolutionary biology[edit]
Evolutionary biology is the subfield of biology that studies the evolutionary processes (natural selection, common descent, speciation) that produced the diversity of life on Earth. Evolutionary research is concerned with the origin and descent of species, as well as their change over time, and includes scientists from many taxonomically oriented disciplines. For example, it generally involves scientists who have special training in particular organisms such as mammalogy, ornithology, herpetology, or entomology, but use those organisms as systems to answer general questions about evolution.[31]
Evolutionary biology is partly based on paleontology, which uses the fossil record to answer questions about the mode and tempo of evolution,[32] and partly on the developments in areas such as population genetics[33] and evolutionary theory. Following the development of DNA fingerprinting techniques in the late 20th century, the application of these techniques in zoology has increased the understanding of animal populations.[34]  In the 1980s, developmental biology re-entered evolutionary biology from its initial exclusion from the modern synthesis through the study of evolutionary developmental biology. Related fields often considered part of evolutionary biology are phylogenetics, systematics, and taxonomy.[35]

Ethology[edit]
 Kelp gull chicks peck at red spot on mother's beak to stimulate the regurgitating reflex.
Ethology is the scientific and objective study of animal behavior under natural conditions,[36]  as opposed to behaviorism, which focuses on behavioral response studies in a laboratory setting.  Ethologists have been particularly concerned with the evolution of behavior and the understanding of behavior in terms of the theory of natural selection. In one sense, the first modern ethologist was Charles Darwin, whose book, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, influenced many future ethologists.[37]
A subfield of ethology is behavioral ecology which attempts to answer Nikolaas Tinbergen's four questions with regard to animal behavior: what are the proximate causes of the behavior, the developmental history of the organism, the survival value and phylogeny of the behavior?[38] Another area of study is animal cognition, which uses laboratory experiments and carefully controlled field studies to investigate an animal's intelligence and learning.[39]

Biogeography[edit]
Biogeography studies the spatial distribution of organisms on the Earth,[40] focusing on topics like dispersal and migration, plate tectonics, climate change, and cladistics. It is an integrative field of study, uniting concepts and information from evolutionary biology, taxonomy, ecology, physical geography, geology, paleontology and climatology.[41] The origin of this field of study is widely accredited to Alfred Russel Wallace, a British biologist who had some of his work jointly published with Charles Darwin.[42]

Molecular biology[edit]
Molecular biology studies the common genetic and developmental mechanisms of animals and plants, attempting to answer the questions regarding the mechanisms of genetic inheritance and the structure of the gene. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick described the structure of DNA and the interactions within the molecule, and this publication jump-started research into molecular biology and increased interest in the subject.[43] While researchers practice techniques specific to molecular biology, it is common to combine these with methods from genetics and biochemistry. Much of molecular biology is quantitative, and recently a significant amount of work has been done using computer science techniques such as bioinformatics and computational biology. Molecular genetics, the study of gene structure and function, has been among the most prominent sub-fields of molecular biology since the early 2000s. Other branches of biology are informed by molecular biology, by either directly studying the interactions of molecules in their own right such as in cell biology and developmental biology, or indirectly, where molecular techniques are used to infer historical attributes of populations or species, as in fields in evolutionary biology such as population genetics and phylogenetics. There is also a long tradition of studying biomolecules "from the ground up", or molecularly, in biophysics.[44]

See also[edit]
Animal science, the biology of domesticated animals
Astrobiology
Cognitive zoology
Evolutionary biology
List of zoologists
Outline of zoology
Palaeontology
Timeline of zoology
Zoological distribution
Notes[edit]


^ The pronunciation of zoology as /zuˈɒlədʒi/ is usually regarded as nonstandard, though it is not uncommon.


References[edit]


^ "zoology". Online Etymology Dictionary.

^ Mark Fellowes (2020). 30-Second Zoology: The 50 most fundamental categories and concepts from the study of animal life. Ivy Press. ISBN 978-0-7112-5465-7.

^ E. A. Wallis Budge (1920). "Egyptian Hieroglyphic Dictionary: Introduction" (PDF). John Murray. Retrieved 10 June 2021.

^ Leroi, Armand Marie (2015). The Lagoon: How Aristotle Invented Science. Bloomsbury. pp. 135–136. ISBN 978-1-4088-3622-4.

^ Claudii Galeni Pergameni (1992).  Odysseas Hatzopoulos (ed.). "That the best physician is also a philosopher" with a Modern Greek Translation. Athens, Greece: Odysseas Hatzopoulos & Company: Kaktos Editions.

^ Friedman, Meyer; Friedland, Gerald W. (1998). Medecine's 10 Greatest Discoveries. Yale University Press. p. 2. ISBN 0-300-07598-7.

^ Bayrakdar, Mehmet (1986). "Al-Jahiz and the rise of biological evolution". Ankara Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi. Ankara University. 27 (1): 307–315. doi:10.1501/Ilhfak_0000000674.

^ Wyckoff, Dorothy (1967). Book of Minerals. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. Preface.

^ Scott, Michon (26 March 2017). "Conrad Gesner". Strange Science: The rocky road to modern paleontology and biology. Retrieved 27 September 2017.

^ Agutter, Paul S.; Wheatley, Denys N. (2008). Thinking about Life: The History and Philosophy of Biology and Other Sciences. Springer. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-4020-8865-0.

^ Saint Albertus Magnus (1999). On Animals: A Medieval Summa Zoologica. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-4823-7.

^ Magner, Lois N. (2002). A History of the Life Sciences, Revised and Expanded. CRC Press. pp. 133–144. ISBN 0-8247-0824-5.

^ Jan Sapp (2003). "Chapter 7". Genesis: The Evolution of Biology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515619-6.

^ William Coleman (1978). "Chapter 2". Biology in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-29293-X.

^ Coyne, Jerry A. (2009). Why Evolution is True. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-19-923084-6.

^ Henig, Robin Marantz (2009). The Monk in the Garden : The Lost and Found Genius of Gregor Mendel, the Father of Modern Genetics. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-97765-1.

^ "Appendix: Frequently Asked Questions". Science and Creationism: a view from the National Academy of Sciences (php) (Second ed.). Washington, DC: The National Academy of Sciences. 1999. p. 28. ISBN -0-309-06406-6. Retrieved September 24, 2009.

^ "Systematics: Meaning, Branches and Its Application". Biology Discussion. 27 May 2016. Retrieved 10 June 2021.

^ Mora, Camilo; Tittensor, Derek P.; Adl, Sina; Simpson, Alastair G. B.; Worm, Boris (2011-08-23). "How Many Species Are There on Earth and in the Ocean?". PLOS Biology. 9 (8): e1001127. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127. ISSN 1545-7885. PMC 3160336. PMID 21886479.

^ a b Ruppert, Edward E.; Fox, Richard, S.; Barnes, Robert D. (2004). Invertebrate Zoology, 7th edition. Cengage Learning. p. 2. ISBN 978-81-315-0104-7.

^ Campbell, P.N. (2013). Biology in Profile: A Guide to the Many Branches of Biology. Elsevier. pp. 3–5. ISBN 978-1-4831-3797-1.

^ "zoology". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-09-13.

^ "Systematics: Meaning, Branches and Its Application". Biology Discussion. 27 May 2016. Retrieved 12 April 2017.

^ a b Woese C, Kandler O, Wheelis M (1990). "Towards a natural system of organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 87 (12): 4576–4579. Bibcode:1990PNAS...87.4576W. doi:10.1073/pnas.87.12.4576. PMC 54159. PMID 2112744.

^ Heather Silyn-Roberts (2000). Writing for Science and Engineering: Papers, Presentation. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 198. ISBN 0-7506-4636-5.

^ John McNeill (4 November 1996). "The BioCode: Integrated biological nomenclature for the 21st century?". Proceedings of a Mini-Symposium on Biological Nomenclature in the 21st Century.

^ Henry Gray (1918). Anatomy of the Human Body. Lea & Febiger.

^ Gaucher, E.A.; Kratzer, J.T.; Randall, R.N. (January 2010). "Deep phylogeny--how a tree can help characterize early life on Earth". Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology. 2 (1): a002238. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a002238. PMC 2827910. PMID 20182607.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ "What is physiology? — Faculty of Biology". biology.cam.ac.uk. 16 February 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2021.

^ "Developmental biology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 14 February 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2021.

^ Gilbert, Scott F.; Barresi, Michael J.F. (2016) "Developmental Biology" Sinauer Associates, inc.(11th ed.) pp. 785-810. ISBN 9781605354705 

^ Jablonski D (1999). "The future of the fossil record". Science. 284 (5423): 2114–2116. doi:10.1126/science.284.5423.2114. PMID 10381868. S2CID 43388925.

^ John H. Gillespie (1998). Population Genetics: A Concise Guide. Johns Hopkins Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8008-7.

^ Chambers, Geoffrey K.; Curtis, Caitlin; Millar, Craig D.; Huynen, Leon; Lambert, David M. (2014-01-01). "DNA fingerprinting in zoology: past, present, future". Investigative Genetics. 5 (1): 3. doi:10.1186/2041-2223-5-3. ISSN 2041-2223. PMC 3909909. PMID 24490906.

^ Vassiliki Betty Smocovitis (1996). Unifying Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-03343-3.

^ "Definition of Ethology". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 30 October 2012. 2 : the scientific and objective study of animal behaviour especially under natural conditions

^ Black, J (Jun 2002). "Darwin in the world of emotions" (Free full text). Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 95 (6): 311–313. doi:10.1177/014107680209500617. ISSN 0141-0768. PMC 1279921. PMID 12042386.

^ MacDougall-Shackleton, Scott A. (2011-07-27). "The levels of analysis revisited". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 366 (1574): 2076–2085. doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0363. PMC 3130367. PMID 21690126.

^ Shettleworth, S.J. (2010). Cognition, Evolution and Behavior (2ND ed.). New York: Oxford Press. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.843.596.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ Wiley, R. H. (1981). "Social structure and individual ontogenies: problems of description, mechanism, and evolution" (PDF). Perspectives in Ethology. 4: 105–133. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-7575-7_5. ISBN 978-1-4615-7577-1. Retrieved 21 December 2012.

^ Cox, C. Barry; Moore, Peter D.; Ladle, Richard J. (2016). Biogeography:An Ecological and Evolutionary Approach. Chichester, UK: Wiley. p. xi. ISBN 9781118968581. Retrieved 22 May 2020.

^ Browne, Janet (1983). The secular ark: studies in the history of biogeography. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-02460-9.

^ Tabery, Monika, James, Piotrowska; Darden, Lindley (2019). "Molecular Biology".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 2020-04-19.

^ Tian J, ed. (2013). Molecular Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications. Springer-Verlag Berlin & Heidelberg GmbH & Co. K. p. 542. ISBN 9783642343032. Retrieved 2019-07-08.




External links[edit]



At Wikiversity, you can learn more and teach others about Zoology at the School of Zoology.



Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Zoology




Wikiquote has quotations related to Zoology.




Wikisource has original works on the topic: Zoology




Look up zoology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Books on Zoology at Project Gutenberg
Online Dictionary of Invertebrate Zoology
vteZoology
Outline
History
Branches
Anthrozoology
Arthropodology (Arachnology (Acarology)
Carcinology
Entomology (Coleopterology
Lepidopterology
Melittology
Myrmecology
Orthopterology)
Myriapodology)
Biological anthropology
Bryozoology
Cnidariology
Ethnozoology
Ethology
Helminthology
Herpetology (Batrachology
Ophiology
Testudinology)
Ichthyology
Malacology (Conchology
Teuthology)
Mammalogy (Cetology
Cynology
Felinology
Hippology
Primatology)
Nematology
Neuroethology
Ornithology
Parasitology
Paleozoology
Planktology
Zooarchaeology
Zoologists
Karl Ernst von Baer
Georges Cuvier
Charles Darwin
Jean-Henri Fabre
William Kirby
Carl Linnaeus
Konrad Lorenz
Thomas Say
Jakob von Uexküll
Alfred Russel Wallace
more...
History
Pre-Darwin
Post-Darwin
Timeline of zoology

 Category
 Commons

vteExtant Animal phyla
Domain
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukaryota
(Supergroup
Plant
Hacrobia
Heterokont
Alveolata
Rhizaria
Excavata
Amoebozoa
Opisthokonta
Animal
Fungi)
Animalia
Porifera (sponges)
Eumetazoa(Diploblasts)
Ctenophora (comb jellies)
ParaHoxozoa(Planulozoa)
Placozoa (Trichoplax)
Cnidaria (jellyfish and relatives)
Bilateria (Triploblasts)
(see below↓)
BilateriaBilateria
Xenacoelomorpha (acoels and relatives)
Chordata (chordates)
Ambulacraria
Echinodermata (starfish and relatives)
Hemichordata (acorn worms and relatives)
ProtostomiaEcdysozoaScalidophora
Kinorhyncha (mud dragons)
Priapulida (penis worms)
N+L+PNematoida
Nematoda (roundworms)
Nematomorpha (horsehair worms)
L+P
Loricifera (corset animals)
Panarthropoda
Onychophora (velvet worms)
Tactopoda
Arthropoda (arthropods)
Tardigrada (waterbears)
SpiraliaGnathifera
Chaetognatha (arrow worms)
Gnathostomulida (jaw worms)
M+S
Micrognathozoa (Limnognathia)
Syndermata
Rotifera (wheel animals)
Acanthocephala (thorny-headed worms)
PlatytrochozoaR+MRouphozoa
Platyhelminthes (flatworms)
Gastrotricha (hairybacks)
Mesozoa
Orthonectida
Dicyemida or Rhombozoa
Monoblastozoa (Salinella)†
Lophotrochozoa
Cycliophora (Symbion)
Annelida (segmented worms)
M+K
Mollusca (molluscs)
Kryptotrochozoa
Nemertea (ribbon worms)
LophophorataBryozoa s.l.
Entoprocta or Kamptozoa
Ectoprocta (moss animals)
Brachiozoa
Brachiopoda (lamp shells)
Phoronida (horseshoe worms)
Major groupswithin phyla
Sponges
Demosponges
Glass sponges
Calcareous sponges
Cnidarians
Anthozoans inc. corals
Medusozoans inc. jellyfish
Myxozoans
Chordates
Lancelets
Tunicates
Vertebrates
Echinoderms
Sea lilies
Asterozoans inc. starfish
Echinozoans inc. sea urchins
Hemichordates
Acorn worms
Pterobranchs
Nematodes
Chromadorea
Enoplea
Secernentea
Arthropods
Chelicerates/Arachnids
Myriapods
Crustaceans
Hexapods/Insects
Platyhelminths
Turbellaria
Trematoda
Monogenea
Cestoda
Bryozoans
Phylactolaemata
Stenolaemata
Gymnolaemata
Annelids
Polychaetes
Clitellata
Sipuncula
Molluscs
Gastropods
Cephalopods
Bivalves
Chitons
Tusk shells

Phyla with ≥1000 extant species bolded
Potentially dubious phyla †
The phylogeny of Bilateria is disputed; see also
Nephrozoa
Deuterostomia
Xenambulacraria

vteBranches of biology
Abiogenesis
Aerobiology
Agrostology
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Bacteriology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biogeology
Biohistory
Bioinformatics
Biological engineering
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Cytogenetics
Dendrology
Developmental biology
Ecological genetics
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Genetics
Genomics
Geobiology
Gerontology
Herpetology
Histology
Human biology
Ichthyology
Immunology
Lipidology
Mammalogy
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Ornithology
Osteology
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Photobiology
Phycology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Pomology
Primatology
Proteomics
Protistology
Quantum biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Xenobiology
Zoology
See also
History of biology
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
Timeline of biology and organic chemistry

vteBiology
Introduction (Genetics, Evolution)
Outline
History
Timeline
Index
FundamentalsOverview
Science
Life
Properties (Adaptation,  Energy processing, Growth, Order, Regulation, Reproduction, Response to environment)
Hierarchy of life (Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere)
Reductionistic
 Emergent property
Mechanistic
Scientific method
 Theory
 Law
Peer review
Biology journals
Chemical basis
Atoms
Amino acids
Carbohydrates
Chemical bond
Chemical element
Lipids
Matter
Molecules
Monomer
Nucleic acids
Organic compounds
pH
Polymer
Proteins
Water
Cells
ATP
Cell cycle
Cell theory
Cell signaling
Cellular respiration
Energy transformation
Enzyme
Eukaryote
Fermentation
Metabolism
Meiosis
Mitosis
Photosynthesis
Prokaryote
Genetics
DNA
Epigenetics
Evolutionary developmental biology
Gene expression
Gene regulation
Genomes
Mendelian inheritance
Post-transcriptional modification
Evolution
Adaptation
Earliest known life forms
Function
Genetic drift
Gene flow
History of life
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Mutation
Natural selection
Phylogenetics
Speciation
Taxonomy
Diversity
Archaea
Animals
Bacteria
Biodiversity
Fungus
Invertebrates
Plants
Protists
Vertebrates
Viruses
Plant form and function
Epidermis (botany)
Flower
Ground tissue
Leaf
Phloem
Plant stem
Root
Shoot
Vascular plant
Vascular tissue
Xylem
Animal form and function
Breathing
Circulatory system
Endocrine system
Digestive system
Homeostasis
Immune system
Internal environment
Muscular system
Nervous system
Reproductive system
Respiratory system
Ecology
Biogeochemical cycle
Biological interaction
Biomass
Biomes
Biosphere
Climate
Climate change
Community
Conservation
Ecosystem
Habitat
niche
Microbiome
Population dynamics
Resources
Research methodsLaboratory techniques
Genetic engineering
Transformation
Gel electrophoresis
Chromatography
Centrifugation
Cell culture
DNA sequencing
DNA microarray
Green fluorescent protein
vector
Enzyme assay
Protein purification
Western blot
Northern blot
Southern blot
Restriction enzyme
Polymerase chain reaction
Two-hybrid screening
in vivo
in vitro
in silico
Field techniques
Belt transect
mark and recapture
species discovery curve
Branches
Agricultural science
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Developmental biology
Ecology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Evolutionary developmental biology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Lipidology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Phycology
Physiology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Virology
Zoology
Glossaries
Biology
Botanical terms
Ecological terms
Plant morphology terms

 Biology portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vteZoos, aquariums, and aviariesTypes of zoos
Animal sanctuary
Animal theme park
Aquarium
Aviary
Bear pit
Butterfly house
Dolphinarium
Herpetarium
Insectarium
Nature center
Marine mammal park
Menagerie
Night safari
Oceanarium
Penguinarium
Pheasantry
Petting zoo
Reptile centre
Safari park
Virtual zoo
Vivarium
Zoo
Conservation
Biodiversity
Captive breeding
Conservation biology
Endangered species
Ex situ conservation
In situ conservation
Species reintroduction
Lists
Zoos
Aquariums
largest
Animal sanctuaries
Butterfly houses
Dolphinariums
Conservation topics
Former zoos and aquariums
Nature centers
Zoo associations
WAZA members
Related
Animal rights
Animal cruelty
Animals in captivity
Animal training
Behavioral enrichment
Frozen zoo
Immersion exhibit
Nocturnal house
Wildlife conservation
Zookeeper
Zoo emergency response team
Zoo key
Zoological society
Zoology

 Animals portal
 Category: Zoos
 Category: Aquariums

Portals: Animals Biology Palaeontology
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zoology&oldid=1115278148"
Categories: ZoologyBranches of biologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: uses authors parameterArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with EMU identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with FAST identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikiversity




Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésArpetanঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúBasa BanyumasanБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीBikol CentralБългарскиBoarischBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEstremeñuEuskaraفارسیFrançaisFryskFurlanGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIgboIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlingueИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKiswahiliKriyòl gwiyannenKurdîКыргызчаКырык марыLadinoLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLigureLimburgsLa .lojban.LugandaMagyarमैथिलीМакедонскиമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىBahasa MelayuMirandésမြန်မာဘာသာNa Vosa VakavitiNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語Norfuk / PitkernNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandNovialOccitanОлык марийଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏپښتوPatoisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుTetunไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeTürkmençeУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtVolapükWalonWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Zazaki中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 17:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement










