Beijing - Wikipedia
Beijing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Capital city of China
For other uses, see Beijing (disambiguation).
"Peking" redirects here; for other uses, see Peking (disambiguation). "Beijinger" redirects here; for the magazine, see The Beijinger.
Municipality and capital city in ChinaBeijing
北京PekingMunicipality and capital cityMunicipality of BeijingClockwise from top: Beijing CBD skyline; Great Wall of Badaling; Temple of Heaven; Great Hall of the People (left) and National Centre for the Performing Arts; Beijing National Stadium; and TiananmenLocation of Beijing Municipality within ChinaCoordinates (Tian'anmen Square national flag): 39°54′24″N 116°23′51″E﻿ / ﻿39.90667°N 116.39750°E﻿ / 39.90667; 116.39750Coordinates: 39°54′24″N 116°23′51″E﻿ / ﻿39.90667°N 116.39750°E﻿ / 39.90667; 116.39750Country ChinaEstablished1045 BCFounded byZhou Dynasty (Western Zhou)City seatTongzhouDivisions – County-level – Township-level16 districts289 towns and villagesGovernment • TypeMunicipality • BodyBeijing Municipal People's Congress • CPC SecretaryCai Qi • Congress ChairmanLi Wei • MayorChen Jining • CPPCC ChairmanWei Xiaodong • National People's Congress Representation54 deputiesArea • Municipality16,410.5 km2 (6,336.1 sq mi) • Land16,410.5 km2 (6,336.1 sq mi) • Urban16,410.5 km2 (6,336.1 sq mi) • Metro12,796.5 km2 (4,940.8 sq mi)Elevation43.5 m (142.7 ft)Highest elevation (Mount Ling)2,303 m (7,556 ft)Population (2020 census) • Municipality21,893,095 • Density1,300/km2 (3,500/sq mi) • Urban21,893,095 • Urban density1,300/km2 (3,500/sq mi) • Metro22,366,547 • Metro density1,700/km2 (4,500/sq mi) • Ranks in ChinaPopulation: 27th;Density: 4thMajor ethnic groups • Han95% • Manchu2% • Hui2% • Mongol0.3% • Other0.7%Time zoneUTC+8 (CST)Postal codes100000–102629Area code10ISO 3166 codeCN-BJGDP2021 - Total¥4.03 trillion$634.38 billion (nominal)
$965.73 billion (PPP) – Per capita¥184,075$28,975 (nominal) $44,110 (PPP) – Growth 8.5%HDI (2019)0.904 (1st) – very highLicense plate prefixes京A, C, E, F, H, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, Y京B (taxis)京G (outside urban area)京O, D (police and authorities)AbbreviationBJ / 京 (jīng)City treesChinese arborvitae (Platycladus orientalis) Pagoda tree (Sophora japonica)City flowersChina rose (Rosa chinensis) Chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum morifolium)Websitebeijing.gov.cnenglish.beijing.gov.cn
Beijing"Beijing" in regular Chinese charactersChinese北京Hanyu PinyinBěijīng
PostalPeking[note 1]Peiping (1368–1403;1928–1937; 1945–1949)Literal meaning"Northern Capital"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinBěijīngBopomofoㄅㄟˇ   ㄐㄧㄥGwoyeu RomatzyhBeeijingWade–GilesPei3-ching1IPA[pèɪ.tɕíŋ] (listen)WuSuzhounesePoh-cinHakkaRomanizationBet5-gin1Yue: CantoneseYale RomanizationBākgìng or BākgīngJyutpingBak1ging1IPA[pɐ́k̚.kêŋ] or [pɐ́k̚.kéŋ]Southern MinHokkien POJPak-kiaⁿTâi-lôPak-kiannEastern MinFuzhou BUCBáe̤k-gĭng
Beijing (/beɪˈdʒɪŋ/ bay-JING; Chinese: 北京; pinyin: Běijīng; Mandarin pronunciation: [pèɪ.tɕíŋ] (listen)), alternatively romanized as Peking (/piːˈkɪŋ/ pee-KING), is the capital of the People's Republic of China.
It is the political center, cultural center, international communication center and scientific and technological innovation center of the country.
Beijing is the world's most populous national capital city, with over 21 million residents within an administrative area of 16,410.5 km2 (6336 sq. mi.). Nevertheless, its built-up area, the third largest in China after Guangzhou and Shanghai, is slightly bigger, including three districts in Hebei (Sanhe, Dachang Hui and Zhuozhou) being conurbated but with Miyun and Pinggu Districts in Beijing not agglomerated yet.
It is located in Northern China, and is governed as a municipality under the direct administration of the State Council with 16 urban, suburban, and rural districts.
Beijing is mostly surrounded by Hebei Province with the exception of neighboring Tianjin to the southeast; together, the three divisions form the Jingjinji megalopolis and the national capital region of China.
Beijing is a global city and one of the world's leading centres for culture, diplomacy, politics, finance, business and economics, education, research, language, tourism, media, sport, science and technology and transportation.
As a megacity, Beijing is the second largest Chinese city by urban population after Shanghai.
It is home to the headquarters of most of China's largest state-owned companies and houses the largest number of Fortune Global 500 companies in the world, as well as the world's four biggest financial institutions by total assets.
It is also a major hub for the national highway, expressway, railway, and high-speed rail networks.
The Beijing Capital International Airport has been the second busiest in the world by passenger traffic (Asia's busiest) since 2010, and, as of 2016[update], the city's subway network is the busiest and longest in the world.
The Beijing Daxing International Airport, a second international airport in Beijing, is the largest single-structure airport terminal in the world.
Combining both modern and traditional style architectures, Beijing is one of the oldest cities in the world, with a rich history dating back over three millennia.
As the last of the Four Great Ancient Capitals of China, Beijing has been the political center of the country for most of the past eight centuries, and was the largest city in the world by population for much of the second millennium CE. With mountains surrounding the inland city on three sides, in addition to the old inner and outer city walls, Beijing was strategically poised and developed to be the residence of the emperor and thus was the perfect location for the imperial capital.
The city is renowned for its opulent palaces, temples, parks, gardens, tombs, walls and gates.
Beijing is one of the most important tourist destinations of the world.
In 2018, Beijing was the second highest earning tourist city in the world after Shanghai.
Beijing is home to many national monuments and museums and has seven UNESCO World Heritage Sites—the Forbidden City, Temple of Heaven, Summer Palace, Ming Tombs, Zhoukoudian, and parts of the Great Wall and the Grand Canal—all of which are popular tourist locations.
Siheyuans, the city's traditional housing style, and hutongs, the narrow alleys between siheyuans, are major tourist attractions and are common in urban Beijing.
Many of Beijing's public universities consistently rank among the best in the Asia-Pacific and the world.
Beijing is home to the two best C9 League universities (Tsinghua and Peking) in the Asia-Pacific and emerging countries.
Beijing CBD is a center for Beijing's economic expansion, with the ongoing or recently completed construction of multiple skyscrapers.
Beijing's Zhongguancun area is a world leading center of scientific and technological innovation as well as entrepreneurship.
Beijing has been ranked the city with the largest scientific research output by the Nature Index since 2016. The city has hosted numerous international and national sporting events, the most notable being the 2008 Summer Olympics and 2008 Summer Paralympics Games.
In 2022, Beijing became the first city ever to host both the Summer and Winter Olympics, and also the Summer and Winter Paralympics.
Beijing hosts 175 foreign embassies as well as the headquarters of many organizations, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), the Silk Road Fund, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Chinese Academy of Engineering, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, the Central Academy of Fine Arts, the Central Academy of Drama, the Central Conservatory of Music, and the Red Cross Society of China.
Contents
Etymology
Main article: Names of Beijing
Over the past 3,000 years, the city of Beijing has had numerous other names.
The name Beijing, which means "Northern Capital" (from the Chinese characters 北 for north and 京 for capital), was applied to the city in 1403 during the Ming dynasty to distinguish the city from Nanjing (the "Southern Capital"). The English spelling Beijing is based on the government's official romanization (adopted in the 1980s) of the two characters as they are pronounced in Standard Mandarin.
An older English spelling, Peking, was used by Jesuit missionary Martino Martini in a popular atlas published in Amsterdam in 1655. Although Peking is no longer the common name for the city, some of the city's older locations and facilities, such as Beijing Capital International Airport, with the IATA Code PEK, and Peking University, still retain the former romanization.
The single Chinese character abbreviation for Beijing is 京, which appears on automobile license plates in the city.
The official Latin alphabet abbreviation for Beijing is "BJ".
History
Main article: History of Beijing
Early history
The earliest traces of human habitation in the Peking municipality were found in the caves of Dragon Bone Hill near the village of Zhoukoudian in Fangshan District, where Peking Man lived.
Homo erectus fossils from the caves date to 230,000 to 250,000 years ago.
Paleolithic Homo sapiens also lived there more recently, about 27,000 years ago.
Archaeologists have found neolithic settlements throughout the municipality, including in Wangfujing, located in central Peking.
The first walled city in Beijing was Jicheng, the capital city of the state of Ji and was built in 1045 BC. Within modern Beijing, Jicheng was located around the present Guang'anmen area in the south of Xicheng District.
This settlement was later conquered by the state of Yan and made its capital.
Early Imperial China
The Tianning Pagoda, built around 1120 during the Liao dynasty
After the First Emperor unified China, Jicheng became a prefectural capital for the region.
During the Three Kingdoms period, it was held by Gongsun Zan and Yuan Shao before falling to the Wei Kingdom of Cao Cao.
The AD 3rd-century Western Jin demoted the town, placing the prefectural seat in neighboring Zhuozhou.
During the Sixteen Kingdoms period when northern China was conquered and divided by the Wu Hu, Jicheng was briefly the capital of the Xianbei Former Yan Kingdom.
After China was reunified during the Sui dynasty, Jicheng, also known as Zhuojun, became the northern terminus of the Grand Canal.
Under the Tang dynasty, Jicheng as Youzhou, served as a military frontier command center.
During the An-Shi Rebellion and again amidst the turmoil of the late Tang, local military commanders founded their own short-lived Yan dynasties and called the city Yanjing, or the "Yan Capital." Also in the Tang dynasty, the city's name Jicheng was replaced by Youzhou or Yanjing.
In 938, after the fall of the Tang, the Later Jin ceded the frontier territory including what is now Beijing to the Khitan Liao dynasty, which treated the city as Nanjing, or the "Southern Capital", one of four secondary capitals to complement its "Supreme Capital" Shangjing (modern Baarin Left Banner in Inner Mongolia). Some of the oldest surviving pagodas in Beijing date to the Liao period, including the Tianning Pagoda.
The Liao fell to the Jurchen Jin dynasty in 1122, which gave the city to the Song dynasty and then retook it in 1125 during its conquest of northern China.
In 1153, the Jurchen Jin made Beijing their "Central Capital", or Zhongdu.
The city was besieged by Genghis Khan's invading Mongolian army in 1213 and razed to the ground two years later.
Two generations later, Kublai Khan ordered the construction of Dadu (or Daidu to the Mongols, commonly known as Khanbaliq), a new capital for his Yuan dynasty to the northeast of the Zhongdu ruins.
The construction took from 1264 to 1293, but greatly enhanced the status of a city on the northern fringe of China proper.
The city was centered on the Drum Tower slightly to the north of modern Beijing and stretched from the present-day Chang'an Avenue to the northern part of Line 10 subway.
Remnants of the Yuan rammed earth wall still stand and are known as the Tucheng.
Ming dynasty
One of the corner towers of the Forbidden City, built by the Yongle Emperor during the early Ming dynasty
In 1368, soon after declaring the new Hongwu era of the Ming dynasty, the rebel leader Zhu Yuanzhang captured Dadu/Khanbaliq and razed the Yuan palaces to the ground.
Since the Yuan continued to occupy Shangdu and Mongolia, Dadu was used to supply the Ming military garrisons in the area and renamed Beiping (Wade–Giles: Peip'ing, "Northern Peace"). Under the Hongwu Emperor's feudal policies, Beiping was given to his son Zhu Di, who was created "Prince of Yan". Overlapping layout of Beijing during the Liao, Jin, Yuan and Ming dynasties
The early death of Zhu Yuanzhang's heir led to a succession struggle upon his death, one that ended with the victory of Zhu Di and the declaration of the new Yongle era.
Since his harsh treatment of the Ming capital Yingtian (modern Nanjing) alienated many there, he established his fief as a new co-capital.
The city of Beiping became Beijing ("Northern Capital") or Shuntian in 1403. The construction of the new imperial residence, the Forbidden City, took from 1406 to 1420; this period was also responsible for several other of the modern city's major attractions, such as the Temple of Heaven and Tian'anmen.
On 28 October 1420, the city was officially designated the capital of the Ming dynasty in the same year that the Forbidden City was completed.
Beijing became the empire's primary capital, and Yingtian, also called Nanjing ("Southern Capital"), became the co-capital. (A 1425 order by Zhu Di's son, the Hongxi Emperor, to return the primary capital to Nanjing was never carried out: he died, probably of a heart attack, the next month.
He was buried, like almost every Ming emperor to follow him, in an elaborate necropolis to Beijing's north.)
By the 15th century, Beijing had essentially taken its current shape.
The Ming city wall continued to serve until modern times, when it was pulled down and the 2nd Ring Road was built in its place.
It is generally believed that Beijing was the largest city in the world for most of the 15th, 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.
The first known church was constructed by Catholics in 1652 at the former site of Matteo Ricci's chapel; the modern Nantang Cathedral was later built upon the same site.
The capture of Beijing by Li Zicheng's peasant army in 1644 ended the dynasty, but he and his Shun court abandoned the city without a fight when the Manchu army of Prince Dorgon arrived 40 days later.
Qing dynasty
Summer Palace is one of the several palatial gardens built by Qing emperors in the northwest suburb area.
Dorgon established the Qing dynasty as a direct successor of the Ming (delegitimising Li Zicheng and his followers) and Beijing became China's sole capital.
The Qing emperors made some modifications to the Imperial residence but, in large part, the Ming buildings and the general layout remained unchanged.
Facilities for Manchu worship were introduced, but the Qing also continued the traditional state rituals.
Signage was bilingual or Chinese.
This early Qing Beijing later formed the setting for the Chinese novel Dream of the Red Chamber.
Northwest of the city, Qing emperors built several large palatial gardens including the Old Summer Palace and the Summer Palace.
Chongwenmen, a gate to the inner walled city, c. 1906
During the Second Opium War, Anglo-French forces captured the outskirts of the city, looting and burning the Old Summer Palace in 1860. Under the Convention of Peking ending that war, Western powers for the first time secured the right to establish permanent diplomatic presences within the city.
From 14 to 15 August 1900 the Battle of Peking was fought.
This battle was part of the Boxer Rebellion. 
The attempt by the Boxers to eradicate this presence, as well as Chinese Christian converts, led to Beijing's reoccupation by eight foreign powers.
During the fighting, several important structures were destroyed, including the Hanlin Academy and the (new) Summer Palace.
A peace agreement was concluded between the Eight-Nation Alliance and representatives of the Chinese government Li Hung-chang and Prince Ching on 7 September 1901. The treaty required China to pay an indemnity of US$335 million (over US$4 billion in current dollars) plus interest over a period of 39 years.
Also required was the execution or exile of government supporters of the Boxers and the destruction of Chinese forts and other defenses in much of northern China.
Ten days after the treaty was signed the foreign armies left Peking, although legation guards would remain there until World War II.
With the treaty signed the Empress Dowager Cixi returned to Peking from her "tour of inspection" on 7 January 1902 and the rule of the Qing dynasty over China was restored, albeit much weakened by the defeat it had suffered in the Boxer Rebellion and by the indemnity and stipulations of the peace treaty.
The Dowager died in 1908 and the dynasty imploded in 1911.
Republic of China
A large portrait of Chiang Kai-shek was displayed above Tiananmen after WWII.
The fomenters of the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 sought to replace Qing rule with a republic and leaders like Sun Yat-sen originally intended to return the capital to Nanjing.
After the Qing general Yuan Shikai forced the abdication of the last Qing emperor and ensured the success of the revolution, the revolutionaries accepted him as president of the new Republic of China.
Yuan maintained his capital at Beijing and quickly consolidated power, declaring himself emperor in 1915. His death less than a year later left China under the control of the warlords commanding the regional armies.
Following the success of the Kuomintang's Northern Expedition, the capital was formally moved to Nanjing in 1928. On 28 June the same year, Beijing's name was returned to Beiping (written at the time as "Peiping").
On 7 July 1937, the 29th Army and the Japanese army in China exchanged fire at the Marco Polo Bridge near the Wanping Fortress southwest of the city.
The Marco Polo Bridge Incident triggered the Second Sino-Japanese War, World War II as it is known in China.
During the war, Beijing fell to Japan on 29 July 1937 and was made the seat of the Provisional Government of the Republic of China, a puppet state that ruled the ethnic-Chinese portions of Japanese-occupied northern China.
This government was later merged into the larger Wang Jingwei government based in Nanjing.
People's Republic of China
Mao Zedong proclaiming the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949
In the final phases of the Chinese Civil War, the People's Liberation Army seized control of the city peacefully on 31 January 1949 in the course of the Pingjin Campaign.
On 1 October that year, Mao Zedong announced the creation of the People's Republic of China from atop Tian'anmen.
He restored the name of the city, as the new capital, to Beijing, a decision that had been reached by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference just a few days earlier.
In the 1950s, the city began to expand beyond the old walled city and its surrounding neighborhoods, with heavy industries in the west and residential neighborhoods in the north.
Many areas of the Beijing city wall were torn down in the 1960s to make way for the construction of the Beijing Subway and the 2nd Ring Road.
A scene from the opening ceremonies of the 2008 Summer Olympic Games
During the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, the Red Guard movement began in Beijing and the city's government fell victim to one of the first purges.
By the autumn of 1966, all city schools were shut down and over a million Red Guards from across the country gathered in Beijing for eight rallies in Tian'anmen Square with Mao.
In April 1976, a large public gathering of Beijing residents against the Gang of Four and the Cultural Revolution in Tiananmen Square was forcefully suppressed.
In October 1976, the Gang was arrested in Zhongnanhai and the Cultural Revolution came to an end.
In December 1978, the Third Plenum of the 11th Party Congress in Beijing under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping reversed the verdicts against victims of the Cultural Revolution and instituted the "policy of reform and opening up."
Since the early 1980s, the urban area of Beijing has expanded greatly with the completion of the 2nd Ring Road in 1981 and the subsequent addition of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Ring Roads.
According to one 2005 newspaper report, the size of newly developed Beijing was one-and-a-half times larger than before.
Wangfujing and Xidan have developed into flourishing shopping districts, while Zhongguancun has become a major center of electronics in China.
In recent years, the expansion of Beijing has also brought to the forefront some problems of urbanization, such as heavy traffic, poor air quality, the loss of historic neighborhoods, and a significant influx of migrant workers from less-developed rural areas of the country.
Beijing has also been the location of many significant events in recent Chinese history, principally the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. The city has also hosted major international events, including the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2015 World Championships in Athletics, and was chosen to host the 2022 Winter Olympics, making it the first city to ever host both Winter and Summer Olympics.
Geography
Main article: Geography of Beijing
Landsat 7 satellite image of Beijing Municipality with the surrounding mountains in dark brown
Beijing is situated at the northern tip of the roughly triangular North China Plain, which opens to the south and east of the city.
Mountains to the north, northwest and west shield the city and northern China's agricultural heartland from the encroaching desert steppes.
The northwestern part of the municipality, especially Yanqing County and Huairou District, are dominated by the Jundu Mountains, while the western part is framed by Xishan or the Western Hills.
The Great Wall of China across the northern part of Beijing Municipality was built on the rugged topography to defend against nomadic incursions from the steppes.
Mount Dongling, in the Western Hills and on the border with Hebei, is the municipality's highest point, with an altitude of 2,303 metres (7,556 ft).
Major rivers flowing through the municipality, including the Chaobai, Yongding, Juma, are all tributaries in the Hai River system, and flow in a southeasterly direction.
The Miyun Reservoir, on the upper reaches of the Chaobai River, is the largest reservoir within the municipality.
Beijing is also the northern terminus of the Grand Canal to Hangzhou, which was built over 1,400 years ago as a transportation route, and the South–North Water Transfer Project, constructed in the past decade to bring water from the Yangtze River basin.
The urban area of Beijing, on the plains in the south-central of the municipality with elevation of 40 to 60 metres (130–200 feet), occupies a relatively small but expanding portion of the municipality's area.
The city spreads out in concentric ring roads.
The Second Ring Road traces the old city walls and the Sixth Ring Road connects satellite towns in the surrounding suburbs.
Tian'anmen and Tian'anmen Square are at the center of Beijing, directly to the south of the Forbidden City, the former residence of the emperors of China.
To the west of Tian'anmen is Zhongnanhai, the residence of China's current leaders.
Chang'an Avenue, which cuts between Tiananmen and the Square, forms the city's main east–west axis.
Cityscape
A panorama of the Forbidden City, viewed from the Jingshan Park
Architecture
See also: List of tallest buildings in Beijing
Three styles of architecture are predominant in urban Beijing.
First, there is the traditional architecture of imperial China, perhaps best exemplified by the massive Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace), which remains the People's Republic of China's trademark edifice, the Forbidden City, the Imperial Ancestral Temple and the Temple of Heaven.
Next, there is what is sometimes referred to as the "Sino-Sov" style, with structures tending to be boxy and sometimes poorly constructed, which were built between the 1950s and the 1970s.
Finally, there are much more modern architectural forms, most noticeably in the area of the Beijing CBD in east Beijing such as the new CCTV Headquarters, in addition to buildings in other locations around the city such as the Beijing National Stadium and National Center for the Performing Arts.
1940s Nationalist Beijing with predominantly traditional architecture
Since 2007, buildings in Beijing have received the CTBUH Skyscraper Award for best overall tall building twice, for the Linked Hybrid building in 2009 and the CCTV Headquarters in 2013. The CTBUH Skyscraper award for best tall overall building is given to only one building around the world every year.
In the early 21st century, Beijing has witnessed tremendous growth of new building constructions, exhibiting various modern styles from international designers, most pronounced in the CBD region.
A mixture of both 1950s design and neofuturistic style of architecture can be seen at the 798 Art Zone, which mixes the old with the new.
Beijing's tallest building is the 528-meter China Zun.
The sign of Doujiao Hutong, one of the many traditional alleyways in the inner city
Beijing is famous for its siheyuans, a type of residence where a common courtyard is shared by the surrounding buildings.
Among the more grand examples are the Prince Gong Mansion and Residence of Soong Ching-ling.
These courtyards are usually connected by alleys called hutongs.
The hutongs are generally straight and run east to west so that doorways face north and south for good Feng Shui.
They vary in width; some are so narrow only a few pedestrians can pass through at a time.
Once ubiquitous in Beijing, siheyuans and hutongs are rapidly disappearing, as entire city blocks of hutongs are replaced by high-rise buildings.
Residents of the hutongs are entitled to live in the new buildings in apartments of at least the same size as their former residences.
Many complain, however, that the traditional sense of community and street life of the hutongs cannot be replaced, and these properties are often government owned.
Climate
Beijing average annual temperatures from 1970 to 2019 during summer (June, July, and August) and winter (December, January, and February). Weather station data from ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/noaa/. For comparison the Global Surface Temperature Anomaly rose by approximately one degree over the same time period.
Beijing has a monsoon-influenced humid continental climate (Köppen: Dwa), characterized by hot, humid summers due to the East Asian monsoon, and brief but cold, dry winters that reflect the influence of the vast Siberian anticyclone.
Spring can bear witness to sandstorms blowing in from the Gobi Desert across the Mongolian steppe, accompanied by rapidly warming, but generally dry, conditions.
Autumn, similar to spring, is a season of transition and minimal precipitation.
The monthly daily average temperature in January is −2.9 °C (26.8 °F), while in July it is 26.9 °C (80.4 °F). Precipitation averages around 570 mm (22 in) annually, with close to three-quarters of that total falling from June to August.
With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 47% in July to 65% in January and February, the city receives 2,671 hours of bright sunshine annually.
Extremes since 1951 have ranged from −27.4 °C (−17.3 °F) on 22 February 1966 to 41.9 °C (107.4 °F) on 24 July 1999 (unofficial record of 42.6 °C (108.7 °F) was set on 15 June 1942).
Climate data for Beijing (normals 1986–2015, extremes 1951–present)
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
2.1(35.8)
5.8(42.4)
3.8(38.8)
Daily mean °C (°F)
−2.9(26.8)
0.4(32.7)
7.0(44.6)
5.1(41.2)
−0.9(30.4)
Average low °C (°F)
−7.1(19.2)
−4.3(24.3)
1.6(34.9)
8.9(48.0)
8.8(47.8)
0.6(33.1)
−4.9(23.2)
8.2(46.8)
Record low °C (°F)
−22.8(−9.0)
−27.4(−17.3)
−15(5)
−3.2(26.2)
2.5(36.5)
9.8(49.6)
3.7(38.7)
−3.5(25.7)
−12.3(9.9)
−18.3(−0.9)
−27.4(−17.3)
Average precipitation mm (inches)
2.7(0.11)
5.0(0.20)
2.4(0.09)
Average precipitation days (≥ 0.1 mm)
1.8
2.3
3.3
4.7
6.1
9.9
7.6
4.8
2.9
2.0
Average relative humidity (%)
Mean monthly sunshine hours
2,500
Percent possible sunshine
Average ultraviolet index
Source: China Meteorological Administration , China Meteorological Data Sharing Service System, all-time record high, May record high and Weather Atlas
Environmental issues
Beijing has a long history of environmental problems.
Between 2000 and 2009 Beijing's urban extent quadrupled, which not only strongly increased the extent of anthropogenic emissions, but also changed the meteorological situation fundamentally, even if emissions of human society are not included.
For example, surface albedo, wind speed and humidity near the surface were decreased, whereas ground and near-surface air temperatures, vertical air dilution and ozone levels were increased.
Because of the combined factors of urbanization and pollution caused by burning of fossil fuel, Beijing is often affected by serious environmental problems, which lead to health issues of many inhabitants.
In 2013 heavy smog struck Beijing and most parts of northern China, impacting a total of 600 million people.
After this "pollution shock" air pollution became an important economic and social concern in China.
After that the government of Beijing announced measures to reduce air pollution, for example by lowering the share of coal from 24% in 2012 to 10% in 2017, while the national government ordered heavily polluting vehicles to be removed from 2015 to 2017 and increased its efforts to transition the energy system to clean sources.
Air quality
Joint research between American and Chinese researchers in 2006 concluded that much of the city's pollution comes from surrounding cities and provinces.
On average 35–60% of the ozone can be traced to sources outside the city.
Shandong Province and Tianjin Municipality have a "significant influence on Beijing's air quality", partly due to the prevailing south/southeasterly flow during the summer and the mountains to the north and northwest.
Heavy air pollution has resulted in widespread smog.
These photographs, taken in August 2005, show the variations in Beijing's air quality.
In preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics and to fulfill promises to clean up the city's air, nearly US$17 billion was spent.
Beijing implemented a number of air improvement schemes for the duration of the Games, including halting work at all construction sites, closing many factories in Beijing permanently, temporarily shutting industry in neighboring regions, closing some gas stations, and cutting motor traffic by half by limiting drivers to odd or even days (based on their license plate numbers), reducing bus and subway fares, opening new subway lines, and banning high-emission vehicles.
The city further assembled 3,800 natural gas-powered buses, one of the largest fleets in the world.
Beijing became the first city in China to require the Chinese equivalent to the Euro 4 emission standard.
Coal burning accounts for about 40% of the PM 2.5 in Beijing and is also the chief source of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide.
Since 2012, the city has been converting coal-fired power stations to burn natural gas and aims to cap annual coal consumption at 20 million tons.
In 2011, the city burned 26.3 million tons of coal, 73% of which for heating and power generation and the remainder for industry.
Much of the city's air pollutants are emitted by neighboring regions.
Coal consumption in neighboring Tianjin is expected to increase from 48 to 63 million tons from 2011 to 2015. Hebei Province burned over 300 million tons of coal in 2011, more than all of Germany, of which only 30% were used for power generation and a considerable portion for steel and cement making.
Power plants in the coal-mining regions of Shanxi, Inner Mongolia and Shaanxi, where coal consumption has tripled since 2000, and Shandong also contribute to air pollution in Beijing.
Shandong, Shanxi, Hebei and Inner Mongolia, respectively rank from first to fourth, among Chinese provinces by coal consumption.
There were four major coal-fired power plants in the city to provide electricity as well as heating during the winter.
The first one (Gaojing Thermal Power Plant) was shut down in 2014. Another two were shut in March 2015. The last one (Huaneng Thermal Power Plant) would be shut in 2016. Between 2013 and 2017, the city planned to reduce 13 million tons of coal consumption and cap coal consumption to 15 million tons in 2015.
The government sometimes uses cloud-seeding measures to increase the likelihood of rain showers in the region to clear the air prior to large events, such as prior to the 60th anniversary parade in 2009 as well as to combat drought conditions in the area.
More recently, however, the government has increased its usage of such measures as closing factories temporarily and implementing greater restrictions for cars on the road, as in the case of "APEC blue" and "parade blue," short periods during and immediately preceding the APEC China 2014 and the 2015 China Victory Day Parade, respectively.
During and prior to these events, Beijing's air quality improved dramatically, only to fall back to unhealthy levels shortly after.
Beijing air quality is often poor, especially in winter.
In mid-January 2013, Beijing's air quality was measured on top of the city's US embassy at a PM2.5 density of 755 micrograms per cubic meter, which is more than 75 times the safe level established by the WHO, and went off the US Environmental Protection Agency's air quality index.
It was widely reported, originally through a Twitter account, that the category was "crazy bad". This was later changed to "beyond index".
On 8 and 9 December 2015 Beijing had its first smog alert which shut down a majority of the industry and other commercial businesses in the city.
Later in the month another smog "red alert" was issued.
According to Beijing's environmental protection bureau's announcement in November 2016, starting from 2017 highly polluting old cars will be banned from being driven whenever Smog "red alerts" are issued in the city or neighboring regions.
In recent years, there has been measurable reductions in pollutants after the "war on pollution" was declared in 2014, with Beijing seeing a 35% reduction in fine particulates in 2017.
Readings
Due to Beijing's high level of air pollution, there are various readings by different sources on the subject.
Daily pollution readings at 27 monitoring stations around the city are reported on the website of the Beijing Environmental Protection Bureau (BJEPB). The American Embassy of Beijing also reports hourly fine particulate (PM2.5) and ozone levels on Twitter.
Since the BJEPB and US Embassy measure different pollutants according to different criteria, the pollution levels and the impact to human health reported by the BJEPB are often lower than that reported by the US Embassy.
The smog is causing harm and danger to the population.
The air pollution does directly result in significant impact on the mobility rate of cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease in Beijing.
Exposure to large concentrations of polluted air can cause respiratory and cardiovascular problems, emergency room visits, and even death.
Dust storms
Dust from the erosion of deserts in northern and northwestern China results in seasonal dust storms that plague the city; the Beijing Weather Modification Office sometimes artificially induces rainfall to fight such storms and mitigate their effects.
In the first four months of 2006 alone, there were no fewer than eight such storms.
In April 2002, one dust storm alone dumped nearly 50,000 tons of dust onto the city before moving on to Japan and Korea.
Government
Main article: Politics of Beijing
The municipal government is regulated by the local Chinese Communist Party (CCP), led by the Beijing CCP Secretary (Chinese: 中共北京市委书记). The local CCP issues administrative orders, collects taxes, manages the economy, and directs a standing committee of the Municipal People's Congress in making policy decisions and overseeing the local government.
Government officials include the mayor (Chinese: 市长) and vice-mayor.
Numerous bureaus focus on law, public security, and other affairs.
Additionally, as the capital of China, Beijing houses all of the important national governmental and political institutions, including the National People's Congress.
Administrative divisions
For a more comprehensive list, see List of administrative divisions of Beijing and List of township-level divisions of Beijing.
Beijing Municipality currently comprises 16 administrative county-level subdivisions including 16 urban, suburban, and rural districts.
On 1 July 2010, Chongwen and Xuanwu were merged into Dongcheng and Xicheng, respectively.
On 13 November 2015 Miyun and Yanqing were upgraded to districts.
Administrative divisions of Beijing
Dongcheng
Xicheng
Chaoyang
Fengtai
Shijingshan
Haidian
Mentougou
Fangshan
Tongzhou
Shunyi
Changping
Daxing
Huairou
Pinggu
Miyun
Yanqing
Division code
Division
Area in km2
Total population 2010
Urban areapopulation 2010
Seat
Postal code
Subdivisions[full citation needed]
Subdistricts
Towns
Townships[n 1]
Residential communities
Villages
Beijing
Dongcheng / Tongzhou
Dongcheng
Jingshan Subdistrict
Xicheng
1,243,315
Jinrong Street Subdistrict
Chaoyang
3,545,137
3,532,257
Chaowai Subdistrict
Fengtai
2,112,162
2,098,632
Fengtai Subdistrict
Shijingshan
Lugu Subdistrict
Haidian
3,280,670
3,208,563
Haidian Subdistrict
Mentougou
Dayu Subdistrict
Fangshan
Gongchen Subdistrict
Tongzhou
1,184,256
Beiyuan Subdistrict
Shunyi
Shengli Subdistrict
Changping
1,660,501
1,310,617
Chengbei Subdistrict
Daxing
1,365,112
Xingfeng Subdistrict
Huairou
Longshan Subdistrict
Pinggu
Binhe Subdistrict
Miyun
Gulou Subdistrict
Yanqing
Rulin Subdistrict
Divisions in Chinese
English
Chinese
Pinyin
Beijing Municipality
北京市
Běijīng Shì
Dongcheng District
东城区
Dōngchéng Qū
Xicheng District
西城区
Xīchéng Qū
Chaoyang District
朝阳区
Cháoyáng Qū
Fengtai District
丰台区
Fēngtái Qū
Shijingshan District
石景山区
Shíjǐngshān Qū
Haidian District
海淀区
Hǎidiàn Qū
Mentougou District
门头沟区
Méntóugōu Qū
Fangshan District
房山区
Fángshān Qū
Tongzhou District
通州区
Tōngzhōu Qū
Shunyi District
顺义区
Shùnyì Qū
Changping District
昌平区
Chāngpíng Qū
Daxing District
大兴区
Dàxīng Qū
Huairou District
怀柔区
Huáiróu Qū
Pinggu District
平谷区
Pínggǔ Qū
Miyun District
密云区
Mìyún Qū
Yanqing District
延庆区
Yánqìng Qū
Including Ethnic townships & other township related subdivisions.
Houhai Lake and Drum Tower at Shichahai, in the Xicheng District
Towns
Main article: List of township-level divisions of Beijing
Beijing's 16 county-level divisions (districts) are further subdivided into 273 lower third-level administrative units at the township level: 119 towns, 24 townships, 5 ethnic townships and 125 subdistricts.
Towns within Beijing Municipality but outside the urban area include (but are not limited to):
Changping 昌平
Huairou 怀柔
Miyun 密云
Liangxiang 良乡
Liulimiao 琉璃庙
Tongzhou 通州
Yizhuang 亦庄
Tiantongyuan 天通苑
Beiyuan 北苑
Xiaotangshan 小汤山
Several place names in Beijing end with mén (门), meaning "gate", as they were the locations of gates in the former Beijing city wall.
Other place names end in cūn (村), meaning "village", as they were originally villages outside the city wall.
Judiciary and procuracy
The judicial system in Beijing consists of the Supreme People's Court, the highest court in the country, the Beijing Municipal High People's Court, the high people's court of the municipality, three intermediate people's courts, one intermediate railway transport court, 14 basic people's court (one for each of the municipality's districts and counties), and one basic railway transport court.
The Beijing No. 1 Intermediate People's Court in Shijingshan oversees the basic courts of Haidian, Shijingshan, Mentougou, Changping and Yanqing.
The Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People's Court in Fengtai oversees the basic courts of Dongcheng, Xicheng, Fengtai, Fangshan and Daxing.
The Beijing No. 3 Intermediate People's Court in Laiguangying, is the newest of the three intermediate people's courts and opened on 21 August 2013. It oversees the district courts of Chaoyang, Tongzhou, Shunyi, Huairou, Pinggu and Miyun.
Each court in Beijing has a corresponding people's procuratorate.
Economy
Main article: Economy of Beijing
Xidan is one of the oldest and busiest shopping areas in Beijing.
Beijing products treemap, 2020
As of 2018[update], Beijing's nominal GDP was US$458 billion (CN￥3.0 trillion), about 3.45% of the country's GDP and ranked 12th among province-level administrative units; its nominal GDP per capita was US$21,261 (CN￥140,748) and ranked the 1st in the country.  As of 2021, Beijing's gross regional products was CN￥4 trillion ($965 billion in GDP PPP), ranking among the 10th largest metropolitan economies in the world.
Beijing's nominal GDP is projected to reach US$1.1 trillion in 2035, ranking among the world's top 10 largest cities (together with Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen in China) according to a study by Oxford Economics, and its nominal GDP per capita will reach US$45,000 in 2030.
Due to the concentration of state owned enterprises in the national capital, Beijing in 2013 had more Fortune Global 500 Company headquarters than any other city in the world.
As of August 2022, Beijing has 54 Fortune Global 500 companies, more than Japan (47), the third-place country after China (145) and the United States (124). Beijing has also been described as the "billionaire capital of the world". In 2020, Beijing is the 5th wealthiest city in the world, with a total wealth amounts to $2 trillion.
Beijing is classified as an Alpha+ (global first-tier) city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, indicating its influence in the region and worldwide and making it one of the world's Top 10 major cities.
In the 2021 Global Financial Centres Index, Beijing was ranked as having the sixth-most competitive financial center in the world and fourth-most competitive in the whole Asia & Oceania region (behind Shanghai, Hong Kong and Singapore).
As of 2021, Beijing was ranked first globally in terms of "Global City Competitiveness" in the 2020–2021 Global Urban Competitiveness Report jointly released by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) and the United Nations Programme for Human Settlements (UN-Habitat). Beijing is also a large hub of the Chinese and global technology industry and ranked as having the strongest global startup ecosystem in the whole of Asia-Oceania region, ranking 3rd globally by the Global Startup Ecosystem Index.
Historical GDP of Beijing for 1978–present (SNA2008)(purchasing power parity of Chinese Yuan, as international dollar based on IMF WEO October 2017)
Year
CNY(millions)
USD(millions)
PPP(Int'l$)(millions)
Real growth(%)
CNYper capita*
USDper capita*
PPP(Int'l$.)per capita*
Reference index:USD 1to CNY
Reference index:Int'l$. 1to CNY
2,566,910
6.8
2,368,570
6.9
2,194,410
7.4
2,033,010
7.7
1,835,010
8.0
1,662,790
8.1
1,444,160
1,241,900
1,139,200
9.0
9,517
1,007,190
8,084
6,644
5,753
2,962
9,016
1,520
4,649
5.2
4,635
2,722
8,755
8.7
2,643
1,886
9,283
9,301
1,544
1,030
1,032
6,462
1,257
* Per-capita GDP is based on mid-year population.
Sector composition
The Taikoo Li Sanlitun shopping arcade is a destination for locals and visitors.
The city has a post-industrial economy that is dominated by the tertiary sector (services), which generated 76.9% of output, followed by the secondary sector (manufacturing, construction) at 22.2% and the primary sector (agriculture, mining) at 0.8%.
The services sector is broadly diversified with professional services, wholesale and retail, information technology, commercial real estate, scientific research, and residential real estate each contributing at least 6% to the city's economy in 2013.
The single largest sub-sector remains industry, whose share of overall output has shrunk to 18.1% in 2013. The mix of industrial output has changed significantly since 2010 when the city announced that 140 highly-polluting, energy and water resource intensive enterprises would be relocated from the city in five years.
The relocation of Capital Steel to neighboring Hebei province had begun in 2005. In 2013, output of automobiles, aerospace products, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, and food processing all increased.
In the farmland around Beijing, vegetables and fruits have displaced grain as the primary crops under cultivation.
In 2013, the tonnage of vegetable, edible fungus and fruit harvested was over three times that of grain.
In 2013, overall acreage under cultivation shrank along with most categories of produce as more land was reforested for environmental reasons.
Economic zones
For a more comprehensive list, see List of economic and technological development zones in Beijing.
The skyline of Beijing CBD
Zhongguancun is a technology hub in Haidian District.
In 2006, the city government identified six high-end economic output zones around Beijing as the primary engines for local economic growth.
In 2012, the six zones produced 43.3% of the city's GDP, up from 36.5% in 2007.
The six zones are:
Zhongguancun, China's silicon village in Haidian District northwest of the city, is home to both established and start-up tech companies.
In the first two quarters of 2014, 9,895 companies registered in the six zones, among which 6,150 were based in Zhongguancun.
Zhongguancun is also the center of Beijing-Tianjin-Shijiazhuang Hi-Tech Industrial Belt.
Beijing Financial Street, in Xicheng District on the west side of the city between Fuxingmen and Fuchengmen, is lined with headquarters of large state banks and insurance companies.
The country's financial regulatory agencies including the central bank, bank regulator, securities regulator, and foreign exchange authority are located in the neighborhood.
Beijing Central Business District (CBD), is actually located to the east of downtown, near the embassies along the eastern Third Ring Road between Jianguomenwai and Chaoyangmenwai.
The CBD is home to most of the city's skyscraper office buildings.
Most of the city's foreign companies and professional service firms are based in the CBD.
Beijing Economic and Technological Development Area, better known as Yizhuang, is an industrial park the straddles the southern Fifth Ring Road in Daxing District.
It has attracted pharmaceutical, information technology, and materials engineering companies.
Beijing Airport Economic Zone was created in 1993 and surrounds the Beijing Capital International Airport in Shunyi District northeast of the city.
In addition to logistics, airline services, and trading firms, this zone is also home to Beijing's automobile assembly plants.
Beijing Olympic Center Zone surrounds the Olympic Green due north of downtown and is developing into an entertainment, sports, tourism and business convention center.
Shijingshan, on the western outskirts of the city, is a traditional heavy industrial base for steel-making.
Chemical plants are concentrated in the far eastern suburbs.
Less legitimate enterprises also exist.
Urban Beijing is known for being a center of infringed goods; anything from the latest designer clothing to DVDs can be found in markets all over the city, often marketed to expatriates and international visitors.
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Beijing
Historical populationYearPop.±% p.a.19532,768,149—    19647,568,495+9.57%19829,230,687+1.11%199010,819,407+2.00%200013,569,194+2.29%201019,612,368+3.75%201321,150,000+2.55%201421,516,000+1.73%Population size may be affected by changes on administrative divisions.
In 2013, Beijing had a total population of 21.148 million within the municipality, of which 18.251 million resided in urban districts or suburban townships and 2.897 million lived in rural villages.
The encompassing metropolitan area was estimated by the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) to have, as of 2010[update], a population of 24.9 million.
Within China, the city ranked second in urban population after Shanghai and the third in municipal population after Shanghai and Chongqing.
Beijing also ranks among the most populous cities in the world, a distinction the city has held for much of the past 800 years, especially during the 15th to early 19th centuries when it was the largest city in the world.
About 13 million of the city's residents in 2013 had local hukou permits, which entitles them to permanent residence in Beijing.
The remaining 8 million residents had hukou permits elsewhere and were not eligible to receive some social benefits provided by the Beijing municipal government.
The population increased in 2013 by 455,000 or about 7% from the previous year and continued a decade-long trend of rapid growth.
The total population in 2004 was 14.213 million.
The population gains are driven largely by migration.
The population's rate of natural increase in 2013 was a mere 0.441%, based on a birth rate of 8.93 and a mortality rate of 4.52. The gender balance was 51.6% males and 48.4% females.
Working age people account for nearly 80% of the population.
Compared to 2004, residents age 0–14 as a proportion of the population dropped from 9.96% to 9.5% in 2013 and residents over the age of 65 declined from 11.12% to 9.2%. From 2000 to 2010, the percentage of city residents with at least some college education nearly doubled from 16.8% to 31.5%. About 22.2% have some high school education and 31% had reached middle school.
According to the 2010 census, nearly 96% of Beijing's population are ethnic Han Chinese.
Of the 800,000 ethnic minority population living in the capital, Manchu (336,000), Hui (249,000), Korean (77,000), Mongol (37,000) and Tujia (24,000) constitute the five largest groups.
In addition, there were 8,045 Hong Kong residents, 500 Macau residents, and 7,772 Taiwan residents along with 91,128 registered foreigners living in Beijing.
A study by the Beijing Academy of Sciences estimates that in 2010 there were on average 200,000 foreigners living in Beijing on any given day including students, business travellers and tourists that are not counted as registered residents.
In 2017 the Chinese government implemented population controls for Beijing and Shanghai to fight what it called the "big city disease" which includes congestion, pollution, and shortages of education and health care services.
From this policy, Beijing's population declined by 20,000 from 2016 to 2017. Some low-income people are being forcibly removed from the city as both legal and illegal housing is being demolished in some high-density residential neighborhoods.
The population is being redistributed to Jing-Jin-Ji and Xiong'an New Area, the transfer to the latter expected to include 300,000-500,000 people working in government research, universities, and corporate headquarters.
Education and research
Main articles: Education in Beijing, Education in China, and Higher education in China
See also: List of universities and colleges in Beijing, List of universities in China, and Double First Class University PlanBeijing is a world leading center for scientific and technological innovation and has been ranked the No.1 city in the world with the largest scientific research output, as tracked by the Nature Index since 2016. The city is also leading the world with the highest share of articles published in the fields of physical sciences, chemistry, and earth & environmental sciences, especially in the United Nations'17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) related output.
Beijing has over 90 public colleges and universities, which is the largest urban public university system in Asia and the first city in China with most higher education institutions, and it is home to the two best universities (Tsinghua and Peking) in the whole of Asia-Oceania region and emerging countries with its shared rankings at 16th place in the world by the 2022 Times Higher Education World University Rankings.
Both are members of the C9 League, an alliance of elite Chinese universities offering comprehensive and leading education.
A number of Beijing's most prestigious universities consistently rank among the best in the Asia-Pacific and the world, including Peking University, Tsinghua University, Renmin University of China, Beijing Normal University, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beihang University, Beijing Institute of Technology, China Agricultural University, Minzu University of China, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, University of International Business and Economics, University of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and Central University of Finance and Economics.
These universities were selected as "985 universities" or "211 universities" by the Chinese government in order to build world-class universities.
Some of the national key universities in Beijing are:
Beijing Forestry University
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing University of Technology
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute
Beijing Foreign Studies University
Beijing Language and Culture University
Beijing Sport University
Central Conservatory of Music
Central Academy of Fine Arts
Central Academy of Drama
China University of Geosciences (Beijing)
China University of Petroleum (Beijing)
China University of Mining and Technology (Beijing)
China University of Political Science and Law
China Foreign Affairs University
Chinese People's Public Security University
China Women's University
China Youth University for Political Sciences
China Institute of Industrial Relations
Communication University of China
North China Electric Power University
Peking Union Medical College
University of International Relations
Beijing is also home to several religious institutions, Some of them are listed as follows:
China Islamic Institute (中国伊斯兰教经学院)
Beijing Islamic Institute (北京伊斯蘭教經學院)
The Buddhist Academy of China (中国佛学院)
High-level Tibetan Buddhism College of China (中国藏语系高级佛学院)
National Seminary of Catholic Church in China (中国天主教神哲学院)
The city is a seat of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, which has been consistently ranked the No.1 research institute in the world by Nature Index since the list's inception in 2016, by Nature Research.
Beijing is also a site of Chinese Academy of Engineering, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and National Natural Science Foundation of China.
The city's compulsory education system is among the best in the world: in 2018, 15-year-old students from Beijing (together with Shanghai, Zhejiang and Jiangsu) outperformed all of the other 78 participating countries in all categories (math, reading, and science) in the Program for International Student Assessment, a worldwide study of academic performance conducted by the OECD.
Culture
The Beijing Ancient Observatory
People native to urban Beijing speak the Beijing dialect, which belongs to the Mandarin subdivision of spoken Chinese.
This speech is the basis for putonghua, the standard spoken language used in mainland China and Taiwan, and one of the four official languages of Singapore.
Rural areas of Beijing Municipality have their own dialects akin to those of Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing Municipality.
Beijing or Peking opera is a traditional form of Chinese theater well known throughout the nation.
Commonly lauded as one of the highest achievements of Chinese culture, Beijing opera is performed through a combination of song, spoken dialogue, and codified action sequences involving gestures, movement, fighting and acrobatics.
Much of Beijing opera is carried out in an archaic stage dialect quite different from Modern Standard Chinese and from the modern Beijing dialect.
Beijing cuisine is the local style of cooking.
Peking duck is perhaps the best known dish.
Fuling jiabing, a traditional Beijing snack food, is a pancake (bing) resembling a flat disk with a filling made from fu ling, a fungus used in traditional Chinese medicine.
Teahouses are also common in Beijing.
The cloisonné (or Jingtailan, literally "Blue of Jingtai") metalworking technique and tradition is a Beijing art speciality, and is one of the most revered traditional crafts in China.
Cloisonné making requires elaborate and complicated processes which include base-hammering, copper-strip inlay, soldering, enamel-filling, enamel-firing, surface polishing and gilding.
Beijing's lacquerware is also well known for its sophisticated and intricate patterns and images carved into its surface, and the various decoration techniques of lacquer include "carved lacquer" and "engraved gold".
Younger residents of Beijing have become more attracted to the nightlife, which has flourished in recent decades, breaking prior cultural traditions that had practically restricted it to the upper class.
Today, Houhai, Sanlitun and Wudaokou are Beijing's nightlife hotspots.
In 2012 Beijing was named as City of Design and became part of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network.
Places of interest
See also: Major National Historical and Cultural Sites (Beijing) and List of Beijing landmarks
...the city remains an epicenter of tradition with the treasures of nearly 2,000 years as the imperial capital still on view—in the famed Forbidden City and in the city's lush pavilions and gardens...— National Geographic
Qianmen Avenue, a traditional commercial street outside Qianmen Gate along the southern Central Axis
At the historical heart of Beijing lies the Forbidden City, the enormous palace compound that was the home of the emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties; the Forbidden City hosts the Palace Museum, which contains imperial collections of Chinese art.
Surrounding the Forbidden City are several former imperial gardens, parks and scenic areas, notably Beihai, Shichahai, Zhongnanhai, Jingshan and Zhongshan.
These places, particularly Beihai Park, are described as masterpieces of Chinese gardening art, and are tourist destinations of historical importance; in the modern era, Zhongnanhai has also been the political heart of various Chinese governments and regimes and is now the headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party and the State Council.
From Tiananmen Square, right across from the Forbidden City, there are several notable sites, such as the Tiananmen, Qianmen, the Great Hall of the People, the National Museum of China, the Monument to the People's Heroes, and the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong.
The Summer Palace and the Old Summer Palace both lie at the western part of the city; the former, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, contains a comprehensive collection of imperial gardens and palaces that served as the summer retreats for the Qing imperial family.
Among the best known religious sites in the city is the Temple of Heaven (Tiantan), located in southeastern Beijing, also a UNESCO World Heritage Site, where emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties made visits for annual ceremonies of prayers to Heaven for good harvest.
In the north of the city is the Temple of Earth (Ditan), while the Temple of the Sun (Ritan) and the Temple of the Moon (Yuetan) lie in the eastern and western urban areas respectively.
Other well-known temple sites include the Dongyue Temple, Tanzhe Temple, Miaoying Temple, White Cloud Temple, Yonghe Temple, Fayuan Temple, Wanshou Temple and Big Bell Temple.
The city also has its own Confucius Temple, and a Guozijian or Imperial Academy.
The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, built in 1605, is the oldest Catholic church in Beijing.
The Niujie Mosque is the oldest mosque in Beijing, with a history stretching back over a thousand years.
Inside the Forbidden City
Beijing contains several well-preserved pagodas and stone pagodas, such as the towering Pagoda of Tianning Temple, which was built during the Liao dynasty from 1100 to 1120, and the Pagoda of Cishou Temple, which was built in 1576 during the Ming dynasty.
Historically noteworthy stone bridges include the 12th-century Lugou Bridge, the 17th-century Baliqiao bridge, and the 18th-century Jade Belt Bridge.
The Beijing Ancient Observatory displays pre-telescopic spheres dating back to the Ming and Qing dynasties.
The Fragrant Hills (Xiangshan) is a public park that consists of natural landscaped areas as well as traditional and cultural relics.
The Beijing Botanical Garden exhibits over 6,000 species of plants, including a variety of trees, bushes and flowers, and an extensive peony garden.
The Taoranting, Longtan, Chaoyang, Haidian, Milu Yuan and Zizhu Yuan parks are some of the notable recreational parks in the city.
The Beijing Zoo is a center of zoological research that also contains rare animals from various continents, including the Chinese giant panda.
There are 144 museums and galleries (as of June 2008[update]) in the city.
In addition to the Palace Museum in the Forbidden City and the National Museum of China, other major museums include the National Art Museum of China, the Capital Museum, the Beijing Art Museum, the Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution, the Geological Museum of China, the Beijing Museum of Natural History and the Paleozoological Museum of China.
Located at the outskirts of urban Beijing, but within its municipality are the Thirteen Tombs of the Ming dynasty, the lavish and elaborate burial sites of thirteen Ming emperors, which have been designated as part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties.
The archaeological Peking Man site at Zhoukoudian is another World Heritage Site within the municipality, containing a wealth of discoveries, among them one of the first specimens of Homo erectus and an assemblage of bones of the gigantic hyena Pachycrocuta brevirostris.
There are several sections of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Great Wall of China, most notably Badaling, Jinshanling, Simatai and Mutianyu.
According to the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC), Beijing is the second highest earning tourist city in the world after Shanghai.
Intangible Cultural Heritage
Beijing Acrobatic Performance (10553642935)
The cultural heritage of Beijing is rich and diverse.
Starting 2006, the Beijing government started the process of selecting and preserving cultural heritages.
Five cultural heritage lists have been published over the years. 288 distinct practices are categorized as cultural heritage.
These 288 cultural heritages are further divided into ten categories, namely folk music, folk dance, traditional opera, melodious art, juggling and game, folk art, traditional handicraft, traditional medicine, folk literature and folklore.
Folk music
Zhihua Temple music
Tongzhou shanty
Folk dance
Tongzhou Dragon dance
Miliangtun Stilts
Traditional opera
Kunqu
Peking opera
Melodious art
Xiangsheng
Acrobatic Performance and game
Weiqi(Go)
Xiangqi
Folk art
Ivory carving
Traditional handicraft
Peking duck manufacturing techniques
Cloisonné manufacturing techniques
Traditional medicine
Tong Ren Tang culture
Folk literature
Yongding River legend
Folklore
Miaohui
Lantern Festival
Religion
A Temple of the Goddess in Gubeikou
Fire God Temple in Di'anmen
The religious heritage of Beijing is rich and diverse as Chinese folk religion, Taoism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Islam and Christianity all have significant historical presence in the city.
As the national capital, the city also hosts the State Administration for Religious Affairs and various state-sponsored institutions of the leading religions.
In recent decades, foreign residents have brought other religions to the city.
According to Wang Zhiyun of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in 2010 there were 2.2 million Buddhists in the city, equal to 11.2% of the total population.
According to the Chinese General Social Survey of 2009, Christians constitute 0.78% of the city's population.
According to a 2010 survey, Muslims constitute 1.76% of the population of Beijing.
Chinese folk religion and Taoism
Beijing has many temples dedicated to folk religious and communal deities, many of which are being reconstructed or refurbished in the 2000s and 2010s.
Yearly sacrifices to the God of Heaven (祭天; jìtiān) at the Temple of Heaven have been resumed by Confucian groups in the 2010s.
There are temples dedicated to the worship of the Goddess (娘娘; Niángniáng) in the city, one of them near the Olympic Village, and they revolve around a major cult center at Mount Miaofeng.
There are also many temples consecrated to the Dragon God, to the Medicine Master (药王; Yàowáng), to Divus Guan (Guan Yu), to the Fire God (火神; Huǒshén), to the Wealth God, temples of the City God, and at least one temple consecrated to the Yellow Deity of the Chariot Shaft (轩辕黄帝; Xuānyuán Huángdì) in Pinggu District.
Many of these temples are governed by the Beijing Taoist Association, such as the Fire God Temple of the Shicha Lake, while many others are not and are governed by popular committees and locals.
A great Temple of Xuanyuan Huangdi will be built in Pinggu (possibly as an expansion of the already existing shrine) within 2020, and the temple will feature a statue of the deity which will be amongst the tallest in the world.
The national Chinese Taoist Association and Chinese Taoist College have their headquarters at the White Cloud Temple of Quanzhen Taoism, which was founded in 741 and rebuilt numerous times.
The Beijing Dongyue Temple outside Chaoyangmen is the largest temple of Zhengyi Taoism in the city.
The local Beijing Taoist Association has its headquarters at the Lüzu Temple near Fuxingmen.
Buddhism
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The tomb pagodas at Tanzhe Temple
Yonghe Temple of Tibetan Buddhism
The Buddhist Association of China, the state's supervisory organ overseeing all Buddhist institutions in mainland China, is headquartered in the Guangji Temple, a temple founded over 800 years ago during the Jin dynasty (1115–1234) in what is now Fuchengmennei (阜成门内). The Beijing Buddhist Association along with the Buddhist Choir and Orchestra are based in the Guanghua Temple, which dates to the Yuan dynasty over 700 years ago.
The Buddhist Academy of China and its library are housed in the Fayuan Temple near Caishikou.
The Fayuan Temple, which dates to the Tang dynasty 1300 years ago, is the oldest temple in urban Beijing.
The Tongjiao Temple inside Dongzhimen is the city's only Buddhist nunnery.
The Xihuang Temple originally dates to the Liao dynasty.
In 1651, the temple was commissioned by the Qing Emperor Shunzhi to host the visit of the Fifth Dalai Lama to Beijing.
Since then, this temple has hosted the 13th Dalai Lama as well as the Sixth, Ninth and Tenth Panchen Lamas.
The largest Tibetan Buddhist Temple in Beijing is the Yonghe Temple, which was decreed by the Qing Emperor Qianlong in 1744 to serve as the residence and research facility for his Buddhist preceptor of Rölpé Dorjé the third Changkya (or living Buddha of Inner Mongolia). The Yonghe Temple is so-named because it was the childhood residence of the Yongzheng Emperor, and retains the glazed tiles reserved for imperial palaces.
While the "High-level Tibetan Buddhism College of China", China's highest institution college of Tibetan Buddhism, situated near the Yonghe Temple.
The Lingguang Temple of Badachu in the Western Hills also dates to the Tang dynasty.
The temple's Zhaoxian Pagoda (招仙塔) was first built in 1071 during the Liao dynasty to hold a tooth relic of the Buddha.
The pagoda was destroyed during the Boxer Rebellion and the tooth was discovered from its foundation.
A new pagoda was built in 1964. The six aforementioned temples: Guangji, Guanghua, Tongjiao, Xihuang, Yonghe and Lingguang have been designated National Key Buddhist Temples in Han Chinese Area.
In addition, other notable temples in Beijing include the Tanzhe Temple (founded in the Jin dynasty (266–420) is the oldest in the municipality), the Tianning Temple (oldest pagoda in the city), the Miaoying Temple (famed for Yuan-era white pagoda), the Wanshou Temple (home to the Beijing Art Museum) and the Big Bell Temple (Dazhong Temple).
Islam
Niujie Mosque
Beijing has about 70 mosques recognized by the Islamic Association of China, whose headquarters are located next to the Niujie Mosque, the oldest mosque in the city.
The Niujie Mosque was founded in 996 during the Liao dynasty and is frequently visited by Muslim dignitaries.
The Chinese Muslim community reportedly celebrated Ramadan and made Eid prayers at the mosque on 2021.
The largest mosque in Beijing is ChangYing mosque, located in ChaoYang district, with an area of 8,400 square meters.
Other notable mosques in the old city include the Dongsi Mosque, founded in 1346; the Huashi Mosque, founded in 1415; Nan Douya Mosque, near Chaoyangmen; Jinshifang Street Mosque, in Xicheng District; and the Dongzhimen Mosque.
There are large mosques in outlying Muslim communities in Haidian, Madian, Tongzhou, Changping, Changying, Shijingshan and Miyun.
The China Islamic Institute is located in the Niujie neighborhood in Xicheng District.
Christianity
Church of the Saviour, also known as the Xishiku Church, built in 1703
Catholicism
In 1289, John of Montecorvino came to Beijing as a Franciscan missionary with the order from the Pope.
After meeting and receiving the support of Kublai Khan in 1293, he built the first Catholic church in Beijing in 1305. The Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association (CPCA), based in Houhai is the government oversight body for Catholics in mainland China.
Notable Catholic churches in Beijing include:
the Nantang or Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception also known as the Xuanwumen Church, which was founded in 1605 and whose current archbishop, Joseph Li Shan, is one of the few bishops in China to have the support of both the Vatican and the CPCA.
the Dongtang or St.
Joseph's Church, better known as the Wangfujing Church, founded in 1653.
the Beitang or Church of the Saviour, also known as the Xishiku Church, founded in 1703.
the Xitang or Church of Our Lady of Mount Carmel also known as the Xizhimen Church, founded in 1723.
The National Seminary of Catholic Church in China is located in Daxing District.
Protestantism
The earliest Protestant churches in Beijing were founded by British and American missionaries in the second half of the 19th century.
Protestant missionaries also opened schools, universities and hospitals which have become important civic institutions.
Most of Beijing's Protestant churches were destroyed during the Boxer Rebellion and afterwards rebuilt.
In 1958, the 64 Protestant churches in the city are reorganized into four and overseen by the state through the Three-Self Patriotic Movement.
Eastern Orthodox
There was a significant amount of Orthodox Christians in Beijing.
Orthodoxy came to Beijing with Russian prisoners from the Sino-Russian border conflicts of the 17th century.
In 1956, Viktor, the bishop of Beijing returned to the Soviet Union, and the Soviet embassy took over the old cathedral and demolished it.
In 2007, the Russian embassy built a new church in its garden to serve the Russian Orthodox Christians in Beijing.
Media
Television and radio
The China Central Television Headquarters building in CBD
Beijing Television broadcasts on channels 1 through 10, and China Central Television, China's largest television network, maintains its headquarters in Beijing.
Three radio stations feature programmes in English: Hit FM on FM 88.7, Easy FM by China Radio International on FM 91.5, and the newly launched Radio 774 on AM 774. Beijing Radio Stations is the family of radio stations serving the city.
Press
The well-known Beijing Evening News, covering news about Beijing in Chinese, is distributed every afternoon.
Other newspapers include Beijing Daily, The Beijing News, the Beijing Star Daily, the Beijing Morning News, and the Beijing Youth Daily, as well as English-language weeklies Beijing Weekend and Beijing Today.
The People's Daily, Global Times and the China Daily (English) are published in Beijing as well.
Publications primarily aimed at international visitors and the expatriate community include the English-language periodicals Time Out Beijing, City Weekend, Beijing This Month, Beijing Talk, That's Beijing, and The Beijinger.
Beijing Rock
Beijing rock (Chinese:  北京摇滚) is a wide variety of rock and roll music made by rock bands and solo artists from Beijing.
The first rock band in Beijing is Peking All-Stars, which was formed in 1979 by foreigners.
Famous rock bands and solo artists from Beijing include Cui Jian, Dou Wei, He Yong, Pu Shu, Tang Dynasty, Black Panther, The Flowers, 43 Baojia Street, etc.
Beijing born celebrities
Mei Lanfang (22 October 1894 – 8 August 1961) is a Beijing opera singer.
At age 15, he became an orphan and was adopted by his uncle's family.
He started stage life in 1905 and became famous at 25 years old during performances in Japan.
He was a pre-modern superstar, and famous for his portrayal of the Dan role, the elegant female archetype.
After the Communist revolution, he served as an opera and performing art counselor in China.
In November 2007, a theater namely Mei Lanfang Grand Theater opened in Xicheng District, Beijing to memorize him.
Yuan Longping (7 September 1930- 22 May 2021) is a Chinese agronomist.
He studied at Southwest Agricultural University.
He encountered national famine at the beginning of his career.
This made him determined to solve the food shortage in China.
He worked as a pioneer on hybrid rice back in 1960. His research on cross breeding wild abortive rice with mutated male-sterile rice was later involve a lot of research around the globe.
In 2004, Yuan Longping was awarded the World Food Prize because he conducted pioneer research that helped transform China from food deficiency to food security within three decades.
Cui Jian (August 1960 – present) is a Chinese rock singer.
Various media praised him as the father of China's rock music.
He introduces western Rock to China in 1986 and mixed it with Chinese traditional music.
Some of his songs are associated with movements in Chinese society such as "Nothing to My Name" and "Rock 'n' Roll on the New Long March". He also directed one movie called "Blue Sky Bones" at age 52.
Yang Jiang (17 July 1911- 25 May 2016) is a Chinese writer and translator.
She was educated at a Chinese university and Oxford University.
Ms.
Yang was known for her fiction, plays, essay, and nonfiction.
She is the first person who translates "Don Quixote" into Chinese.
Later, she taught at Tsinghua University for many years and retired in 1980. Some of her representative works are the essay collection "We three" and the novel "Baptism". She died on 25 May 2016, at a hospital in Beijing.
Shu Qingchun (3 Feb 1899 – 24 August 1966), pen name Lao She, is a Chinese writer, linguist, and artist.
He wrote eight million Chinese characters in entire life, is famous for long novels and scripts.
In his iconic works, there are two long novels, two novellas, six short stories, and three scripts.
Most of his works are depicting the poor life of Chinese citizens in the late Qing Dynasty.
He has been living in Britain, Singapore, and United States.
During the Chinese Culture Revolution, he committed suicide by drowning in Taiping Lake.
Sports
Events
Fireworks above Olympic venues during the opening ceremony of the 2008 Summer Olympics
Tai chi (Taijiquan) practitioners at the Fragrant Hills Park
Beijing Workers' Stadium at night as viewed from Sanlitun
Beijing has hosted numerous international and national sporting events, the most notable was the 2008 Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games.
Other multi-sport international events held in Beijing include the 2001 Universiade and the 1990 Asian Games.
Single-sport international competitions include the Beijing Marathon (annually since 1981), China Open of Tennis (1993–97, annually since 2004), ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating Cup of China (2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009 and 2010), WPBSA China Open for Snooker (annually since 2005), Union Cycliste Internationale Tour of Beijing (since 2011), 1961 World Table Tennis Championships, 1987 IBF Badminton World Championships, the 2004 AFC Asian Cup (football), and 2009 Barclays Asia Trophy (football). Beijing hosted the 2015 IAAF World Championships in Athletics.
Beijing's LeSports Center is one of the main venues for the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup.
The city hosted the second Chinese National Games in 1914 and the first four National Games of China in 1959, 1965, 1975, 1979, respectively, and co-hosted the 1993 National Games with Sichuan and Qingdao.
Beijing also hosted the inaugural National Peasants' Games in 1988 and the sixth National Minority Games in 1999.
In November 2013, Beijing made a bid to host the 2022 Winter Olympics.
On 31 July 2015, the International Olympic Committee awarded the 2022 Winter Olympics to the city becoming the first ever to host both Summer and Winter Olympics also for the 2022 Winter Paralympics becoming the first ever to host both Summer and Winter Paralympics.
Venues
Major sporting venues in the city include the National Stadium, also known as the "Birds' Nest", National Aquatics Center, also known as the "Water Cube", National Indoor Stadium, all in the Olympic Green to the north of downtown; the MasterCard Center at Wukesong west of downtown; the Workers' Stadium and Workers' Arena in Sanlitun just east of downtown and the Capital Arena in Baishiqiao, northeast of downtown.
In addition, many universities in the city have their own sport facilities.
Clubs
Professional sports teams based in Beijing include:
China Baseball League
Beijing Tigers
Chinese Basketball Association
Beijing Ducks
Beijing Royal Fighters
Women's Chinese Basketball Association
Beijing Shougang
Kontinental Hockey League
HC Kunlun Red Star
Chinese Super League
Beijing Guoan
China League One
Beijing BSU
China League Two
Beijing BIT
Chinese Women's National League
Beijing BG Phoenix
The Beijing Olympians of the American Basketball Association, formerly a Chinese Basketball Association team, kept their name and maintained a roster of primarily Chinese players after moving to Maywood, California in 2005.
China Bandy Federation is based in Beijing, one of several cities in which the potential for bandy development is explored.
Transportation
Main article: Transport in Beijing
Beijing railway station, one of several rail stations in the city
Beijing is an important transport hub in North China with six ring roads, 1167 km (725 miles) of expressways, 15 National Highways, nine conventional railways, and six high-speed railways converging on the city.
Rail and high-speed rail
Beijing serves as a large rail hub in China's railway network.
Ten conventional rail lines radiate from the city to: Shanghai (Jinghu Line), Guangzhou (Jingguang Line), Kowloon (Jingjiu Line), Harbin (Jingha Line) (including Qinhuangdao (Jingqin Line)), Baotou (Jingbao Line), Chengde (Jingcheng Line), Tongliao, Inner Mongolia (Jingtong Line), Yuanping, Shanxi (Jingyuan Line) and Shacheng, Hebei (Fengsha Line). In addition, the Datong–Qinhuangdao Railway passes through the municipality to the north of the city.
Beijing also has six high-speed rail lines: the Beijing-Tianjin Intercity Railway, which opened in 2008; the Beijing-Shanghai High-Speed Railway, which opened in 2011; the Beijing–Guangzhou High-Speed Railway, which opened in 2012; and the Beijing–Xiong'an intercity railway and the Beijing–Zhangjiakou intercity railway, both of which opened in 2019. The Beijing–Shenyang high-speed railway was completed in 2021.
The city's main railway stations are the Beijing railway station, which opened in 1959; the Beijing West railway station, which opened in 1996; and the Beijing South railway station, which was rebuilt into the city's high-speed railway station in 2008; The Beijing North railway station, was first built in 1905 and expanded in 2009; The Qinghe railway station, was first built in 1905 and expanded in 2019; The Beijing Chaoyang railway station opened in 2021; The Beijing Fengtai railway station opened in 2022; and the Beijing Sub-Center railway station is under construction.
Smaller stations in the city including Beijing East railway station and Daxing Airport station handle mainly commuter passenger traffic.
In outlying suburbs and counties of Beijing, there are over 40 railway stations.
From Beijing, direct passenger train service is available to most large cities in China.
International train service is available to Mongolia, Russia, Vietnam and North Korea.
Passenger trains in China are numbered according to their direction in relation to Beijing.
Roads and expressways
Further information: Expressways of Beijing and China National Highways of Beijing
Badaling Expressway overpass near the Great Wall
Typical Beijing traffic signage found at intersections
Beijing is connected by road links to all parts of China as part of the National Trunk Road Network.
Many expressways of China serve Beijing, as do 15 China National Highways.
Beijing's urban transport is dependent upon the "ring roads" that concentrically surround the city, with the Forbidden City area marked as the geographical center for the ring roads.
The ring roads appear more rectangular than ring-shaped.
There is no official "1st Ring Road". The 2nd Ring Road is located in the inner city.
Ring roads tend to resemble expressways progressively as they extend outwards, with the 5th and 6th Ring Roads being full-standard national expressways, linked to other roads only by interchanges.
Expressways to other regions of China are generally accessible from the 3rd Ring Road outward.
A final outer orbital, the Capital Area Loop Expressway (G95), was fully opened in 2018 and will extend into neighboring Tianjin and Hebei.
Within the urban core, city streets generally follow the checkerboard pattern of the ancient capital.
Many of Beijing's boulevards and streets with "inner" and "outer" are still named in relation to gates in the city wall, though most gates no longer stand.
Traffic jams are a major concern.
Even outside of rush hour, several roads still remain clogged with traffic.
Traffic jam in the Beijing CBD
Beijing's urban design layout further exacerbates transportation problems.
The authorities have introduced several bus lanes, which only public buses can use during rush hour.
In the beginning of 2010, Beijing had 4 million registered automobiles.
By the end of 2010, the government forecast 5 million.
In 2010, new car registrations in Beijing averaged 15,500 per week.
Towards the end of 2010, the city government announced a series of drastic measures to tackle traffic jams, including limiting the number of new license plates issued to passenger cars to 20,000 a month and barring cars with non-Beijing plates from entering areas within the Fifth Ring Road during rush hour.
More restrictive measures are also reserved during major events or heavily polluted weather.
Road signs began to be standardized with both Chinese and English names displayed, with location names using pinyin, in 2008.
Air
Beijing Capital International Airport
Terminal 3 of the Beijing Capital International Airport
Beijing has two of the world's largest airports.
The Beijing Capital International Airport (IATA: PEK) located 32 kilometres (20 mi) northeast of the city center in Chaoyang District bordering Shunyi District, is the second busiest airport in the world after Atlanta's Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport.
Capital Airport's Terminal 3, built during the expansion for the 2008 Olympics, is one of the largest in the world.
Capital Airport is the main hub for Air China and Hainan Airlines.
The Airport Expressway and Second Airport Expressway, connect to Capital Airport from the northeast and east of the city center, respectively.
Driving time from city center is about 40 minutes under normal traffic conditions.
The Capital Airport Express line of Beijing Subway and the Capital Airport Bus serves the Capital Airport.
Beijing Daxing International Airport
Beijing Daxing International Airport
The Beijing Daxing International Airport (IATA: PKX) located 46 kilometres (29 mi) south of the city in Daxing District bordering the city of Langfang, Hebei Province, opened on 25 September 2019. The Daxing Airport has one of the world's largest terminal buildings and is expected to be a major airport serving Beijing, Tianjin and northern Hebei Province.
Daxing Airport is connected to the city via the Beijing–Xiong'an intercity railway, the Daxing Airport Express line of the Beijing Subway and two expressways.
Other airports
With the opening of the Daxing Airport in September 2019, the Beijing Nanyuan Airport (IATA:NAY), located 13 kilometres (8.1 mi) south of center in Fengtai District, has been closed to civilian airline service.
Other airports in the city at Liangxiang, Xijiao, Shahe and Badaling are primarily for military use.
Visa requirements for air passengers
As of 1 January 2013[update], tourists from 45 countries are permitted a 72-hour visa-free stay in Beijing.
The 45 countries include Singapore, Japan, the United States, Canada, all EU and EEA countries (except Norway and Liechtenstein), Switzerland, Brazil, Argentina and Australia.
The programme benefits transit and business travellers with the 72 hours calculated starting from the moment visitors receive their transit stay permits rather than the time of their plane's arrival.
Foreign visitors are not permitted to leave Beijing for other Chinese cities during the 72 hours.
Public transit
Two Line 1 trains on the Beijing Subway, which is among the longest and busiest rapid transit systems in the world
An articulated Beijing bus
The Beijing Subway, which began operating in 1969, now has 25 lines, 459 stations, and 783 km (487 mi) of lines.
It is the longest subway system in the world and first in annual ridership with 3.66 billion rides delivered in 2016. In 2013, with a flat fare of ¥2.00 (US$0.31) per ride with unlimited transfers on all lines except the Airport Express, the subway was also the most affordable rapid transit system in China.
The subway is undergoing rapid expansion and is expected to reach 30 lines, 450 stations, 1,050 kilometres (650 mi) in length by 2022. When fully implemented, 95% of residents inside the Fourth Ring Road will be able to walk to a station in 15 minutes.[better source needed] The Beijing Suburban Railway provides commuter rail service to outlying suburbs of the municipality.
On 28 December 2014, the Beijing Subway switched to a distance-based fare system from a fixed fare for all lines except the Airport Express.
Under the new system a trip under 6 km (3+1⁄2 mi) will cost ¥3.00(US$0.49), an additional ¥1.00 will be added for the next 6 km (3+1⁄2 mi) and the next 10 km (6 mi) until the distance for the trip reaches 32 km (20 mi). For every 20 kilometres (12 miles) after the original 32 kilometres (20 miles) an additional ¥1.00 is added.
For example, a 50-kilometre (31-mile) trip would cost ¥ 8.00.
There are nearly 1,000 public bus and trolleybus lines in the city, including four bus rapid transit lines.
Standard bus fares are as low as ¥1.00 when purchased with the Yikatong metrocard.
Taxi
Metered taxi in Beijing start at ¥13 for the first 3 kilometres (1.9 mi), ¥2.3 Renminbi per additional 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) and ¥1 per ride fuel surcharge, not counting idling fees which are ¥2.3 (¥4.6 during rush hours of 7–9 am and 5–7 pm) per 5 minutes of standing or running at speeds lower than 12 kilometres per hour (7.5 mph). Most taxis are Hyundai Elantras, Hyundai Sonatas, Peugeots, Citroëns and Volkswagen Jettas.
After 15 kilometres (9.3 mi), the base fare increases by 50% (but is only applied to the portion over that distance). Different companies have special colours combinations painted on their vehicles.
Usually registered taxis have yellowish brown as basic hue, with another color of Prussian blue, hunter green, white, umber, tyrian purple, rufous, or sea green.
Between 11 pm and 5 am, there is also a 20% fee increase.
Rides over 15 km (9 mi) and between 23:00 and 06:00 incur both charges, for a total increase of 80%. Tolls during trip should be covered by customers and the costs of trips beyond Beijing city limits should be negotiated with the driver.
The cost of unregistered taxis is also subject to negotiation with the driver.
Bicycles
Bicyclists during rush hour at the Chang'an Avenue, 2009
Beijing has long been well known for the number of bicycles on its streets.
Although the rise of motor traffic has created a great deal of congestion and bicycle use has declined, bicycles are still an important form of local transportation.
Many cyclists can be seen on most roads in the city, and most of the main roads have dedicated bicycle lanes.
Beijing is relatively flat, which makes cycling convenient.
The rise of electric bicycles and electric scooters, which have similar speeds and use the same cycle lanes, may have brought about a revival in bicycle-speed two-wheeled transport.
It is possible to cycle to most parts of the city.
Because of the growing traffic congestion, the authorities have indicated more than once that they wish to encourage cycling, but it is not clear whether there is sufficient will to translate that into action on a significant scale.
On 30 March 2019, a 6.5 km (4 mile) bicycle-dedicated lane was opened, easing the traffic congestion between Huilongguan and Shangdi where there are many high-tech companies.
Cycling has seen a resurgence in popularity spurred by the emergence of a large number of dockless app based bikeshares such as Mobike, Bluegogo and Ofo since 2016.
Defense and aerospace
KJ-2000 and J-10s started the flypast formation on the 70th anniversary of the People's Republic of China.
The command headquarters of China's military forces are based in Beijing.
The Central Military Commission, the political organ in charge of the military, is housed inside the Ministry of National Defense, located next to the Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution in western Beijing.
The Second Artillery Corps, which controls the country's strategic missile and nuclear weapons, has its command in Qinghe, Haidian District.
The headquarters of the Central Theater Command, one of five nationally, is based further west in Gaojing.
The CTR oversees the Beijing Capital Garrison as well as the 27th, 38th and 65th Armies, which are based in Hebei.
Military institutions in Beijing also include academies and thinktanks such as the PLA National Defence University and Academy of Military Science, military hospitals such as the 301, 307 and the Academy of Military Medical Sciences, and army-affiliated cultural entities such as 1 August Film Studios and the PLA Song and Dance Troupe.
The China National Space Administration, which oversees country's space program, and several space-related state owned companies such as CASTC and CASIC are all based in Beijing.
The Beijing Aerospace Command and Control Center, in Haidian District tracks the country's manned and unmanned flight and other space exploration initiatives.
Nature and wildlife
Beijing Municipality has 20 nature reserves that have a total area of 1,339.7 km2 (517.3 sq mi). The mountains to the west and north of the city are home to a number of protected wildlife species including leopard, leopard cat, wolf, red fox, wild boar, masked palm civet, raccoon dog, hog badger, Siberian weasel, Amur hedgehog, roe deer, and mandarin rat snake.
The Beijing Aquatic Wildlife Rescue and Conservation Center protects the Chinese giant salamander, Amur stickleback and mandarin duck on the Huaijiu and Huaisha Rivers in Huairou District.
The Beijing Milu Park south of the city is home to one of the largest herds of Père David's deer, now extinct in the wild.
The Beijing barbastelle, a species of vesper bat discovered in caves of Fangshan District in 2001 and identified as a distinct species in 2007, is endemic to Beijing.
The mountains of Fangshan are also habitat for the more common Beijing mouse-eared bat, large myotis, greater horseshoe bat and Rickett's big-footed bat.
Each year, Beijing hosts 200–300 species of migratory birds including the common crane, black-headed gull, swan, mallard, common cuckoo and the endangered yellow-breasted bunting.
In May 2016, Common cuckoos nesting in the wetlands of Cuihu (Haidian), Hanshiqiao (Shunyi), Yeyahu (Yanqing) were tagged and have been traced to far as India, Kenya and Mozambique.
In the fall of 2016, the Beijing Forest Police undertook a month-long campaign to crack down on illegal hunting and trapping of migratory birds for sale in local bird markets.
Over 1,000 rescued birds of protected species including streptopelia, Eurasian siskin, crested myna, coal tit and great tit were handed to the Beijing Wildlife Protection and Rescue Center for repatriation to the wild.
The city flowers are the Chinese rose and chrysanthemum.
The city trees are the Chinese arborvitae, an evergreen in the cypress family and the pagoda tree, also called the Chinese scholar tree, a deciduous tree of the family Fabaceae.
The oldest scholar tree in the city was planted in what is now Beihai Park during the Tang dynasty.
International relations
The capital is the home of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a multilateral development bank that aims to improve economic and social outcomes in Asia and the Silk Road Fund, an investment fund of the Chinese government to foster increased investment and provide financial supports in countries along the One Belt, One Road.
Beijing is also home to the headquarters of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), making it an important city for international diplomacy.
Twin towns and sister cities
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in China
Beijing is twinned with the following regions, cities, and counties:
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Ankara, Turkey
Astana, Kazakhstan
Athens, Greece
Bangkok, Thailand
Berlin, Germany
Brussels, Belgium
Bucharest, Romania
Budapest, Hungary
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Cairo, Egypt
Canberra, Australia
Cologne, Germany
Copenhagen, Denmark
Delhi, India
Doha, Qatar
Dublin, Ireland
Hanoi, Vietnam
Havana, Cuba
Île-de-France, France
Islamabad, Pakistan
Jakarta, Indonesia
Johannesburg, South Africa
Kyiv, Ukraine
Lima, Peru
London, England, United Kingdom
Manila, Philippines
Minsk, Belarus
Mexico City, Mexico
Moscow, Russia
New South Wales, Australia
New York City, United States
Ottawa, Canada
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Riga, Latvia
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
San José, Costa Rica
Santiago, Chile
Seoul, South Korea
Tallinn, Estonia
Tehran, Iran
Tel Aviv, Israel
Tirana, Albania
Tokyo, Japan
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia
Vientiane, Laos
Washington D.C., United States
Wellington, New Zealand
Foreign embassies and consulates
See also: list of diplomatic missions in ChinaIn 2019, China had the largest diplomatic network in the world.
China hosts a large diplomatic community in its capital city of Beijing.
At present, the capital of Beijing hosts 172 embassies, 1 consulate and 3 representatives, excluding Hong Kong and Macau trade office.
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Comoros
Republic of the Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Monaco (consulate)
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
North Macedonia
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Representative offices and delegations
Haiti (Representative Office)
Faroe Islands (Representative Office)
European Union (Delegation of the European Union to China)
See also
China portal
Beijing city fortifications
Historical capitals of China
Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
List of hospitals in Beijing
List of mayors of Beijing
List of twin towns and sister cities in China
List of diplomatic missions in China
Uyghurs in Beijing
Notes
Loaned earlier via French "Pékin".
References
Citations
a b c d "Township divisions". ebeijing.gov.cn.
Archived from the original on 3 September 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Doing Business in China – Survey". Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China.
Archived from the original on 26 May 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2013.
"Communiqué of the Seventh National Population Census (No. 3)". National Bureau of Statistics of China. 11 May 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2021.
"政府工作报告-2022年1月6日在北京市第十五届人民代表大会第五次会议上-政府工作报告解读-北京市发展和改革委员会". Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 23 January 2022.
a b "CN￥6.3527 per dollar (according to International Monetary Fund on January 2022 publication)". IMF. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
"World Economic Outlook (WEO) database". International Monetary Fund.
Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2022.
"CN￥4.173 per Int'l. dollar (according to International Monetary Fund in October 2021 publication)". IMF. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
"Subnational Human Development Index". Global Data Lab China. 2020. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 9 April 2020.
"Beijing". Lexico UK English Dictionary.
Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 25 October 2020.
Wells, John (3 April 2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman.
ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0.
China Postal Album: Showing the Postal Establishments and Postal Routes in Each Province (1st ed.). Shanghai, China: Directorate General of Posts. 1907.
"Peking". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
"Beijing info". english.beijing.gov.cn.
Retrieved 22 September 2022.
"Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics and NBS Survey Office in Beijing". Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics. 23 January 2019. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019.
"China: Hébĕi (Prefectures, Cities, Districts and Counties) - Population Statistics, Charts and Map". Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2022.
Figures based on 2006 statistics published in 2007 National Statistical Yearbook of China and available online at 2006年中国乡村人口数 中国人口与发展研究中心 (archive). Retrieved 21 April 2009.
"Basic Information". Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics.
Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2008.
a b c "Beijing". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2008. Archived from the original on 12 February 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Top 100 Banks in the World". 
"Beijing has most Fortune 500 global HQs". Beijing Municipal People's Government.
Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
a b "Year to date Passenger Traffic". Airports Council International. 23 June 2014. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2014.
"What does the world's largest single-building airport terminal look like?". BBC News. 15 April 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 20 April 2019.
Taylor, Alan. "Photos: The World's Largest Airport-Terminal Building - The Atlantic". The Atlantic.
Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019.
"Peking (Beijing)". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 25 (Macropædia, 15th ed.). p. 468.
"Top Ten Cities Through History". things made unthinkable.
Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2016.
"Beijing". World Book Encyclopedia. 2008. Archived from the original on 19 May 2008. Retrieved 7 August 2008.
Töre, Özgür. "WTTC reveals the world's best performing tourism cities". ftnnews.com.
Retrieved 7 August 2021.
走进北京七大世界文化遗产 – 千龙网. qianlong.com (in Simplified Chinese). 18 August 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2014.
a b "Top 10 institutions in Beijing". 
a b "US News Best Global Universities in Beijing". US News.
Archived from the original on 6 November 2020. Retrieved 27 September 2020.
a b "Asia University Rankings". Times Higher Education (THE). 28 May 2020. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 27 September 2020.
a b "Emerging Economies". Times Higher Education (THE). 22 January 2020. Archived from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020.
a b Jia, Hepeng (19 September 2020). "Beijing, the seat of science capital". Nature. 585 (7826): S52–S54. Bibcode:2020Natur.585S..52J. doi:10.1038/d41586-020-02577-x.
a b jknotts (25 September 2020). "Beijing Defends its Title as World's Top City for Scientific Research". 
a b "Beijing and Zhangjiakou launch joint bid to host 2022 Winter Olympic Games". insidethegames.biz. 5 November 2013. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 5 November 2013.
a b "IOC awards 2022 Winter Olympics to Beijing". The Washington Post.
Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017.
a b Hucker, Charles O. (1958). "Governmental Organization of the Ming Dynasty". Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies. 21: 1–66. doi:10.2307/2718619. JSTOR 2718619.
Martini, Martino, De bello Tartarico historia, 1654.
Martini, Martino (1655), Novus Atlas Sinensis, "Prima Provencia Peking Sive Pecheli", p. 17.
Standardization Administration of China (SAC). "GB/T-2260: Codes for the administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China" (Microsoft Word). Archived 5 March 2004 at the Wayback Machine.
"The Peking Man World Heritage Site at Zhoukoudian". Archived from the original on 9 March 2013. Retrieved 7 April 2008.
"Beijing's History". China Internet Information Center.
Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 1 May 2008.
Haw, Stephen.
Beijing: A Concise History.
Routledge, 2007. p. 136.
Grousset, Rene (1970). The Empire of the Steppes.
Rutgers University Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-8135-1304-1.
a b c "Beijing – Historical Background". The Economist. 2007. Archived from the original on 22 May 2007.
Brian Hook, Beijing and Tianjin: Towards a Millennial Megalopolis, p. 2.
元大都土城遗址公园. Tuniu.com (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 5 February 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2008.
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley.
The Cambridge Illustrated History of China.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-521-66991-X
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 23
An Illustrated Survey of Dikes and Dams in Jianghan Region.
World Digital Library. 1567. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013.
"The Temple of Heaven". China.org. 13 April 2001. Archived from the original on 20 June 2008. Retrieved 14 June 2008.
Robert Hymes (2000).  John Stewart Bowman (ed.). Columbia Chronologies of Asian History and Culture.
Columbia University Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-231-11004-4.
"Renewal of Ming Dynasty City Wall". Beijing This Month. 1 February 2003. Archived from the original on 3 May 2005. Retrieved 14 June 2008.
Rosenburg, Matt T. "Largest Cities Through History". About.com.
Archived from the original on 27 May 2005. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 33
"Beijing – History – The Ming and Qing Dynasties". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008. Archived from the original on 12 May 2008. Retrieved 16 June 2008.
Elliott 2001, p. 98
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, pp. 119–120
Preston, p. 310–311
Preston, pp. 312–315
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, pp. 133–134
MacKerras & Yorke 1991, p. 8
"Incident on 7 July 1937". Xinhua News Agency. 27 June 2005. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 20 June 2008.
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 166
Cheung, Andrew (1995). "Slogans, Symbols, and Legitimacy: The Case of Wang Jingwei's Nanjing Regime". Indiana University.
Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2008.
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 168
毛主席八次接见红卫兵的组织工作.  中国共产党新闻网 (in Chinese (China)). 7 April 2011. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2011.
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 217
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 255
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 252
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 149
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, pp. 249–250
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, pp. 255–256
Picture Power:Tiananmen Standoff Archived 17 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine BBC News.
"IOC: Beijing To Host 2022 Winter Olympics". The Huffington Post.
Associated Press. 31 July 2015. Archived from the original on 10 August 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2015.
Business Guide to Beijing and North-East China (2006–2007 ed.). Hong Kong: China Briefing Media. 2006. p. 108. ISBN 978-988-98673-3-1. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
Shen, Wei (16 February 2004). "Chorography to record rise and fall of Beijing's Hutongs". China Daily.
Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 27 June 2008.
Amy Stone (Spring 2008). "Farewell to the Hutongs: Urban Development in Beijing". Dissent magazine.
Archived from the original on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2011.
Li, Dray-Novey & Kong 2007, p. 253
Gallagher, Sean (6 December 2006). "Beijing's urban makeover: the 'hutong' destruction". Open Democracy.
Archived from the original on 25 May 2008. Retrieved 27 June 2008.
"Beijing". People's Daily.
March 2001. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 22 June 2008.
"无标题文档". Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013.
a b "Extreme Temperatures Around the World". Retrieved 21 February 2013.
中国地面国际交换站气候标准值月值数据集（1971－2000年） (in Chinese). China Meteorological Administration.
Retrieved 4 May 2010.
"Beijing". China Meteorological Data Sharing Service System.
December 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014.
Burt, Christopher C. "UPDATE June 1: Record May Heat Wave in Northeast China, Koreas". Wunderground.
Retrieved 1 June 2014.
d.o.o, Yu Media Group. "Beijing, China - Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast". Weather Atlas.
Retrieved 9 July 2019.
J.R. McNeill, Something New Under the Sun: An Environmental History of the 20th-Century World.
New York: Norton, 2000, ISBN 978-0-14-029509-2.
Mark Z. Jacobson, Son V. Nghiem, Alessandro Sorichetta, Natasha Whitney, Ring of impact from the mega-urbanization of Beijing between 2000 and 2009. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 120, Issue 12, (2015), 5740–5756, doi:10.1002/2014JD023008.
Peter Sheehan, Enjiang Cheng, Alex English, Fanghong Sun, China's response to the air pollution shock.
In: Nature Climate Change 4, (2014), 306–309, doi:10.1038/nclimate2197.
David G. Streetsa, Joshua S. Fub, Carey J. Jangc, Jiming Haod, Kebin Hed, Xiaoyan Tange, Yuanhang Zhange, Zifa Wangf, Zuopan Lib, Qiang Zhanga, Litao Wangd, Binyu Wangc, Carolyne Yua, Air quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games accessed 23 April 2012
a b "Green Olympics Effort Draws UN Environment Chief to Beijing". Sundance Channel.
Archived from the original on 20 March 2012.
"Beijing petrol stations to close". BBC News. 15 February 2008. Archived from the original on 18 February 2008. Retrieved 15 February 2008.
Yardley, Jim (24 January 2008). "Smoggy Beijing Plans to Cut Traffic by Half for Olympics, Paper Says". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Post-Olympics Beijing car restrictions to take effect next month". News.xinhuanet.com. 28 September 2008. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2010.
"Only 'green' vehicles permitted to enter Beijing". Autonews.gasgoo.com. 22 May 2009. Archived from the original on 27 May 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2010.
"China: Beijing launches Euro 4 standards". Automotiveworld.com. 4 January 2008. Archived from the original on 27 April 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2010.
a b c James West, Mother Jones Archived 29 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine. 18 January 2013.
a b "Beijing to switch from coal to gas to go green". China Daily Archived 5 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. 8 March 2012.
a b Li Jing, "Beijing's air quality will worsen without coal control, Greenpeace says". South China Morning Post. 5 February 2013 Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
"Detecting the Heavy Metal Concentration of PM2.5 in Beijing", Greenpeace.org. 8 June 2013.
Stanway, David (23 July 2014). "Beijing shuts big coal-fired power plant to ease smog –Xinhua". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016.
a b Chang, Lyu (24 March 2015). "Beijing shuts two more coal-fired power plants". The China Daily.
Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016.
Demick, Barbara (2 October 2009). "Communist China celebrates 60th anniversary with instruments of war and words of peace". Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on 14 October 2009. Retrieved 11 October 2009.
Liu, Charles (12 May 2016). ""Parade Blue" Joins "APEC Blue" as Distant Memories as Nasty Air Returns to Beijing". The Nanfang.
Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 28 November 2016.
Wong, Edward (12 January 2013). "Beijing Air Pollution Off the Charts". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 3 March 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017.
Wong, Edward (9 December 2015). "As Beijing Shuts Down Over Smog Alert, Worse-Off Neighbors Carry On". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 December 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2015.
"Beijing issues second red alert for choking smog". ABC News.
ABC. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 18 December 2015. Retrieved 18 December 2015.
"Beijing to ban polluting cars during smog alerts". 
Greenstone, Michael (12 March 2018). "Four Years After Declaring War on Pollution, China Is Winning". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019.
首页. Beijing Municipal Web.
Archived from the original on 29 December 2015.
a b Barbara Demick (29 October 2011). "U.S. Embassy air quality data undercut China's own assessment". Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on 7 November 2011. Retrieved 7 November 2011. (login required)
Zhao, Xiaoli; Yu, Xueying; Wang, Ying; Fan, Chunyang (1 June 2016). "Economic evaluation of health losses from air pollution in Beijing, China". Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 23 (12): 11716–11728. doi:10.1007/s11356-016-6270-8. ISSN 0944-1344. PMID 26944425. S2CID 3075757.
Maji, Kamal Jyoti; Arora, Mohit; Dikshit, Anil Kumar (1 April 2017). "Burden of disease attributed to ambient PM2.5 and PM10 exposure in 190 cities in China". Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 24 (12): 11559–11572. doi:10.1007/s11356-017-8575-7. ISSN 0944-1344. PMID 28321701. S2CID 37640939.
"China says it made rain to wash off sand". NBC News. 5 May 2006. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Beijing hit by eighth sandstorm". BBC News. 17 April 2006. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
Weaver, Lisa Rose (4 April 2002). "More than a dust storm in a Chinese teacup". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 January 2007. Retrieved 7 February 2008.
"Beijing – Administration and society – Government". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008. Archived from the original on 9 June 2008. Retrieved 16 June 2008.
国家统计局统计用区划代码. National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China.
Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 24 November 2015.
2017年度北京市土地利用现状汇总表. ghgtw.beijing.gov.cn.
Archived from the original on 13 January 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2019.
Census Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China; Population and Employment Statistics Division of the National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China (2012).  中国2010年人口普查分乡、镇、街道资料 (1 ed.). Beijing: China Statistics Print.
ISBN 978-7-5037-6660-2.
国务院人口普查办公室、国家统计局人口和社会科技统计司编 (2012).  中国2010年人口普查分县资料. Beijing: China Statistics Print.
ISBN 978-7-5037-6659-6.
《中国民政统计年鉴2012》
a b c d 北京市第三中级人民法院、北京市人民检察院第三分院同日成立. Xinhua (in Chinese (China)). 6 August 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013.
北京市高级人民法院关于我市中级人民法院管辖调整有关问题的规定（暂行）. chinacourt.org (in Chinese (China)). 2 August 2013. Archived from the original on 14 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013.
a b Historical GDP of Beijing published on Beijing Statistical Yearbook 2017, ALSO see Beijing'GDP Revison (Chinese) Archived 13 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine (10 October 2017)
"For first time, Beijing's GDP tops 4 trillion yuan". english.
"Global Wealth PPP Distribution: Who Are The Leaders Of The Global Economy? - Full Size". 
"These will be the most important cities by 2035". World Economic Forum.
Archived from the original on 3 November 2020. Retrieved 3 November 2020.
"World's Richest Cities in 2030, and Where Southeast Asian Cities Stand | Seasia.co". Good News from Southeast Asia.
Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 3 November 2020.
"Jones Lang LaSalle Research Report – Five years after the Olympics – Growth in Beijing has continued, what to expect next?" Archived 18 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine August 2013
"2022 Global 500 in Beijing". Fortune.
Retrieved 9 August 2022.
"Chinese companies top list of Fortune 500". global.chinadaily.com.cn.
Retrieved 9 August 2022.
Shapiro, Ariel R. "Beijing is 'Billionaire Capital of the World'". Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2018.
"Beijing is new 'billionaire capital'". BBC News. 25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2018.
Wealth, New World. "The Wealthiest Cities in the World 2021". New World Wealth.
Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022.
"GaWC - The World According to GaWC 2020". 
"The Global Financial Centres Index 29" (PDF). Long Finance.
March 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2021.
"Beijing tops the world as most competitive city in the era of Covid-19". South China Morning Post. 9 December 2020. Archived from the original on 12 December 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020.
"The Global Startup Ecosystem Index Report by StartupBlink". StartupBlink Blog. 14 June 2021. Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021.
Purchasing power parity (PPP) for Chinese yuan is estimate according to IMF WEO (October 2017 Archived 14 February 2006 at Archive-It) data; exchange rate of CN￥ to US$ is according to State Administration of Foreign Exchange, published on China Statistical Yearbook Archived 20 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m NBS Beijing investigatory team (国家统计局北京调查总队) (13 February 2014). 北京市2013年国民经济和社会发展统计公报 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Statistics.
Archived from the original on 10 March 2014.
北京五年淘汰140余家"三高"企业.  北京商报 (in Chinese (China)). 17 November 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 18 November 2014.
"Capital Steel opens new branch to step up eastward relocation". People's Daily Online. 23 October 2005. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 24 October 2008.
Spencer, Richard (18 July 2008). "Beijing abandons Mao's dream of workers' paradise". The Daily Telegraph.
London.
Archived from the original on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2019.
六大功能区 (in Chinese (China)). Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2014.
Tu, Lufang (涂露芳) (9 October 2013). 六大功能区创造北京四成多GDP. Beijing Daily.
Archived from the original on 14 October 2013.
北京市统计局 六大高端产业功能区主要经济指标 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Statistics. 12 August 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 18 November 2014.
"Statistical Communique on the 2003 National Economic and Social Development of the City of Beijing". Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics. 12 February 2004. Archived from the original on 5 March 2008. Retrieved 15 March 2008.
"ShiJingShan". Beijing Economic Information Center.
Archived from the original on 20 November 2008. Retrieved 22 June 2008.
"Pirates weave tangled web on 'Spidey'". The Hollywood Reporter.
Reuters. 27 April 2007. Archived from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 15 March 2008.
北京市2014年国民经济和社会发展统计公报 [Beijing Economic and Social Development Statistical Bulletin 2014] (in Simplified Chinese). Beijing Bureau of Statistics. 12 February 2015. Archived from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2015.
CNBC.com, Justina Crabtree; special to (20 September 2016). "A tale of megacities: China's largest metropolises". CNBC. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. slide 4
OECD Urban Policy Reviews: China 2015, OECD READ edition.
OECD iLibrary.
OECD Urban Policy Reviews.
OECD. 2015. p. 37. doi:10.1787/9789264230040-en.
ISBN 978-92-64-23003-3. ISSN 2306-9341. Archived from the original on 27 March 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017.Linked from the OECD here Archived 9 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine
a b "Age Composition and Dependency Ratio of Population by Region (2004) in China Statistics 2005". Archived from the original on 4 December 2010. Retrieved 5 July 2010.
a b c d 北京市2010年第六次全国人口普查主要数据情况. Beijing Bureau of Statistics.
Archived from the original on 19 February 2014.
北京市少数民族人口状况 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Statistics. 30 May 2011. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014.
在北京外国人数量或已达20万人 超过市人口总数1%.  中国新闻网 (in Chinese (China)). 9 October 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014.
a b Roxburgh, Helen (19 March 2018). "China's radical plan to limit the populations of Beijing and Shanghai". The Guardian.
Archived from the original on 9 April 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2018.
"China to move half a million people from Beijing to new city". The Economic Times.
Archived from the original on 29 February 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2019.
"A plan to build a city from scratch that will dwarf New York". The Economist. 6 April 2017. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019.
"The top cities for research in the Nature Index". 
"Leading 200 science cities in SDG research". 
"Leading 25 science cities in Earth & environmental sciences". 
"Leading 50 science cities in physical sciences". 
"Leading 50 science cities in chemistry". 
2015年北京市高校名单（共91所）. gaokao.com. 22 May 2015. Archived from the original on 30 November 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2016.
"Top 10 Chinese cities with most higher education institutions". 
"World University Rankings 2022". Times Higher Education (THE). 25 August 2021. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2021.
"Eastern stars: Universities of China's C9 League excel in select fields". Times Higher Education (THE). 17 February 2011. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021.
"Best universities in Beijing". Times Higher Education (THE). 29 October 2020. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
"Beijing". QS Top Universities. 30 November 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
"Beijing 985 Project Universities | Study in China | CUCAS". 
"Beijing 211 Project Universities | Study in China | CUCAS". 
"2016 tables: Institutions | 2016 tables | Institutions | Nature Index". 
"Institution outputs | Nature Index". 
PISA 2018: Insights and Interpretations (PDF), OECD, 3 December 2019, archived (PDF) from the original on 9 December 2020, retrieved 25 February 2021
"Jingxi". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 16 June 2008.
"Beijing – Chinese Cloisonné Enamelware". Archived from the original on 11 June 2008.
Levin, Dan (15 June 2008). "Beijing Lights Up the Night". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2008.
"Beijing, Jeonju, and Norwich named UNESCO Creative Cities | ASEF culture360". culture360.asef.org.
Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018.
"Beijing, Places of a Lifetime". National Geographic Society.
Archived from the original on 3 August 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008.
"The Imperial Palace of the Ming and Qing Dynasties" (PDF). UNESCO World Heritage Center. 29 December 1986. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Beihai Park Behind Behai park locates Hou Hai, which is one of the most popular visited tourist places.
Hou hai is the largest of the three lakes, along with Qianhai (lit. the "Front Lake") and Xihai (lit. the "Western Lake"), that comprise Shichahai, the collective name for the three northernmost lakes in central Beijing.
Since the early 2000s, the hutong neighborhood around Houhai has become known for its nightlife as many residences along the lake shore have been converted into restaurants, bars, and cafes". UNECO World Heritage.
Archived from the original on 2 July 2007.
Littlewood, Misty and Mark Littlewood (2008). Gateways to Beijing: a travel guide to Beijing.
Armour Publishing Pte Ltd. p. 182. ISBN 978-981-4222-12-9.
"Summer Palace, an Imperial Garden in Beijing". UNESCO World Heritage Center.
Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
"Temple of Heaven: an Imperial Sacrificial Altar in Beijing". UNESCO World Heritage Center.
Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
(Chinese) [北京地区博物馆名录（截止2008年6月）] 6 January 2009[full citation needed]
"About Beijing". Archived from the original on 29 September 2008.
a b 
"Beijing's Museums & Galleries". Archived from the original on 13 August 2008. Retrieved 19 August 2008.
"Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties". UNESCO World Heritage Center. 10 December 2003. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Peking Man Site at Zhoukoudian". UNESCO World Heritage Center.
Archived from the original on 23 July 2008. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
"The Great Wall". UNESCO World Heritage Center.
Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
Töre, Özgür. "WTTC reveals the world's best performing tourism cities". ftnnews.com.
Archived from the original on 7 August 2021. Retrieved 7 August 2021.
[bare URL PDF]
[bare URL PDF]
[bare URL PDF]
[bare URL PDF]
[bare URL PDF]
"Browse the Lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage and the Register of good safeguarding practices". Intangible Cultural Heritage.
UNESCO.
a b 北京的宗教文化.  中国网 (in Chinese (China)). 11 July 2008. Archived from the original on 16 April 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2015.
Lai, Hongyi.
China's Governance Model: Flexibility and Durability of Pragmatic Authoritarianism.
Routledge, 2016. ISBN 1-317-85952-9. p. 167
China General Social Survey (CGSS) 2009. Report by: Xiuhua Wang (2015, p. 15) Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
Min Junqing.
The Present Situation and Characteristics of Contemporary Islam in China.
JISMOR, 8. 2010 Islam by province, p. 29 Archived 27 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Data from: Yang Zongde, Study on Current Muslim Population in China, Jinan Muslim, 2, 2010.
china dictatorship
平谷轩辕山国际旅游区概念性规划. zsfh.org.
Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2017..
2020世界休闲大会战略规划 – 北京平谷旅游发展重大项目储备规划. fanhuazhida.com.
Archived from the original on 21 January 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2017..
北京市道教协会协会简介. Beijing Taoist Association.
Archived from the original on 14 August 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2015.
伊斯兰教简介 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Ethnic Affairs.
Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2016. Accessed 4 April 2016
北京市清真寺文物等级 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Ethnic Affairs.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. Accessed 4 April 2016
"Beijing's Muslim community celebrates holy month of Ramadan", South China Morning Post, 14 April 2021, archived from the original on 27 October 2021, retrieved 22 May 2021
"China: Beijing's Muslim community gathers for Eid prayers at mosque", Agence France-Presse, 13 May 2021, archived from the original on 27 October 2021, retrieved 22 May 2021
朝阳文化--文化遗产. 24 September 2015. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 21 February 2019.
北京市部分清真寺介绍 (in Chinese (China)). Beijing Bureau of Ethnic Affairs.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. Accessed 4 April 2016
Eric Widmer, The Russian Ecclesiastical Mission in Peking During the Eighteenth Century, p. 23, 1976, ISBN 0-674-78129-5 Google Books Archived 6 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
Brace, Tim (1991). "Popular Music in Contemporary Beijing: Modernism and Cultural Identity". Asian Music. 22 (2): 43–66. doi:10.2307/834306. ISSN 0044-9202. JSTOR 834306.
"Mei Lanfang | Chinese singer, actor, and dancer | Britannica". 
"Mei Lanfang: A Tribute to China's First Global Superstar on the 125th Anniversary of His Birth". RADII | Stories from the center of China's youth culture. 22 October 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2022.
"Mei Lanfang Grand Theater - chinaculture". en.chinaculture.org.
Retrieved 29 March 2022.
Wu, Shellen X. (24 June 2021). "Yuan Longping (1930–2021)". Nature. 595 (7865): 26. Bibcode:2021Natur.595...26W. doi:10.1038/d41586-021-01732-2. S2CID 235633772.
"Yuan Longping, the 'father of hybrid rice': A people's scientist". Institute of Development Studies. 1 June 2021. Retrieved 29 March 2022.
"Cui Jian: Father of China's Rock Music". 
Beijing, Associated Press in (18 January 2014). "Chinese rock star Cui Jian quits new year show over Tiananmen song". The Guardian.
Retrieved 29 March 2022.
a b Sebag-Montefiore, Clarissa (5 June 2014). "Cui Jian, the Godfather of Chinese Rock 'n' Roll, Talks About Tiananmen". The Wall Street Journal.
ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 29 March 2022.
"Yang Jiang, Chinese writer and translator of 'Don Quixote,' dies at 104". The Washington Post. 25 May 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2022.
"领读中国·走进文人｜DAY10：老舍". xw.qq.com (in Chinese). Retrieved 29 March 2022.
"The Life of Lao She, the First People's Writer". That's Online.
Retrieved 29 March 2022.
The Official website of the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup Archived 27 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, FIBA.com, Retrieved 9 March 2016.
Some 350,000 residents were expected to be relocated to make room for the constructions of stadiums for the 2008 Summer Olympics.
Davis, Mike (2006). Planet of Slums.
Verso. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-84467-022-2. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
"Beijing Olympics Bird's Nest ready". BBC News. 28 June 2008. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2008.
"Welcome". chinabandy.org.
Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 10 November 2016.
Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics. "Statistical Communiqué on the National Economy and Social Development of Beijing in 2019". Beijing Stat Bureau.
Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020.
北京市火车站大全. oklx.com.
Archived from the original on 30 March 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Beijingers spend lives on road as traffic congestion worsens". China Daily.
Xinhua News Agency. 6 October 2003. Archived from the original on 24 July 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
"Automobile numbers could be capped". China Daily.
Archived from the original on 9 November 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010.
"Beijing city to have five mln cars on roads by year end". Gasgoo. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2010.
"To Tackle Traffic Jam, Beijing Sets New Car Plate Quota, Limits Out-of-Towners". ChinaAutoWeb.com.
Archived from the original on 28 December 2010. Retrieved 13 January 2011.
"Beijing Standardizes Translations of Road Signs". Shanghai Daily at china.org.cn. 24 March 2006. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 28 October 2018.
北京大兴国际机场正式投运. Xinhua. 25 September 2019. Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019 – via Sina Finance.
首都新机场跑道呈三纵一横分布 规划7条跑道. news.carnoc.com.
Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
"China plans to build world's biggest airport near Beijing". In.news.yahoo.com. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 19 May 2012. Retrieved 31 October 2011.
"Beijing grants three-day visa-free access". TTGmice. 6 December 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 7 December 2012.
"Beijing 72-hour Visa-free" ChinaTour.Net Archived 18 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 6 June 2014
"30 subway lines to cover Beijing by 2020". China Daily. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 August 2010. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
a b c "Beijing to Increase Public Transportation Fare Prices Next Month". english.cri.cn.
Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 24 December 2015.
Watts, Jonathan (24 January 2010). "Campaign to boost cycling in Beijing". The Guardian.
UK. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
Xin, Wen (14 August 2019). "Beijing's first dedicated bike lane eases traffic congestion". China Daily.
Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020.
"Ofo, Mobike, BlueGogo: China's Messy Bikeshare Market". What's on Weibo.
Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 13 August 2017.
北京市自然保护区名录（截至2011年底）. Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People's Republic of China. 24 August 2012. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2013.
北京一级保护野生动物 (in Simplified Chinese). Beijing Wildlife Conservation Association.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2013.
北京二级保护野生动物 (in Simplified Chinese). Beijing Wildlife Conservation Association.
Archived from the original on 26 December 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2013.
Michael Rank, Wild leopards of Beijing, Danwei.org Archived 2 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine 31 July 2007
(Chinese) Beijing Aquatic Wildlife Rescue and Conservation Center Accessed 5 April 2013 Archived 23 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine
70年解密大足鼠耳蝠吃鱼. sxrb.com (in Simplified Chinese). 14 April 2007. Archived from the original on 19 March 2014. Retrieved 19 September 2013.
北京：候鸟翱翔野鸭湖 Xinhua (in Simplified Chinese). 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
a b c 北京开始"清网行动"保护候鸟 森林公安公布举报电话, 北京晚报. qianlong.com (in Simplified Chinese). 30 October 2016. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
Beijing Cuckoo Project Archived 28 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 28 November 2016
"With a Cuckoo's Journey from China, a Mystery is Solved, and Cheers Go Up" N.Y. Times Archived 28 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine 11 November 2016
"北京集中一个月打击非法捕售鸟 抓获36名违法者" 新京报. The Beijing News.
Xinhua News. 31 October 2016. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
a b 首都之窗-北京市政务门户网站-市花市树. eBeijing.gov.cn.
Archived from the original on 13 April 2013.
北京市市树 – 国槐. bjkp.gov.cn. 18 February 2004. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2016.
"AIIB: Who We Are". Archived from the original on 30 September 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
"Silk Road Fund_Overview". Silk Road Fund.
Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2020.
"Shanghai Cooperation Organisation | SCO". eng.sectsco.org.
Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2020.
"Sister cities of Beijing". english.beijing.gov.cn.
Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2020.
"China now has more diplomatic posts than any other country". BBC News. 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 6 September 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2020.
"Foreign Embassies in Beijing". english.beijing.gov.cn.
Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2020.
"EMBASSIES & CONSULATES IN BEIJING". 
Sources
Elliott, Mark C. (2001). The Manchu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late Imperial China.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8047-4684-7. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2009.
Li, Lillian; Dray-Novey, Alison; Kong, Haili (2007). Beijing: From Imperial Capital to Olympic City.
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-4039-6473-1.
MacKerras, Colin; Yorke, Amanda (1991). The Cambridge Handbook of Contemporary China.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-38755-2. Retrieved 22 July 2009. beiping beijing.
Further reading
Cotterell, Arthur. (2007). The Imperial Capitals of China: An Inside View of the Celestial Empire.
London: Pimlico.
ISBN 978-1-84595-009-5. (304 pages){{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: postscript (link)
Bonino, Michele; De Pieri, Filippo (2015). Beijing Danwei: Industrial Heritage in the Contemporary City.
Berlin: Jovis.
ISBN 978-3-86859-382-2. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2015.
Cammelli, Stefano (2004). Storia di Pechino e di come divenne capitale della Cina.
Bologna: Il Mulino.
ISBN 978-88-15-09910-5.
Chen, Gaohua (2015). The Capital of the Yuan Dynasty. [Dadu or Khanbaliq]: Silkroad Press.
ISBN 978-981-4332-44-6, 978-981-4339-55-1 (Print & eBook).
Harper, Damian (2007). Beijing: City Guide (7th ed.). Oakland, California: Lonely Planet Publications.
External links
Beijing  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity
Economic profile for Beijing at HKTDC
Visit Beijing Facebook Page
Photograph of The approach to Peking – outside the walls taken in 1890 by Sir Henry Norman
Preceded byLin'an (Song dynasty)
Capital of China (as Dadu of Yuan) 1264–1368
Succeeded byNanjing (Ming dynasty)
Preceded byNanjing (Ming dynasty)
Capital of China 1420–1928
Succeeded byNanjing (ROC)
Preceded byNanjing (ROC)
Capital of the People's Republic of China 1949–present
Succeeded bypresent capital
Beijing
History
Politics
Geography
Toponym
AdministrationDistricts
Dongcheng
Xicheng
Chaoyang
Haidian
Fengtai
Shijingshan
Mentougou
Fangshan
Tongzhou
Shunyi
Changping
Daxing
Huairou
Pinggu
Miyun
Yanqing
Defunct
Chongwen
Xuanwu
Yanshan
Other
Administrative divisions
Township-level divisions
Economic and technological development zones
Economy
Beijing central business district
Beijing Financial Street
National Equities Exchange and Quotations
Beijing Stock Exchange
Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area
Wangjing Science and Technology Park
China Milan Equity Exchange
China Beijing Equity Exchange
China World Trade Center
Guomao
Education
List of universities
Peking University
Tsinghua University
Beijing Normal University
Renmin University
Transportation
Ring roads
Expressways
Highways
Subway
Suburban Railway
Bus
Airports: Capital International, Daxing International
Major railway stations: Beijing West, Beijing, Beijing South, Beijing North, Beijing East, Beijing Chaoyang, Beijing Fengtai (u/c, opening in April 2022), Qinghe
Visitor attractions
Landmarks
Major National Historical and Cultural Sites)
List of hotels
Museums
Parks in Beijing
Gardens in Beijing
Municipal agencies
Administration of Prisons
Commission of Education
Public Security Bureau (Police Department)
Category
Commons
Capitals of China by jurisdiction
National:
CN Beijing
Provinces:
AH Hefei
FJ Fuzhou
GD Guangzhou
GS Lanzhou
GZ Guiyang
HA Zhengzhou
HB Wuhan
HE Shijiazhuang
HI Haikou
HL Harbin
HN Changsha
JL Changchun
JS Nanjing
JX Nanchang
LN Shenyang
QH Xining
SC Chengdu
SD Jinan
SN Xi'an
SX Taiyuan
TW Taipei¹
YN Kunming
ZJ Hangzhou
Autonomous Regions:
GX Nanning
NM Hohhot
NX Yinchuan
XJ Ürümqi
XZ Lhasa
Municipalities:
BJ Beijing
CQ Chongqing
SH Shanghai
TJ Tianjin
SARs:
HK Hong Kong
MO Macau
¹ — Taiwan is administered as a streamlined province by the Republic of China, but claimed by the PRC.
Places adjacent to Beijing
Zhangjiakou, Hebei
Chengde, Hebei
Beijing
Langfang, Hebei
Baoding, Hebei
Langfang, Hebei
Tianjin
Articles related to Beijing
Provincial-level divisions of ChinaProvinces
Anhui
Fujian
Gansu
Guangdong
Guizhou
Hainan
Hebei
Heilongjiang
Henan
Hubei
Hunan
Jiangsu
Jiangxi
Jilin
Liaoning
Qinghai
Shaanxi
Shandong
Shanxi
Sichuan
Yunnan
Zhejiang
Autonomous regions
Guangxi
Inner Mongolia
Ningxia
Tibet
Xinjiang
Direct-administered municipalities
Beijing
Chongqing
Shanghai
Tianjin
Special administrative regions
Hong Kong
Macao
Disputed province
Taiwan1
Prefectural-level divisions of ChinaNotes: *Provincial capitals, ★Sub-provincial cities, ☆Sub-provincial autonomous prefecture *Sub prefectural-level divisions, ✧"Comparatively larger city [zh]" (较大的市) as approved by the State CouncilProvincesAnhui
*Hefei
Wuhu
Bengbu
Huainan
Ma'anshan
Huaibei
Tongling
Anqing
Huangshan
Chuzhou
Fuyang
Suzhou
Lu'an
Bozhou
Chizhou
Xuancheng
Fujian
*Fuzhou
★Xiamen
Putian
Sanming
Quanzhou
Zhangzhou
Nanping
Longyan
Ningde
Gansu
*Lanzhou
Jiayuguan
Jinchang
Baiyin
Tianshui
Wuwei
Zhangye
Pingliang
Jiuquan
Qingyang
Dingxi
Longnan
Linxia (Hui)
Gannan (Tibetan)
Guangdong
*★Guangzhou
★Shenzhen
Shaoguan
Zhuhai
Shantou
Foshan
Jiangmen
Zhanjiang
Maoming
Zhaoqing
Huizhou
Meizhou
Yangjiang
Shanwei
Heyuan
Qingyuan
Dongguan
Zhongshan
Jieyang
Yunfu
Guizhou
*Guiyang
Liupanshui
Zunyi
Anshun
Bijie
Tongren
Qianxinan (Buyei and Miao)
Qiannan (Buyei and Miao)
Qiandongnan (Miao and Dong)
Hainan
*Haikou
Sanya
Danzhou
Sansha
*Wuzhishan
*Qionghai
*Wenchang
*Wanning
*Dongfang
*Ding'an County
*Tunchang County
*Chengmai County
*Lingao County
*Baisha County (Li)
*Changjiang County (Li)
*Ledong County (Li)
*Lingshui County (Li)
*Baoting County (Li and Miao)
*Qiongzhong County (Li and Miao)
Hebei
*Shijiazhuang
✧Tangshan
Qinhuangdao
Handan
Xingtai
Baoding
Zhangjiakou "Kalgan"
Chengde
Cangzhou
Langfang
Hengshui
Henan
*Zhengzhou
Kaifeng
Luoyang
Pingdingshan
Anyang
Hebi
Xinxiang
Jiaozuo
Puyang
Xuchang
Luohe
Sanmenxia
Nanyang
Shangqiu
Xinyang
Zhoukou
Zhumadian
*Jiyuan
Hubei
*★Wuhan
Huangshi
Shiyan
Yichang
Xiangyang
Ezhou
Jingmen
Xiaogan
Jingzhou
Huanggang
Xianning
Suizhou
Enshi (Tujia and Miao)
*Xiantao
*Qianjiang
*Tianmen
*Shennongjia Forestry District
Heilongjiang
*★Harbin
Qiqihar
Jixi
Hegang
Shuangyashan
Daqing
Yichun
Jiamusi
Qitaihe
Mudanjiang
Heihe
Suihua
Daxing'anling Prefecture
Hunan
*Changsha
Zhuzhou
Xiangtan
Hengyang
Shaoyang
Yueyang
Changde
Zhangjiajie
Yiyang
Chenzhou
Yongzhou
Huaihua
Loudi
Xiangxi (Tujia and Miao)
Jilin
*★Changchun
Jilin
Siping
Liaoyuan
Tonghua
Baishan
Songyuan
Baicheng
Yanbian (Korean)
Jiangsu
*★Nanjing
Wuxi
Xuzhou
Changzhou
✧Suzhou
Nantong
Lianyungang
Huai'an
Yancheng
Yangzhou
Zhenjiang
Taizhou
Suqian
Jiangxi
*Nanchang
Jingdezhen
Pingxiang
Jiujiang
Xinyu
Yingtan
Ganzhou
Ji'an
Yichun
Fuzhou
Shangrao
Liaoning
*★Shenyang
★Dalian
Anshan
Fushun
Benxi
Dandong
Jinzhou
Yingkou
Fuxin
Liaoyang
Panjin
Tieling
Chaoyang
Huludao
Qinghai
*Xining
Haidong
Haibei (Tibetan)
Huangnan (Tibetan)
Hainan (Tibetan)
Golog "Guolog" (Tibetan)
Yushu (Tibetan)
Haixi "Qaidam" (Mongol and Tibetan)
Sichuan
*★Chengdu
Zigong
Panzhihua
Luzhou
Deyang
Mianyang
Guangyuan
Suining
Neijiang
Leshan
Nanchong
Meishan
Yibin
Guang'an
Dazhou
Bazhong
Ziyang
Ya'an
Ngawa "Aba" (Tibetan and Qiang)
Garzê "Ganzi" (Tibetan)
Liangshan (Yi)
Shaanxi
*★Xi'an
Tongchuan
Baoji
Xianyang
Weinan
Yan'an
Hanzhong
Yulin
Ankang
Shangluo
Shandong
*★Jinan
★Qingdao
Zibo
Zaozhuang
Dongying
Yantai
Weifang
Jining
Tai'an
Weihai
Rizhao
Linyi
Dezhou
Liaocheng
Binzhou
Heze
Shanxi
*Taiyuan
Datong
Yangquan
Changzhi
Jincheng
Shuozhou
Jinzhong
Yuncheng
Xinzhou
Linfen
Lüliang
Yunnan
*Kunming
Qujing
Yuxi
Baoshan
Zhaotong
Lijiang
Pu'er
Lincang
Chuxiong (Yi)
Honghe (Hani and Yi)
Wenshan (Zhuang and Miao)
Xishuangbanna (Dai)
Dali (Bai)
Dehong (Dai and Jingpo)
Nujiang (Lisu)
Dêqên (Tibetan)
Zhejiang
*★Hangzhou
★Ningbo
✧Wenzhou
Jiaxing
Huzhou
Shaoxing
Jinhua
Quzhou
Zhoushan
Taizhou
Lishui
Autonomous regionsGuangxi
*Nanning
Liuzhou
Guilin
Wuzhou
Beihai
Fangchenggang
Qinzhou
Guigang
Yulin
Baise
Hezhou
Hechi
Laibin
Chongzuo
Ningxia
*Yinchuan
Shizuishan
Wuzhong
Guyuan
Zhongwei
Inner Mongolia
*Hohhot
✧Baotou
Wuhai
Chifeng "Ulankhad"
Tongliao
Ordos
Hulunbuir
Bayannur "Bayannao'er"
Ulanqab
Hinggan League
Xilingol League
Alxa League "Ālāshàn League"
Xinjiang
*Ürümqi
Karamay
Turpan
Hami
Changji (Hui)
Bortala (Mongol)
Bayingolin (Mongol)
Kizilsu (Kyrgyz)
( ☆Ili (Kazakh)
Tacheng Prefecture
Altay Prefecture )
Aksu Prefecture
Kashgar "Kashi" Prefecture
Hotan Prefecture
*Shihezi
*Aral
*Tumxuk
*Wujiaqu
*Beitun
*Tiemenguan
*Shuanghe
*Kokdala
*Kunyu
*Huyanghe
*Xinxing
Tibet
*Lhasa
Shigatse "Xigazê"
Chamdo "Qamdo"
Nyingchi "Linzhi"
Shannan
Nagqu
Ngari Prefecture
Direct-administered municipalities
Beijing
Tianjin
Shanghai
Chongqing
Special administrative regions
Hong Kong
Macau
See also: List of prefectures in China, List of cities in China
Metropolitan cities of ChinaMajor Metropolitan regions
Jing-Jin-Ji (BJ-TJ-HE)
Yuegang'ao Greater Bay Area (GD-HK-MO)
Yangtze Delta (SH-JS-ZJ)
Zhongyuan
Chengyu
Cross-Strait Western Coast
Guanzhong
Mid-Southern Liaoning
Shandong Peninsula
Yangtze River Midstream (Yangtze River Valley)
Major citiesNational Central Cities
Beijinga
Chongqinga
Guangzhoub2
Shanghaia2
Tianjina2
Special administrative regions
Hong Kong
Macau
Regional Central Cities
Chengdub
Nanjingb
Shenyangb
Shenzhenc1
Wuhanb
Xi'anb
Sub-provincial cities
Changchunb
Chengdub
Dalianc2
Guangzhoub2
Hangzhoub
Harbinb
Jinanb
Nanjingb
Ningboc2
Qingdaoc2
Shenyangb
Shenzhenc1
Wuhanb
Xiamenc1
Xi'anb
Provincial capitals(Prefecture-level)
Changsha
Fuzhou2
Guiyang
Haikou
Hefei
Kunming
Lanzhou
Nanchang
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan
Xining
Zhengzhou
Taibei5
Autonomous regional capitals
Hohhot
Lhasa
Nanning
Ürümqi
Yinchuan
Comparatively large cities
Anshan
Baotou
Benxi
Datong
Fushun
Jiujiang
Handan
Huainan
Jilin
Luoyang
Qiqihar
Suzhou
Tangshan
Wuxi
Xuzhou
Zibo
Prefecture-level cities by ProvinceHebei
Shijiazhuang*
Tangshan*
Qinhuangdao2
Handan*
Xingtai
Baoding
Zhangjiakou
Chengde
Cangzhou
Langfang
Hengshui
Shanxi
Taiyuan*
Datong*
Yangquan
Changzhi
Jincheng
Shuozhou
Jinzhong
Yuncheng
Xinzhou
Linfen
Lüliang
Inner Mongolia
Hohhot*
Baotou*
Wuhai
Chifeng
Tongliao
Ordos
Hulunbuir
Bayannur
Ulanqab
Liaoning
Shenyang*
Dalian*
Anshan*
Fushun*
Benxi*
Dandong
Jinzhou
Yingkou
Fuxin
Liaoyang
Panjin
Tieling
Chaoyang
Huludao
Jilin
Changchun*
Jilin
Siping
Liaoyuan
Tonghua
Baishan
Songyuan
Baicheng
Heilongjiang
Harbin*
Qiqihar*
Jixi
Hegang
Shuangyashan
Daqing
Yīchun
Jiamusi
Qitaihe
Mudanjiang
Heihe
Suihua
Jiangsu
Nanjing*
Wuxi*
Xuzhou*
Changzhou
Suzhou*
Nantong
Lianyungang2
Huai'an
Yancheng
Yangzhou
Zhenjiang
Tàizhou
Suqian
Zhejiang
Hangzhou*
Ningbo*
Wenzhou2
Jiaxing
Huzhou
Shaoxing
Jinhua
Quzhou
Zhoushan
Tāizhou
Lishui
Anhui
Hefei*
Wuhu
Bengbu
Huainan*
Ma'anshan
Huaibei
Tongling
Anqing
Huangshan
Chuzhou
Fuyang
Sùzhou
Lu'an
Bozhou
Chizhou
Xuancheng
Fujian
Fuzhou*
Xiamen*
Putian
Sanming
Quanzhou
Zhangzhou
Nanping
Longyan
Ningde
Jiangxi
Nanchang*
Jingdezhen
Pingxiang
Jiujiang
Xinyu
Yingtan
Ganzhou
Ji'an
Yíchun
Fǔzhou
Shangrao
Shandong
Jinan*
Qingdao*
Zibo*
Zaozhuang
Dongying
Yantai2
Weifang
Jining
Tai'an
Weihai
Rizhao
Laiwu
Linyi
Dezhou
Liaocheng
Binzhou
Heze
Henan
Zhengzhou*
Kaifeng
Luoyang*
Pingdingshan
Anyang
Hebi
Xinxiang
Jiaozuo
Puyang
Xuchang
Luohe
Sanmenxia
Nanyang
Shangqiu
Xinyang
Zhoukou
Zhumadian
Hubei
Wuhan*
Huangshi
Shiyan
Yichang
Xiangyang
Ezhou
Jingmen
Xiaogan
Jinzhou
Huanggang
Xianning
Suizhou
Hunan
Changsha*
Zhuzhou
Xiangtan
Hengyang
Shaoyang
Yueyang
Changde
Zhangjiajie
Yiyang
Chenzhou
Yongzhou
Huaihua
Loudi
Guangdong
Guangzhou*
Shaoguan
Shenzhen*
Zhuhai1
Shantou1
Foshan
Jiangmen
Zhanjiang2
Maoming
Zhaoqing
Huizhou
Meizhou
Shanwei
Heyuan
Yangjiang
Qingyuan
Dongguan
Zhongshan
Chaozhou
Jieyang
Yunfu
Guangxi
Nanning*
Liuzhou
Guilin
Wuzhou
Beihai2
Fangchenggang
Qinzhou
Guigang
Yùlin
Baise
Hezhou
Hechi
Laibin
Chongzuo
Hainan1
Haikou*
Sanya
Sansha4
Danzhou
Sichuan
Chengdu*
Zigong
Panzhihua
Luzhou
Deyang
Mianyang
Guangyuan
Suining
Neijiang
Leshan
Nanchong
Meishan
Yibin
Guang'an
Dazhou
Ya'an
Bazhong
Ziyang
Guizhou
Guiyang*
Liupanshui
Zunyi
Anshun
Bijie
Tongren
Yunnan
Kunming*
Qujing
Yuxi
Baoshan
Zhaotong
Lijiang
Pu'er
Lincang
Tibet
Lhasa*
Shigatse
Chamdo
Nyingchi
Shannan
Shaanxi
Xi'an*
Tongchuan
Baoji
Xianyang
Weinan
Yan'an
Hanzhong
Yúlin
Ankang
Shangluo
Gansu
Lanzhou*
Jiayuguan
Jinchang
Baiyin
Tianshui
Wuwei
Zhangye
Pingliang
Jiuquan
Qingyang
Dingxi
Longnan
Qinghai
Xining*
Haidong
Ningxia
Yinchuan*
Shizuishan
Wuzhong
Guyuan
Zhongwei
Xinjiang
Ürümqi*
Karamay
Turpan
Hami
Taiwan5
(none)
Other cities (partly shown below)Prefecture-level capitals(County-level)
(Inner Mongolia: Ulanhot
Xilinhot)
Jiagedaqi3, Heilongjiang
Enshi, Hubei
Jishou, Hunan
(Sichuan：Xichang
Kangding
Barkam)
(Guizhou: Xingyi
Kaili
Duyun)
(Yunnan: Chuxiong
Mengzi
Wenshan
Jinghong
Dali
Mangshi
Shangri-La
Lushui)
(Gansu: Linxia
Hezuo)
(Qinghai: Yushu
Delingha)
(Xinjiang: Changji
Bole
Korla
Yining
Artux
Aksu
Kashgar1
Hotan
Tacheng
Altay)
Province-governed cities(Sub-prefecture-level)
Jiyuan, Henan
(Hubei: Xiantao
Qiánjiang
Tianmen
Shennongjia)
(Hainan1: Wuzhishan
Qionghai
Wenchang
Wanning
Dongfang)
(Xinjiang - XPCC(Bingtuan) cities: Shihezi
Aral
Tumxuk
Wujiaqu
Beitun
Tiemenguan
Shuanghe
Kokdala
Kunyu)
Former Prefecture-level cities
Chaohu, Anhui
Yumen，Gansu
Dongchuan, Yunnan
Shashi, Hubei
(Sichuan: Fuling
Wanxian)
(Jilin: Meihekou
Gongzhuling)
Sub-prefecture-level cities(Prefecture-governed)
Qian'an, Hebei
Manzhouli, Inner Mongolia
Erenhot, Inner Mongolia
Golmud, Qinghai
County-level cities by ProvinceHebei
Xinji
Jinzhou
Xinle
Zunhua
Qian'an*
Wu'an
Nangong
Shahe
Zhuozhou
Dingzhou
Anguo
Gaobeidian
Botou
Renqiu
Huanghua
Hejian
Bazhou
Sanhe
Shenzhou
Shanxi
Gujiao
Lucheng
Gaoping
Jiexiu
Yongji
Hejin
Yuanping
Houma
Huozhou
Xiaoyi
Fenyang
Inner Mongolia
Holingol
Manzhouli*
Yakeshi
Zhalantun
Ergun
Genhe
Fengzhen
Ulanhot*
Arxan
Erenhot*
Xilinhot*
Liaoning
Xinmin
Wafangdian
Zhuanghe
Haicheng
Donggang
Fengcheng
Linghai
Beizhen
Gaizhou
Dashiqiao
Dengta
Diaobingshan
Kaiyuan
Beipiao
Lingyuan
Xingcheng
Jilin
Yushu
Dehui
Jiaohe
Huadian
Shulan
Panshi
Gongzhuling
Shuangliao
Meihekou
Ji'an
Linjiang
Fuyu
Taonan
Da'an
Yanji
Tumen
Dunhua
Hunchun
Longjing
Helong
Heilongjiang
Shangzhi
Wuchang
Nehe
Hulin
Mishan
Tieli
Tongjiang
Fujin
Fuyuan
Suifenhe
Hailin
Ning'an
Muling
Dongning
Bei'an
Wudalianchi
Anda
Zhaodong
Hailun
Jiangsu
Jiangyin
Yixing
Xinyi
Pizhou
Liyang
Changshu
Zhangjiagang
Kunshan
Taicang
Qidong
Rugao
Haimen
Dongtai
Yizheng
Gaoyou
Danyang
Yangzhong
Jurong
Jingjiang
Taixing
Xinghua
Zhejiang
Jiande
Lin'an
Yuyao
Cixi
Fenghua
Rui'an
Yueqing
Haining
Pinghu
Tongxiang
Zhuji
Shengzhou
Lanxi
Yiwu
Dongyang
Yongkang
Jiangshan
Wenling
Linhai
Longquan
Anhui
Chaohu
Jieshou
Tongcheng
Tianchang
Mingguang
Ningguo
Fujian
Fuqing
Changle
Yong'an
Shishi
Jinjiang
Nan'an
Longhai
Shaowu
Wuyishan
Jian'ou
Zhangping
Fu'an
Fuding
Jiangxi
Leping
Ruichang
Gongqingcheng
Lushan
Guixi
Ruijin
Jinggangshan
Fengcheng
Zhangshu
Gao'an
Dexing
Shandong
Zhangqiu
Jiaozhou
Jimo
Pingdu
Laixi
Tengzhou
Longkou
Laiyang
Laizhou
Penglai
Zhaoyuan
Qixia
Haiyang
Qingzhou
Zhucheng
Shouguang
Anqiu
Gaomi
Changyi
Qufu
Zoucheng
Xintai
Feicheng
Rongcheng
Rushan
Laoling
Yucheng
Linqing
Henan
Gongyi
Xingyang
Xinmi
Xinzheng
Dengfeng
Yanshi
Wugang
Ruzhou
Linzhou
Weihui
Huixian
Qinyang
Mengzhou
Yuzhou
Changge
Yima
Lingbao
Dengzhou
Yongcheng
Xiangcheng
Jiyuan*
Hubei
Daye
Danjiangkou
Yidu
Dangyang
Zhijiang
Laohekou
Zaoyang
Yicheng
Zhongxiang
Yingcheng
Anlu
Hanchuan
Shishou
Honghu
Songzi
Macheng
Wuxue
Chibi
Guangshui
Enshi*
Lichuan
Xiantao*
Qianjiang*
Tianmen*
Hunan
Liuyang
Liling
Xiangxiang
Shaoshan
Leiyang
Changning
Wugang
Miluo
Linxiang
Jinshi
Yuanjiang
Zixing
Hongjiang
Lengshuijiang
Lianyuan
Jishou*
Guangdong
Lechang
Nanxiong
Taishan
Kaiping
Heshan
Enping
Lianjiang
Leizhou
Wuchuan
Gaozhou
Huazhou
Xinyi
Sihui
Xingning
Lufeng
Yangchun
Yingde
Lianzhou
Puning
Luoding
Guangxi
Cenxi
Dongxing
Guiping
Beiliu
Jingxi
Yizhou
Heshan
Pingxiang
Hainan
Wuzhishan*
Qionghai*
Wenchang*
Wanning*
Dongfang*
Sichuan
Dujiangyan
Pengzhou
Qionglai
Chongzhou
Jianyang
Guanghan
Shifang
Mianzhu
Jiangyou
Emeishan
Langzhong
Huaying
Wanyuan
Barkam*
Kangding*
Xichang*
Guizhou
Qingzhen
Chishui
Renhuai
Xingyi*
Kaili*
Duyun*
Fuquan
Yunnan
Anning
Xuanwei
Tengchong
Chuxiong*
Mengzi*
Gejiu
Kaiyuan
Mile
Wenshan*
Jinghong*
Dali*
Ruili
Mangshi*
Lushui*
Shangri-La*
Tibet
(none)
Shaanxi
Xingping
Hancheng
Huayin
Gansu
Yumen
Dunhuang
Linxia*
Hezuo*
Qinghai
Yushu*
Golmud*
Delingha*
Ningxia
Lingwu
Qingtongxia
Xinjiang
Changji*
Fukang
Bole*
Alashankou
Korla*
Aksu*
Artux*
Kashgar*
Hotan*
Yining*
Kuytun
Korgas
Tacheng*
Wusu
Altay*
Shihezi*
Aral*
Tumxuk*
Wujiaqu*
Beitun*
Tiemenguan*
Shuanghe*
Kokdala*
Kunyu*
Taiwan5
(none)
Notes* Indicates this city has already occurred above.
aDirect-administered Municipalities.
bSub-provincial cities as provincial capitals.
cSeparate state-planning cities.
Disputed by Oroqen Autonomous Banner, Hulunbuir, Inner Mongolia as part of it.
See Template:Administrative divisions of Taiwan instead.
All provincial capitals are listed first in prefecture-level cities by province.
Capitals of AsiaDependent territories and states with limited recognition are in italicsCentral AsiaSouth AsiaSoutheast AsiaWestern Asia
Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
Astana, Kazakhstan
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
Dushanbe, Tajikistan
Tashkent, Uzbekistan
East Asia
Beijing, China
Pyongyang, North Korea
Seoul, South Korea
Taipei, Taiwan
Tokyo, Japan
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia
Camp Justice, BIOT (UK) *
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Islamabad, Pakistan
Kabul, Afghanistan
Kathmandu, Nepal
Malé, Maldives
New Delhi, India
Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Sri Lanka
Thimphu, Bhutan
Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
Bangkok, Thailand
Dili, East Timor
Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island (Australia)
Hanoi, Vietnam
Jakarta, Indonesia
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Manila, Philippines
Naypyidaw, Myanmar
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Singapore
Vientiane, Laos
West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia)
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Amman, Jordan
Ankara, Turkey
Baghdad, Iraq
Baku, Azerbaijan
Beirut, Lebanon
Damascus, Syria
Doha, Qatar
Episkopi Cantonment, Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK) *
Jerusalem, Israel (de facto) *
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Manama, Bahrain
Muscat, Oman
Nicosia, Cyprus
North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus *
Ramallah, Palestine (de facto) *
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Sanaa, Yemen
Stepanakert, Artsakh *
Sukhumi, Abkhazia *
Tbilisi, Georgia
Tehran, Iran
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia *
Yerevan, Armenia
* Disputed.
See: Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute, Cyprus dispute, Status of Jerusalem, Artsakh-Azerbaijani conflict, Abkhaz-Georgian conflict and Georgian-Ossetian conflict
Museums in Beijing
Palace Museum
National Museum of China
National Art Museum of China
China Millennium Monument
China Railway Museum
China Science and Technology Museum
Geological Museum of China
Paleozoological Museum of China
Chinese Aviation Museum
Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution
Museum of the War of Chinese People's Resistance Against Japanese Aggression
Beijing Ancient Observatory
Beijing Exhibition Center
Beijing Liao and Jin City Wall Museum
Beijing Museum of Natural History
Beijing Planetarium
Beijing Art Museum
Capital Museum
Cultural Palace of Nationalities
Dabaotai Western Han Dynasty Mausoleum
Guanfu Museum
Prince Gong Mansion
Today Art Museum
Tuancheng Fortress
Western Zhou Yan State Capital Museum
Yuan Center
Summer Olympic Games host cities
Louis
[c1] Cancelled due to World War I; [c2] Cancelled due to World War II; [c3] Postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic
Summer Paralympic Games host cities
Winter Olympic Games host cities
Moritz
Moritz
[c1] Cancelled due to World War II
Olympic Games portal
Winter Paralympic Games host cities
Host cities of Asian GamesSummer
Winter
Host cities of the World Athletics Championships
World's 50 most-populous urban areas   
TokyoJakartaDelhiManilaSeoulMumbaiShanghaiNew YorkSão PauloMexico City
Guangzhou–FoshanShenzhenBeijingDhakaOsaka–Kobe–KyotoCairoMoscowBangkokLos AngelesKolkata
LagosBuenos AiresKarachiIstanbulTehranTianjinKinshasa–BrazzavilleChengduRio de JaneiroLahore
LimaBangaloreParisHo Chi Minh CityLondonBogotáChennaiNagoyaHyderabadJohannesburg
ChicagoTaipeiWuhanDongguanHanoiChongqingOnitshaKuala LumpurAhmedabadLuanda
MegacitiesAfrica (3)
Cairo
Kinshasa
Lagos
Asia (28)
Bangalore
Bangkok
Beijing
Chengdu
Chennai
Chongqing
Delhi
Dhaka
Guangzhou
Hangzhou
Ho Chi Minh City
Hyderabad
Istanbul
Jakarta
Karachi
Kolkata
Kyoto–Osaka–Kobe (Keihanshin)
Lahore
Metro Manila
Mumbai
Nagoya
Seoul
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Tehran
Tianjin
Tokyo
Xiamen
Europe (5)
Istanbul
London
Moscow
Paris
Rhine-Ruhr
North America (3)
Los Angeles
Mexico City
New York City
South America (5)
Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Lima
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Cities portal
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 22:06 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
