Brazil - Wikipedia
Brazil
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Country in South America
"Brazilian Republic" redirects here.
For other uses, see Brazil (disambiguation) and Brazilian Republic (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 10°S 52°W﻿ / ﻿10°S 52°W﻿ / -10; -52
Federative Republic of BrazilRepública Federativa do Brasil (Portuguese)
Flag
Coat of arms
Motto: Ordem e Progresso (Portuguese)"Order and Progress"Anthem: Hino Nacional Brasileiro (Portuguese)"Brazilian National Anthem"Flag anthem: Hino à Bandeira Nacional (Portuguese)"National Flag Anthem"National sealSelo Nacional do BrasilNational Seal of Brazil CapitalBrasília15°47′S 47°52′W﻿ / ﻿15.783°S 47.867°W﻿ / -15.783; -47.867Largest citySão Paulo23°33′S 46°38′W﻿ / ﻿23.550°S 46.633°W﻿ / -23.550; -46.633Official languageand national languagePortugueseEthnic groups  (2010)47.73% White[a]43.13% Pardo[b]7.61% Black1.09% East Asian[c]0.43% IndigenousReligion  (2010)88.8% Christianity—64.6% Roman Catholic—22.2% Protestant—2.0% Other Christian8.0% No religion2.0% Spiritism1.2% OtherDemonym(s)BrazilianGovernmentFederal presidential constitutional republic• President Jair Bolsonaro• Vice President Hamilton Mourão• President of theChamber of Deputies Arthur Lira• President of the Federal Senate Rodrigo Pacheco• President of theSupreme Federal Court Rosa Weber
LegislatureNational Congress• Upper houseFederal Senate• Lower houseChamber of DeputiesIndependence from Portugal• Declared 7 September 1822• Recognized 29 August 1825• Republic 15 November 1889• Current constitution 5 October 1988
Area • Total8,515,767 km2 (3,287,956 sq mi) (5th)• Water (%)0.65Population• 2022 estimate217,240,060 (7th)• Density25/km2 (64.7/sq mi) (193rd)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate• Total $3.680 trillion (9th)• Per capita $17,208 (88th)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate• Total $1.833 trillion (10th)• Per capita $8,570 (104th)Gini (2019) 53.4high · 10thHDI (2021) 0.754high · 87thCurrencyReal (R$) (BRL)Time zoneUTC−2 to −5 (BRT)Date formatdd/mm/yyyy (CE)Driving siderightCalling code+55ISO 3166 codeBRInternet TLD.br
Brazil (Portuguese: Brasil; Brazilian Portuguese: [bɾaˈziw]),[nt 1] officially the Federative Republic of Brazil (Portuguese: República Federativa do Brasil), is the largest country in both South America and Latin America.
At 8.5 million square kilometers (3,300,000 sq mi) and with over 214 million people, Brazil is the world's fifth-largest country by area and the seventh most populous.
Its capital is Brasília, and its most populous city is São Paulo.
The federation is composed of the union of the 26 states and the Federal District.
It is the largest country to have Portuguese as an official language and the only one in the Americas; one of the most multicultural and ethnically diverse nations, due to over a century of mass immigration from around the world; and the most populous Roman Catholic-majority country.
Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Brazil has a coastline of 7,491 kilometers (4,655 mi). It borders all other countries and territories in South America except Ecuador and Chile and covers 47.3% of the continent's land area.
Its Amazon basin includes a vast tropical forest, home to diverse wildlife, a variety of ecological systems, and extensive natural resources spanning numerous protected habitats.
This unique environmental heritage makes Brazil one of 17 megadiverse countries, and is the subject of significant global interest, as environmental degradation through processes like deforestation has direct impacts on global issues like climate change and biodiversity loss.
The territory which would become known as Brazil was inhabited by numerous tribal nations prior to the landing in 1500 of explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral, who claimed the discovered land for the Portuguese Empire.
Brazil remained a Portuguese colony until 1808 when the capital of the empire was transferred from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.
In 1815, the colony was elevated to the rank of kingdom upon the formation of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves.
Independence was achieved in 1822 with the creation of the Empire of Brazil, a unitary state governed under a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary system.
The ratification of the first constitution in 1824 led to the formation of a bicameral legislature, now called the National Congress.
Slavery was abolished in 1888. The country became a presidential republic in 1889 following a military coup d'état.
An authoritarian military junta came to power in 1964 and ruled until 1985, after which civilian governance resumed.
Brazil's current constitution, formulated in 1988, defines it as a democratic federal republic.
Due to its rich culture and history, the country ranks thirteenth in the world by number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
Brazil is a regional and middle power, and is also classified as an emerging power.
It is considered an advanced emerging economy, having the twelfth largest GDP in the world by nominal, and ninth by PPP measures, the largest in Latin America.
As an upper-middle income economy by the World Bank and a newly industrialized country, Brazil has the largest share of global wealth in South America and it is one of the world's major breadbaskets, being the largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years.
However, the country maintains noticeable amounts of corruption, crime and social inequality.
Brazil is a founding member of the United Nations, the G20, BRICS, Mercosul, Organization of American States, Organization of Ibero-American States and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.
Contents
Etymology
Main article: Name of Brazil
The word "Brazil" likely comes from the Portuguese word for brazilwood, a tree that once grew plentifully along the Brazilian coast.
In Portuguese, brazilwood is called pau-brasil, with the word brasil commonly given the etymology "red like an ember," formed from brasa ("ember") and the suffix -il (from -iculum or -ilium). As brazilwood produces a deep red dye, it was highly valued by the European textile industry and was the earliest commercially exploited product from Brazil.
Throughout the 16th century, massive amounts of brazilwood were harvested by indigenous peoples (mostly Tupi) along the Brazilian coast, who sold the timber to European traders (mostly Portuguese, but also French) in return for assorted European consumer goods.
The official Portuguese name of the land, in original Portuguese records, was the "Land of the Holy Cross" (Terra da Santa Cruz), but European sailors and merchants commonly called it simply the "Land of Brazil" (Terra do Brasil) because of the brazilwood trade.
The popular appellation eclipsed and eventually supplanted the official Portuguese name.
Some early sailors called it the "Land of Parrots."
In the Guarani language, an official language of Paraguay, Brazil is called "Pindorama". This was the name the indigenous population gave to the region, meaning "land of the palm trees."
History
Main article: History of Brazil
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Brazilian history.
Pre-Cabraline era
Rock art at Serra da Capivara National Park, one of the largest and oldest concentrations of prehistoric sites in the Americas.
Some of the earliest human remains found in the Americas, Luzia Woman, were found in the area of Pedro Leopoldo, Minas Gerais and provide evidence of human habitation going back at least 11,000 years. 
The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere was excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil and radiocarbon dated to 8,000 years ago (6000 BC). The pottery was found near Santarém and provides evidence that the tropical forest region supported a complex prehistoric culture.
The Marajoara culture flourished on Marajó in the Amazon delta from AD 400 to 1400, developing sophisticated pottery, social stratification, large populations, mound building, and complex social formations such as chiefdoms.
Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of current day Brazil had an estimated indigenous population of 7 million people, mostly semi-nomadic, who subsisted on hunting, fishing, gathering, and migrant agriculture.
The indigenous population of Brazil comprised several large indigenous ethnic groups (e.g., the Tupis, Guaranis, Gês, and Arawaks). The Tupí people were subdivided into the Tupiniquins and Tupinambás, and there were also many subdivisions of the other groups.
Before the arrival of the Europeans, the boundaries between these groups and their subgroups were marked by wars that arose from differences in culture, language and moral beliefs.
These wars also involved large-scale military actions on land and water, with cannibalistic rituals on prisoners of war.
While heredity had some weight, leadership was a status more won over time than assigned in succession ceremonies and conventions.
Slavery among the Indians had a different meaning than it had for Europeans, since it originated from a diverse socioeconomic organization, in which asymmetries were translated into kinship relations.
Portuguese colonization
Main articles: Colonial Brazil, War of the Emboabas, and Inconfidência Mineira
Depiction of Pedro Álvares Cabral landing in Porto Seguro in 1500, ushering in more than 300 years of Portuguese rule of Colonial Brazil.
Following the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, the land now called Brazil was claimed for the Portuguese Empire on 22 April 1500, with the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral.
The Portuguese encountered indigenous peoples divided into several tribes, most of whom spoke languages of the Tupi–Guarani family and fought among themselves.
Though the first settlement was founded in 1532, colonization effectively began in 1534, when King John III of Portugal divided the territory into the fifteen private and autonomous Captaincy Colonies of Brazil.
However, the decentralized and unorganized tendencies of the captaincy colonies proved problematic, and in 1549 the Portuguese king restructured them into the Governorate General of Brazil in the city of Salvador, which became the capital of a single and centralized Portuguese colony in South America.
In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other.
By the mid-16th century, cane sugar had become Brazil's most important export, while slaves purchased in Sub-Saharan Africa in the slave market of Western Africa (not only those from Portuguese allies of their colonies in Angola and Mozambique), had become its largest import, to cope with plantations of sugarcane, due to increasing international demand for Brazilian sugar.
Portuguese Brazil received more than 2.8 million slaves from Africa between the years of 1500 to 1800.
Painting showing the arrest of Tiradentes; he was sentenced to death for his involvement in the best known movement for independence in Colonial Brazil.
Painting of 1914.
By the end of the 17th century, sugarcane exports began to decline and the discovery of gold by bandeirantes in the 1690s would become the new backbone of the colony's economy, fostering a Brazilian Gold Rush which attracted thousands of new settlers to Brazil from Portugal and all Portuguese colonies around the world.
This increased level of immigration in turn caused some conflicts between newcomers and old settlers.
Portuguese expeditions known as Bandeiras gradually advanced the Portugal colonial original frontiers in South America to approximately the current Brazilian borders.
In this era other European powers tried to colonize parts of Brazil, in incursions that the Portuguese had to fight, notably the French in Rio during the 1560s, in Maranhão during the 1610s, and the Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco, during the Dutch–Portuguese War, after the end of Iberian Union.
The Portuguese colonial administration in Brazil had two objectives that would ensure colonial order and the monopoly of Portugal's wealthiest and largest colony: to keep under control and eradicate all forms of slave rebellion and resistance, such as the Quilombo of Palmares, and to repress all movements for autonomy or independence, such as the Minas Conspiracy.
United Kingdom with Portugal
Main article: United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves
The Acclamation of King João VI of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves in Rio de Janeiro, 6 February 1818
In late 1807, Spanish and Napoleonic forces threatened the security of continental Portugal, causing Prince Regent João, in the name of Queen Maria I, to move the royal court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.
There they established some of Brazil's first financial institutions, such as its local stock exchanges and its National Bank, additionally ending the Portuguese monopoly on Brazilian trade and opening Brazil to other nations.
In 1809, in retaliation for being forced into exile, the Prince Regent ordered the Portuguese conquest of French Guiana.
With the end of the Peninsular War in 1814, the courts of Europe demanded that Queen Maria I and Prince Regent João return to Portugal, deeming it unfit for the head of an ancient European monarchy to reside in a colony.
In 1815, to justify continuing to live in Brazil, where the royal court had thrived for six years, the Crown established the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves, thus creating a pluricontinental transatlantic monarchic state.
However, the leadership in Portugal, resentful of the new status of its larger colony, continued to demand the return of the court to Lisbon (see Liberal Revolution of 1820). In 1821, acceding to the demands of revolutionaries who had taken the city of Porto, João VI departed for Lisbon.
There he swore an oath to the new constitution, leaving his son, Prince Pedro de Alcântara, as Regent of the Kingdom of Brazil.
Independent empire
Main articles: Independence of Brazil and Empire of Brazil
Declaration of the Brazilian independence by Prince Pedro (later Emperor Pedro I) on 7 September 1822.
Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased and the Portuguese Cortes, guided by the new political regime imposed by the Liberal Revolution, tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony.
The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them, declaring the country's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822. A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the royal title of Dom Pedro I, resulting in the founding of the Empire of Brazil.
The Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along this process, spread through the northern, northeastern regions and in Cisplatina province.
The last Portuguese soldiers surrendered on 8 March 1824; Portugal officially recognized Brazilian independence on 29 August 1825.
On 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissent with both liberal and conservative sides of politics, including an attempt of republican secession and unreconciled to the way that absolutists in Portugal had given in the succession of King John VI, Pedro I went to Portugal to reclaim his daughter's crown after abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (who thus became the Empire's second monarch, with the royal title of Dom Pedro II).
Pedro II, Emperor of Brazil between 1831 and 1889.
As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he came of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly.
In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, such as the Cabanagem in Grão-Pará Province, the Malê Revolt in Salvador da Bahia, the Balaiada (Maranhão), the Sabinada (Bahia), and the Ragamuffin War, which began in Rio Grande do Sul and was supported by Giuseppe Garibaldi.
These emerged from the dissatisfaction of the provinces with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar to a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state.
This period of internal political and social upheaval, which included the Praieira revolt in Pernambuco, was overcome only at the end of the 1840s, years after the end of the regency, which occurred with the premature coronation of Pedro II in 1841.
During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate centered on the issue of slavery.
The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850, as a result of the British Aberdeen Act, but only in May 1888, after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished with the approval of the Golden Law.
The foreign-affairs policies of the monarchy dealt with issues with the countries of the Southern Cone with whom Brazil had borders.
Long after the Cisplatine War that resulted in the independence of Uruguay, Brazil won three international wars during the 58-year reign of Pedro II. These were the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War, the largest war effort in Brazilian history.
Although there was no desire among the majority of Brazilians to change the country's form of government, on 15 November 1889, in disagreement with the majority of the Imperial Army officers, as well as with rural and financial elites (for different reasons), the monarchy was overthrown by a military coup.
A few days later, the national flag was replaced with a new design that included the national motto "Ordem e Progresso", influenced by positivism. 15 November is now Republic Day, a national holiday.
Early republic
Main articles: First Brazilian Republic, Vargas Era § Estado Novo, and Second Brazilian Republic
Proclamation of the Republic, 1893, oil on canvas by Benedito CalixtoGetúlio Vargas (center) during the Revolution of 1930
The early republican government was nothing more than a military dictatorship, with the army dominating affairs both in Rio de Janeiro and in the states.
Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power.
Not until 1894, following an economic crisis and a military one, did civilians take power, remaining there until October 1930.
If in relation to its foreign policy, the country in this first republican period maintained a relative balance characterized by a success in resolving border disputes with neighboring countries, only broken by the Acre War (1899–1902) and its involvement in World War I (1914–1918), followed by a failed attempt to exert a prominent role in the League of Nations; Internally, from the crisis of Encilhamento and the Armada Revolts, a prolonged cycle of financial, political and social instability began until the 1920s, keeping the country besieged by various rebellions, both civilian and military.
Little by little, a cycle of general instability sparked by these crises undermined the regime to such an extent that in the wake of the murder of his running mate, the defeated opposition presidential candidate Getúlio Vargas, supported by most of the military, successfully led the Revolution of 1930. Vargas and the military were supposed to assume power temporarily, but instead closed down Congress, extinguished the Constitution, ruled with emergency powers and replaced the states' governors with his own supporters.
Soldiers of the FEB, the only Latin American military force in World War II, in Massarosa, Italy, 1944.
In the 1930s, three failed attempts to remove Vargas and his supporters from power occurred.
The first was the Constitutionalist Revolution in 1932, led by the Paulista oligarchy.
The second was a Communist uprising in November 1935, and the last one a putsch attempt by local fascists in May 1938. The 1935 uprising created a security crisis in which Congress transferred more power to the executive branch.
The 1937 coup d'état resulted in the cancellation of the 1938 election and formalized Vargas as dictator, beginning the Estado Novo era.
During this period, government brutality and censorship of the press increased.
Throughout World War II, Brazil remained neutral until August 1942 Brazil suffered retaliation by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in a strategic dispute over the South Atlantic, and, therefore, entered on the allied side.
In addition to its participation in the battle of the Atlantic, Brazil also sent an expeditionary force to fight in the Italian campaign.
With the Allied victory in 1945 and the end of the fascist regimes in Europe, Vargas's position became unsustainable and he was swiftly overthrown in another military coup, with democracy "reinstated" by the same army that had ended it 15 years earlier.
Vargas committed suicide in August 1954 amid a political crisis, after having returned to power by election in 1950.
Contemporary era
Main articles: Military dictatorship in Brazil and History of Brazil since 1985
Construction of the building of National Congress of Brazil in Brasília, the new capital, 1959M41s along the Avenida Presidente Vargas during the military government
Several brief interim governments followed Vargas's suicide.
Juscelino Kubitschek became president in 1956 and assumed a conciliatory posture towards the political opposition that allowed him to govern without major crises.
The economy and industrial sector grew remarkably, but his greatest achievement was the construction of the new capital city of Brasília, inaugurated in 1960. Kubitschek's successor, Jânio Quadros, resigned in 1961 less than a year after taking office.
His vice-president, João Goulart, assumed the presidency, but aroused strong political opposition and was deposed in April 1964 by a coup that resulted in a military dictatorship.
The new regime was intended to be transitory but gradually closed in on itself and became a full dictatorship with the promulgation of the Fifth Institutional Act in 1968. Oppression was not limited to those who resorted to guerrilla tactics to fight the regime, but also reached institutional opponents, artists, journalists and other members of civil society, inside and outside the country through the infamous "Operation Condor". Like other brutal authoritarian regimes, due to an economic boom, known as an "economic miracle", the regime reached a peak in popularity in the early 1970s.
Slowly, however, the wear and tear of years of dictatorial power that had not slowed the repression, even after the defeat of the leftist guerrillas, plus the inability to deal with the economic crises of the period and popular pressure, made an opening policy inevitable, which from the regime side was led by Generals Ernesto Geisel and Golbery do Couto e Silva.
With the enactment of the Amnesty Law in 1979, Brazil began a slow return to democracy, which was completed during the 1980s.
Ulysses Guimarães holding the Constitution of 1988 in his hands
Coin of 1 real commemorating 25 years of Real Plan, which brought stability to the Brazilian economy after years of hyperinflation.
Civilians returned to power in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency.
He became unpopular during his tenure through failure to control the economic crisis and hyperinflation he inherited from the military regime.
Sarney's unsuccessful government led to the election in 1989 of the almost-unknown Fernando Collor, subsequently impeached by the National Congress in 1992. Collor was succeeded by his vice-president, Itamar Franco, who appointed Fernando Henrique Cardoso Minister of Finance.
In 1994, Cardoso produced a highly successful Plano Real, that, after decades of failed economic plans made by previous governments attempting to curb hyperinflation, finally stabilized the Brazilian economy.
Cardoso won the 1994 election, and again in 1998.
The peaceful transition of power from Cardoso to his main opposition leader, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (elected in 2002 and re-elected in 2006), was seen as proof that Brazil had achieved a long-sought political stability.
However, sparked by indignation and frustrations accumulated over decades from corruption, police brutality, inefficiencies of the political establishment and public service, numerous peaceful protests erupted in Brazil from the middle of first term of Dilma Rousseff, who had succeeded Lula after winning election in 2010 and again in 2014 by narrow margins.
Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016, halfway into her second term, and replaced by her Vice-president Michel Temer, who assumed full presidential powers after Rousseff's impeachment was accepted on 31 August.
Large street protests for and against her took place during the impeachment process.
The charges against her were fueled by political and economic crises along with evidence of involvement with politicians (from all the primary political parties) in several bribery and tax evasion schemes.[citation needed] In 2017, the Supreme Court requested the investigation of 71 Brazilian lawmakers and nine ministers of President Michel Temer's cabinet who were allegedly linked to the Petrobras corruption scandal.
President Temer himself was also accused of corruption.
According to a 2018 poll, 62% of the population said that corruption was Brazil's biggest problem.
In the fiercely disputed 2018 elections, the controversial conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party (PSL) was elected president, winning in the second round Fernando Haddad, of the Workers Party (PT), with the support of 55.13% of the valid votes.
In the early 2020s, Brazil became one of the hardest hit countries during the COVID-19 pandemic, receiving the second-highest death toll worldwide after the United States.
Experts have largely blamed the situation on the leadership of President Bolsonaro, who throughout the pandemic has repeatedly downplayed the threat of COVID-19 and dissuaded states and cities from enforcing quarantine measures, prioritizing the nation's economy.
Geography
Main article: Geography of Brazil
Topographic map of Brazil
Brazil occupies a large area along the eastern coast of South America and includes much of the continent's interior, sharing land borders with Uruguay to the south; Argentina and Paraguay to the southwest; Bolivia and Peru to the west; Colombia to the northwest; and Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and France (French overseas region of French Guiana) to the north.
It shares a border with every South American country except Ecuador and Chile.
It also encompasses a number of oceanic archipelagos, such as Fernando de Noronha, Rocas Atoll, Saint Peter and Paul Rocks, and Trindade and Martim Vaz.
Its size, relief, climate, and natural resources make Brazil geographically diverse.
Including its Atlantic islands, Brazil lies between latitudes 6°N and 34°S, and longitudes 28° and 74°W.
Brazil is the fifth largest country in the world, and third largest in the Americas, with a total area of 8,515,767.049 km2 (3,287,956 sq mi), including 55,455 km2 (21,411 sq mi) of water.
Brazil is also the longest country in the world, spanning 4,395 km (2,731 mi) from north to south, and the only country in the world that has the equator and the Tropic of Capricorn running through it.
It spans four time zones; from UTC−5 comprising the state of Acre and the westernmost portion of Amazonas, to UTC−4 in the western states, to UTC−3 in the eastern states (the national time) and UTC−2 in the Atlantic islands.
Topography and hydrography
Serra dos Órgãos National Park, Teresópolis, Rio de Janeiro stateXingó canyon in São Francisco River, Delmiro Gouveia, Alagoas
Brazilian topography is also diverse and includes hills, mountains, plains, highlands, and scrublands.
Much of the terrain lies between 200 meters (660 ft) and 800 meters (2,600 ft) in elevation.
The main upland area occupies most of the southern half of the country.
The northwestern parts of the plateau consist of broad, rolling terrain broken by low, rounded hills.
The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to 1,200 meters (3,900 ft). These ranges include the Mantiqueira and Espinhaço mountains and the Serra do Mar.
In the north, the Guiana Highlands form a major drainage divide, separating rivers that flow south into the Amazon Basin from rivers that empty into the Orinoco River system, in Venezuela, to the north.
The highest point in Brazil is the Pico da Neblina at 2,994 meters (9,823 ft), and the lowest is the Atlantic Ocean.
Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers, one of the world's most extensive, with eight major drainage basins, all of which drain into the Atlantic.
Major rivers include the Amazon (the world's second-longest river and the largest in terms of volume of water), the Paraná and its major tributary the Iguaçu (which includes the Iguazu Falls), the Negro, São Francisco, Xingu, Madeira and Tapajós rivers.
Climate
Main article: Climate of Brazil
Brazil map of Köppen climate classification zones
The climate of Brazil comprises a wide range of weather conditions across a large area and varied topography, but most of the country is tropical.
According to the Köppen system, Brazil hosts six major climatic subtypes: desert, equatorial, tropical, semiarid, oceanic and subtropical.
The different climatic conditions produce environments ranging from equatorial rainforests in the north and semiarid deserts in the northeast, to temperate coniferous forests in the south and tropical savannas in central Brazil.
Many regions have starkly different microclimates.
An equatorial climate characterizes much of northern Brazil.
There is no real dry season, but there are some variations in the period of the year when most rain falls.
Temperatures average 25 °C (77 °F), with more significant temperature variation between night and day than between seasons.
Over central Brazil rainfall is more seasonal, characteristic of a savanna climate.
This region is as extensive as the Amazon basin but has a very different climate as it lies farther south at a higher altitude.
In the interior northeast, seasonal rainfall is even more extreme.
The semiarid climatic region generally receives less than 800 millimeters (31.5 in) of rain, most of which generally falls in a period of three to five months of the year and occasionally less than this, creating long periods of drought.
Brazil's 1877–78 Grande Seca (Great Drought), the worst in Brazil's history, caused approximately half a million deaths.
A similarly devastating drought occurred in 1915.
South of Bahia, near the coasts, and more southerly most of the state of São Paulo, the distribution of rainfall changes, with rain falling throughout the year.
The south enjoys subtropical conditions, with cool winters and average annual temperatures not exceeding 18 °C (64.4 °F); winter frosts and snowfall are not rare in the highest areas.
In 2020 the government of Brazil pledged to reduce its annual greenhouse gases emissions by 43% by 2030. It also set as indicative target of reaching carbon neutrality by 2060 if the country gets 10 billion dollars per year.
Biodiversity and conservation
Main articles: Wildlife of Brazil, Deforestation in Brazil, Conservation in Brazil, and Protected areas of Brazil
The majority of Amazon rainforest, the most biodiverse rainforest in the world, is contained within Brazil, with 60% of the forest.Female pantanal jaguar in Piquirí River, Mato Grosso.
Pantanal is the world's largest tropical wetland area.
The wildlife of Brazil comprises all naturally occurring animals, plants, and fungi in the South American country.
Home to 60% of the Amazon Rainforest, which accounts for approximately one-tenth of all                                                      
species in the world, Brazil is considered to have the greatest biodiversity of any country on the planet.
It has the most known species of plants (55,000), freshwater fish (3,000), and mammals (over 689). It also ranks third on the list of countries with the most bird species (1,832) and second with the most reptile species (744). The number of fungal species is unknown but is large.
Brazil is second only to Indonesia as the country with the most endemic species.
Brazil's large territory comprises different ecosystems, such as the Amazon rainforest, recognized as having the greatest biological diversity in the world, with the Atlantic Forest and the Cerrado, sustaining the greatest biodiversity.
In the south, the Araucaria pine forest grows under temperate conditions.
The rich wildlife of Brazil reflects the variety of natural habitats.
Scientists estimate that the total number of plant and animal species in Brazil could approach four million, mostly invertebrates.
Larger mammals include carnivores pumas, jaguars, ocelots, rare bush dogs, and foxes, and herbivores peccaries, tapirs, anteaters, sloths, opossums, and armadillos.
Deer are plentiful in the south, and many species of New World monkeys are found in the northern rain forests.
Annually, Brazil's tropical old-growth forest loss greatly exceeds that of other world nations.Cumulatively, Brazil has the highest percentage of deforested or highly degraded rainforest of any Amazonia nation.
By 2013, Brazil's "dramatic policy-driven reduction in Amazon Basin deforestation" was a "global exception in terms of forest change", according to scientific journal Science.: 852  From 2003 to 2011, compared to all other countries in the world, Brazil had the "largest decline in annual forest loss", as indicated in the study using high-resolution satellite maps showing global forest cover changes.: 850 
The annual loss of forest cover decreased from a 2003–2004 record high of more than 40,000 square kilometers (4,000×103 ha; 9.9×106 acres; 15,000 sq mi) to a 2010–2011 low of under 20,000 square kilometers (2,000×103 ha; 4.9×106 acres; 7,700 sq mi),: 850  reversing widespread deforestation from the 1970s to 2003.: 852 
In 2017, preserved native vegetation occupies 61% of the Brazilian territory.
Agriculture occupied only 8% of the national territory and pastures 19.7%. In terms of comparison, in 2019, although 43% of the entire European continent has forests, only 3% of the total forest area in Europe is of native forest.
Brazil's tropical primary (old-growth) forest loss, however, also exceeds that of other countries.
Brazil has a strong interest in forest conservation as its agriculture sector directly depends on its forests.
Government and politics
Main articles: Politics of Brazil, Federal government of Brazil, and Elections in Brazil
Palácio do Planalto, the official workplace of the President of Brazil.
National Congress, seat of the legislative branch.
The form of government is a democratic federative republic, with a presidential system.
The president is both head of state and head of government of the Union and is elected for a four-year term, with the possibility of re-election for a second successive term.
The current president is Jair Bolsonaro.
The previous president, Michel Temer, replaced Dilma Rousseff after her impeachment.
The President appoints the Ministers of State, who assist in government.
Legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in Brazil.
The National Congress is the Federation's bicameral legislature, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Senate.
Judiciary authorities exercise jurisdictional duties almost exclusively.
Brazil is a democracy, according to the Democracy Index 2010.
The political-administrative organization of the Federative Republic of Brazil comprises the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities.
The Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities, are the "spheres of government". The federation is set on five fundamental principles: sovereignty, citizenship, dignity of human beings, the social values of labor and freedom of enterprise, and political pluralism.
The classic tripartite branches of government (executive, legislative and judicial under a checks and balances system) are formally established by the Constitution.
The executive and legislative are organized independently in all three spheres of government, while the judiciary is organized only at the federal and state and Federal District spheres.
All members of the executive and legislative branches are directly elected.
For most of its democratic history, Brazil has had a multi-party system, proportional representation.
Voting is compulsory for the literate between 18 and 70 years old and optional for illiterates and those between 16 and 18 or beyond 70. The country has more than 40 active political parties.
Fifteen political parties are represented in Congress.
It is common for politicians to switch parties, and thus the proportion of congressional seats held by particular parties changes regularly.
Almost all governmental and administrative functions are exercised by authorities and agencies affiliated to the Executive.
Law
Main article: Law of Brazil
Supreme Federal Court of Brazil serves primarily as the Constitutional Court of the country
Brazilian law is based on the civil law legal system and civil law concepts prevail over common law practice.
Most of Brazilian law is codified, although non-codified statutes also represent a substantial part, playing a complementary role.
Court decisions set out interpretive guidelines; however, they are seldom binding on other specific cases.
Doctrinal works and the works of academic jurists have strong influence in law creation and in law cases.
Judges and other judicial officials are appointed after passing entry exams.
The legal system is based on the Federal Constitution, promulgated on 5 October 1988, and the fundamental law of Brazil.
All other legislation and court decisions must conform to its rules.
As of July 2022[update], there have been 124 amendments.
States have their own constitutions, which must not contradict the Federal Constitution.
Municipalities and the Federal District have "organic laws" (leis orgânicas), which act in a similar way to constitutions.
Legislative entities are the main source of statutes, although in certain matters judiciary and executive bodies may enact legal norms.
Jurisdiction is administered by the judiciary entities, although in rare situations the Federal Constitution allows the Federal Senate to pass on legal judgments.
There are also specialized military, labor, and electoral courts.
The highest court is the Supreme Federal Court.
This system has been criticized over the last few decades for the slow pace of decision-making.
Lawsuits on appeal may take several years to resolve, and in some cases more than a decade elapses before definitive rulings.
Nevertheless, the Supreme Federal Tribunal was the first court in the world to transmit its sessions on television, and also via YouTube.
In December 2009, the Supreme Court adopted Twitter to display items on the day planner of the ministers, to inform the daily actions of the Court and the most important decisions made by them.
Military
Main article: Brazilian Armed Forces
Brazilian Air Force Saab Gripen NGBrazilian Navy's flagship PHM Atlântico
The armed forces of Brazil are the largest in Latin America by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment.
The country was considered the 9th largest military power on the planet in 2021. It consists of the Brazilian Army (including the Army Aviation Command), the Brazilian Navy (including the Marine Corps and Naval Aviation), and the Brazilian Air Force.
Brazil's conscription policy gives it one of the world's largest military forces, estimated at more than 1.6 million reservists annually.
Numbering close to 236,000 active personnel, the Brazilian Army has the largest number of armored vehicles in South America, including armored transports and tanks.
It is also unique in Latin America for its large, elite forces specializing in unconventional missions, the Brazilian Special Operations Command, and the versatile Strategic Rapid Action Force, made up of highly mobilized and prepared Special Operations Brigade, Infantry Brigade Parachutist, 1st Jungle Infantry Battalion (Airmobile) and 12th Brigade Light Infantry (Airmobile) able to act anywhere in the country, on short notice, to counter external aggression.
The states' Military Police and the Military Firefighters Corps are described as an ancillary forces of the Army by the constitution, but are under the control of each state's governor.
Brazil's navy once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two Minas Geraes-class dreadnoughts, sparking a naval arms race between Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.
Today, it is a green water force and has a group of specialized elite in retaking ships and naval facilities, GRUMEC, unit specially trained to protect Brazilian oil platforms along its coast.
As of 2022[update], it is the only navy in Latin America that operates an aircraft carrier, NAM Atlântico, and one of twelve navies in the world to operate or have one under construction.
The Air Force is the largest in Latin America and has about 700 crewed aircraft in service and effective about 67,000 personnel.
Brazil has not been invaded since 1865 during the Paraguayan War.
Additionally, Brazil has no contested territorial disputes with any of its neighbors and neither does it have rivalries, like Chile and Bolivia have with each other.
The Brazilian military has also three times intervened militarily to overthrow the Brazilian government.
It has built a tradition of participating in UN peacekeeping missions such as in Haiti, East Timor and Central African Republic.
Foreign policy
Main article: Foreign relations of Brazil
Itamaraty Palace, the seat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Brazil's international relations are based on Article 4 of the Federal Constitution, which establishes non-intervention, self-determination, international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of conflicts as the guiding principles of Brazil's relationship with other countries and multilateral organizations.
According to the Constitution, the President has ultimate authority over foreign policy, while the Congress is tasked with reviewing and considering all diplomatic nominations and international treaties, as well as legislation relating to Brazilian foreign policy.
Brazil's foreign policy is a by-product of the country's position as a regional power in Latin America, a leader among developing countries, and an emerging world power.
Brazilian foreign policy has generally been based on the principles of multilateralism, peaceful dispute settlement, and non-intervention in the affairs of other countries.
Brazil is a founding member state of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, an international organization and political association of Lusophone nations across four continents, where Portuguese is an official language.
An increasingly well-developed tool of Brazil's foreign policy is providing aid as a donor to other developing countries.
Brazil does not just use its growing economic strength to provide financial aid, but it also provides high levels of expertise and most importantly of all, a quiet non-confrontational diplomacy to improve governance levels.
Total aid is estimated to be around $1 billion per year, which includes.
In addition, Brazil already managed a peacekeeping mission in Haiti ($350 million) and makes in-kind contributions to the World Food Programme ($300 million). This is in addition to humanitarian assistance and contributions to multilateral development agencies.
The scale of this aid places it on par with China and India.
The Brazilian South-South aid has been described as a "global model in waiting".
Law enforcement and crime
Main articles: Law enforcement in Brazil and Crime in Brazil
Field agents of the Federal Police's Tactical Operations Command.
In Brazil, the Constitution establishes six different police agencies for law enforcement: Federal Police Department, Federal Highway Police, Federal Railroad Police, Federal, District and State Penal Police (included by the Constitutional Amendment No. 104, of 2019),Military Police and Civil Police.
Of these, the first three are affiliated with federal authorities, the last two are subordinate to state governments and the Penal Police can be subordinated to the federal or state/district government.
All police forces are the responsibility of the executive branch of any of the federal or state powers.
The National Public Security Force also can act in public disorder situations arising anywhere in the country.
The country still has above-average levels of violent crime and particularly high levels of gun violence and homicide.
In 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated the number of 32 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest rates of homicide of the world.
The number considered tolerable by the WHO is about 10 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.
In 2018, Brazil had a record 63,880 murders.
However, there are differences between the crime rates in the Brazilian states.
While in São Paulo the homicide rate registered in 2013 was 10.8 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, in Alagoas it was 64.7 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.
Brazil also has high levels of incarceration and the third largest prison population in the world (behind only China and the United States), with an estimated total of approximately 700,000 prisoners around the country (June 2014), an increase of about 300% compared to the index registered in 1992. The high number of prisoners eventually overloaded the Brazilian prison system, leading to a shortfall of about 200,000 accommodations.
Administrative divisions
AtlanticOcean
PacificOcean
North
Northeast
Central-West
Southeast
South
Acre
Amazonas
Pará
Roraima
Amapá
Rondônia
Tocantins
Maranhão
Bahia
Piauí
Ceará
Rio Grandedo Norte
Paraíba
Pernambuco
Alagoas
Sergipe
Mato Grosso
Mato Grossodo Sul
FederalDistrict
Goiás
Minas Gerais
São Paulo
Rio de Janeiro
Espírito Santo
Paraná
Santa Catarina
Rio Grandedo Sul
Argentina
Bolivia
Chile
Colombia
French Guiana
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
States of Brazil and Regions of Brazil
Main articles: States of Brazil and Municipalities of Brazil
See also: Regions of Brazil
Brazil is a federation composed of 26 states, one federal district, and the 5,570 municipalities.
States have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Federal government.
They have a governor and a unicameral legislative body elected directly by their voters.
They also have independent Courts of Law for common justice.
Despite this, states have much less autonomy to create their own laws than in the United States.
For example, criminal and civil laws can be voted by only the federal bicameral Congress and are uniform throughout the country.
The states and the federal district may be grouped into regions: Northern, Northeast, Central-West, Southeast and Southern.
The Brazilian regions are merely geographical, not political or administrative divisions, and they do not have any specific form of government.
Although defined by law, Brazilian regions are useful mainly for statistical purposes, and also to define the distribution of federal funds in development projects.
Municipalities, as the states, have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Union and state government.
Each has a mayor and an elected legislative body, but no separate Court of Law.
Indeed, a Court of Law organized by the state can encompass many municipalities in a single justice administrative division called comarca (county).
Economy
Main article: Economy of Brazil
See also: Brazilian real, Agriculture in Brazil, Mining in Brazil, and Industry in Brazil
A proportional representation of Brazil exports, 2019São Paulo, the largest financial centre in BrazilSoybean crop in Rondonópolis, Mato Grosso.The KC-390, developed by Embraer, the third largest producer of civil aircraft, after Boeing and Airbus.
Brazil's upper-middle income mixed market economy is rich in natural resources.
It has the largest national economy in Latin America, the tenth-largest economy in the world by nominal GDP, and the ninth-largest by PPP. After rapid growth in preceding decades, the country entered an ongoing recession in 2014 amid a political corruption scandal and nationwide protests.
A developing country, Brazil has a labor force of roughly 100 million, which is the world's fifth-largest; with a high unemployment rate of 14.4% as of 2021[update]. Its foreign exchange reserves are the tenth-highest in the world.
The B3 in São Paulo is the largest stock exchange in Brazil.
In regards to poverty, about 1.9% of the total population lives at $2.15 a day, while about 19% live at $6.85 a day.
Brazil's economy suffers from endemic corruption and high income inequality.
The Brazilian real is the national currency.
Brazil's diversified economy includes agriculture, industry, and a wide range of services.
The large service sector accounts for about 72.7% of total GDP, followed by the industrial sector (20.7%), while the agriculture sector is by far the smallest, making up 6.6% of total GDP.
Brazil is one of the largest producers of various agricultural commodities, and also has a large cooperative sector that provides 50% of the food in the country.
It has been the world's largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years.
Brazil is the world's largest producer of sugarcane, soy, coffee and orange; is one of the top 5 producers of maize, cotton, lemon, tobacco, pineapple, banana, beans, coconut, watermelon and papaya; and is one of the top 10 world producers of cocoa, cashew, mango, rice, tomato, sorghum, tangerine, avocado, persimmon, and guava, among others.
Regarding livestock, it is one of the 5 largest producers of chicken meat, beef, pork and cow's milk in the world.
In the mining sector, Brazil is among the largest producers of iron ore, copper, gold, bauxite, manganese, tin, niobium, and nickel.
In terms of precious stones, Brazil is the world's largest producer of amethyst, topaz, agate and one of the main producers of tourmaline, emerald, aquamarine, garnet and opal.
The country is a major exporter of soy, iron ore, pulp (cellulose), maize, beef, chicken meat, soybean meal, sugar, coffee, tobacco, cotton, orange juice, footwear, airplanes, cars, vehicle parts, gold, ethanol, semi-finished iron, among other products.
Brazil is the world's 24th-largest exporter and 26th-largest importer as of 2021[update]. China is its largest trading partner, accounting for 32% of the total trade.
Other large trading partners include the United States, Argentina, the Netherlands and Canada.
Its automotive industry is the eighth-largest in the world.
In the food industry, Brazil was the second-largest exporter of processed foods in the world in 2019. The country was the second-largest producer of pulp in the world and the eighth-largest producer of paper in 2016. In the footwear industry, Brazil was the fourth-largest producer in 2019. It was also the ninth-largest producer of steel in the world.
In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the eighth-largest in the world.
Although, it was among the five largest world producers in 2013, Brazil's textile industry is very little integrated into world trade.
The tertiary sector (trade and services) represented 75.8% of the country's GDP in 2018, according to the IBGE. The service sector was responsible for 60% of GDP and trade for 13%. It covers a wide range of activities: commerce, accommodation and catering, transport, communications, financial services, real estate activities and services provided to businesses, public administration (urban cleaning, sanitation, etc.) and other services such as education, social and health services, research and development, sports activities, etc., since it consists of activities complementary to other sectors.
Micro and small businesses represent 30% of the country's GDP. In the commercial sector, for example, they represent 53% of the GDP within the activities of the sector.
Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Brazil
Iguazu Falls on the Argentina–Brazil borderThe colonial city of Ouro Preto, a World Heritage Site
Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country.
The country had 6.36 million visitors in 2015, ranking in terms of the international tourist arrivals as the main destination in South America and second in Latin America after Mexico.
Revenues from international tourists reached US$6 billion in 2010, showing a recovery from the 2008–2009 economic crisis.
Historical records of 5.4 million visitors and US$6.8 billion in receipts were reached in 2011. In the list of world tourist destinations, in 2018, Brazil was the 48th most visited country, with 6.6 million tourists (and revenues of 5.9 billion dollars).
Natural areas are its most popular tourism product, a combination of ecotourism with leisure and recreation, mainly sun and beach, and adventure travel, as well as cultural tourism.
Among the most popular destinations are the Amazon Rainforest, beaches and dunes in the Northeast Region, the Pantanal in the Center-West Region, beaches at Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina, cultural tourism in Minas Gerais and business trips to São Paulo.
In terms of the 2015 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI), which is a measurement of the factors that make it attractive to develop business in the travel and tourism industry of individual countries, Brazil ranked in the 28st place at the world's level, third in the Americas, after Canada and United States.
Brazil's main competitive advantages are its natural resources, which ranked 1st on this criteria out of all countries considered, and ranked 23rd for its cultural resources, due to its many World Heritage Sites.
The TTCI report notes Brazil's main weaknesses: its ground transport infrastructure remains underdeveloped (ranked 116th), with the quality of roads ranking in 105th place; and the country continues to suffer from a lack of price competitiveness (ranked 114th), due in part to high ticket taxes and airport charges, as well as high prices and high taxation.
Safety and security have improved significantly: 75th in 2011, up from 128th in 2008.
Infrastructure
Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in Brazil
VLS-1 at the Alcântara Launch Center of the Brazilian Space Agency.Sirius, a diffraction-limited storage ring synchrotron light source at the Laboratório Nacional de Luz Síncrotron, in Campinas, São Paulo.
Technological research in Brazil is largely carried out in public universities and research institutes, with the majority of funding for basic research coming from various government agencies.
Brazil's most esteemed technological hubs are the Oswaldo Cruz Institute, the Butantan Institute, the Air Force's Aerospace Technical Center, the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation and the National Institute for Space Research.
The Brazilian Space Agency has the most advanced space program in Latin America, with significant resources to launch vehicles, and manufacture of satellites.
Owner of relative technological sophistication, the country develops submarines, aircraft, as well as being involved in space research, having a Vehicle Launch Center Light and being the only country in the Southern Hemisphere the integrate team building International Space Station (ISS).
The country is also a pioneer in the search for oil in deep water, from where it extracts 73% of its reserves.
Uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory, mostly for research purposes (as Brazil obtains 88% of its electricity from hydroelectricity) and the country's first nuclear submarine is expected to be launched in 2029.
Brazil is one of the three countries in Latin America with an operational Synchrotron Laboratory, a research facility on physics, chemistry, material science and life sciences, and Brazil is the only Latin American country to have a semiconductor company with its own fabrication plant, the CEITEC. According to the Global Information Technology Report 2009–2010 of the World Economic Forum, Brazil is the world's 61st largest developer of information technology.
Brazil was ranked 57th in the Global Innovation Index in 2021, up from 66th in 2019.
Among the most renowned Brazilian inventors are priests Bartolomeu de Gusmão, Landell de Moura and Francisco João de Azevedo, besides Alberto Santos-Dumont, Evaristo Conrado Engelberg, Manuel Dias de Abreu, Andreas Pavel and Nélio José Nicolai.
Brazilian science is represented by the likes of César Lattes (Brazilian physicist Pathfinder of Pi Meson), Mário Schenberg (considered the greatest theoretical physicist of Brazil), José Leite Lopes (only Brazilian physicist holder of the UNESCO Science Prize), Artur Ávila (the first Latin American winner of the Fields Medal) and Fritz Müller (pioneer in factual support of the theory of evolution by Charles Darwin).
Transport
Main article: Transport in Brazil
Aerial view of the São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport, the busiest airport in South America.BR-116 in Guapimirim, Rio de Janeiro, the longest highway in the country, with 4,385 km (2,725 mi) of extension.
Brazilian roads are the primary carriers of freight and passenger traffic.
The road system totaled 
1,720,000 km (1,068,758 mi) in 2019. The total of paved roads increased from 35,496 km (22,056 mi) in 1967 to 215,000 km (133,595 mi) in 2018. The country has about 14,000 km (8,699 mi) of divided highways, 5,000 km (3,107 mi) only in the State of São Paulo.
Currently it's possible to travel from Rio Grande, in the extreme south of the country, to Brasília (2,580 km (1,603 mi)) or Casimiro de Abreu, in the state of Rio de Janeiro (2,045 km (1,271 mi)), only on divided highways.
The first investments in road infrastructure have given up in the 1920s, the government of Washington Luís, being pursued in the governments of Getúlio Vargas and Eurico Gaspar Dutra.
President Juscelino Kubitschek (1956–61), who designed and built the capital Brasília, was another supporter of highways.
Brazil's railway system has been declining since 1945, when emphasis shifted to highway construction.
The total length of railway track was 30,875 km (19,185 mi) in 2002, as compared with 31,848 km (19,789 mi) in 1970. Most of the railway system belonged to the Federal Railroad Corporation RFFSA, which was privatized in 2007. The São Paulo Metro was the first underground transit system in Brazil.
The other metro systems are in Rio de Janeiro, Porto Alegre, Recife, Belo Horizonte, Brasília, Salvador and Fortaleza.
The country has an extensive rail network of 28,538 kilometers (17,733 miles) in length, the tenth largest network in the world.
Currently, the Brazilian government, unlike the past, seeks to encourage this mode of transport; an example of this incentive is the project of the Rio–São Paulo high-speed rail, that will connect the two main cities of the country to carry passengers.
There are about 2,500 airports in Brazil, including landing fields: the second largest number in the world, after the United States.
São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport, near São Paulo, is the largest and busiest airport with nearly 20 million passengers annually, while handling the vast majority of commercial traffic for the country.
For freight transport waterways are of importance, e.g. the industrial zones of Manaus can be reached only by means of the Solimões–Amazonas waterway (3,250 kilometers or 2,020 miles in length, with a minimum depth of six meters or 20 feet). The country also has 50,000 kilometers (31,000 miles) of waterways.
Coastal shipping links widely separated parts of the country.
Bolivia and Paraguay have been given free ports at Santos.
Of the 36 deep-water ports, Santos, Itajaí, Rio Grande, Paranaguá, Rio de Janeiro, Sepetiba, Vitória, Suape, Manaus and São Francisco do Sul are the most important.
Bulk carriers have to wait up to 18 days before being serviced, container ships 36.3 hours on average.
Energy
Main article: Energy in Brazil
The Itaipu Dam on the Paraná River, the second largest of the world.
Brazilian energy matrix is one of the cleanest in the world.Wind farm in Parnaíba, Piauí. Brazil is one of the 5 largest producers of wind energy in the world
Brazil is the world's tenth largest energy consumer with much of its energy coming from renewable sources, particularly hydroelectricity and ethanol; the Itaipu Dam is the world's largest hydroelectric plant by energy generation, and the country has other large plants like Belo Monte and Tucuruí. The first car with an ethanol engine was produced in 1978 and the first airplane engine running on ethanol in 2005.
At the end of 2021 Brazil was the 2nd country in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (109.4 GW) and biomass (15.8 GW), the 7th country in the world in terms of installed wind power (21.1 GW) and the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13.0 GW) - on track to also become one of the top 10 in the world in solar energy.
At the end of 2021, Brazil was the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, USA and Germany, and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.8 TWh).
The main characteristic of the Brazilian energy matrix is that it is much more renewable than that of the world.
While in 2019 the world matrix was only 14% made up of renewable energy, Brazil's was at 45%. Petroleum and oil products made up 34.3% of the matrix; sugar cane derivatives, 18%; hydraulic energy, 12.4%; natural gas, 12.2%; firewood and charcoal, 8.8%; varied renewable energies, 7%; mineral coal, 5.3%; nuclear, 1.4%, and other non-renewable energies, 0.6%.
In the electric energy matrix, the difference between Brazil and the world is even greater: while the world only had 25% of renewable electric energy in 2019, Brazil had 83%. The Brazilian electric matrix was composed of: hydraulic energy, 64.9%; biomass, 8.4%; wind energy, 8.6%; solar energy, 1%; natural gas, 9.3%; oil products, 2%; nuclear, 2.5%; coal and derivatives, 3.3%.
Brazil has the largest electricity sector in Latin America.
Its capacity at the end of 2021 was 181,532 MW.
As for oil, the Brazilian government has embarked on a program over the decades to reduce dependence on imported oil, which previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs.
Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007. In 2021, the country closed the year as the 7th oil producer in the world, with an average of close to 3 million barrels per day, becoming an exporter of the product.
Health
Main articles: Health in Brazil and Sistema Único de Saúde
SUS official symbol, the Brazilian publicly funded health care system
The Brazilian public health system, the Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde – SUS), is managed and provided by all levels of government, being the largest system of this type in the world.
On the other hand, private healthcare systems play a complementary role.
Public health services are universal and offered to all citizens of the country for free.
However, the construction and maintenance of health centers and hospitals are financed by taxes, and the country spends about 9% of its GDP on expenditures in the area.
In 2012, Brazil had 1.85 doctors and 2.3 hospital beds for every 1,000 inhabitants.
Despite all the progress made since the creation of the universal health care system in 1988, there are still several public health problems in Brazil.
In 2006, the main points to be solved were the high infant (2.51%) and maternal mortality rates (73.1 deaths per 1000 births).
The number of deaths from noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases (151.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants) and cancer (72.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants), also has a considerable impact on the health of the Brazilian population.
Finally, external but preventable factors such as car accidents, violence and suicide caused 14.9% of all deaths in the country.
The Brazilian health system was ranked 125th among the 191 countries evaluated by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2000.
Education
Main article: Education in Brazil
Historical building of the Federal University of Paraná, one of the oldest universities in Brazil, located in Curitiba.
The Federal Constitution and the Law of Guidelines and Bases of National Education determine that the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities must manage and organize their respective education systems.
Each of these public educational systems is responsible for its own maintenance, which manages funds as well as the mechanisms and funding sources.
The constitution reserves 25% of the state budget and 18% of federal taxes and municipal taxes for education.
According to the IBGE, in 2019, the literacy rate of the population was 93.4%, meaning that 11.3 million (6.6% of population) people are still illiterate in the country, with some states like Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina reaching around 97% of literacy rate; functional illiteracy has reached 21.6% of the population.
Illiteracy is higher in the Northeast, where 13.87% of the population is illiterate, while the South, has 3.3% of its population illiterate.
Brazil's private institutions tend to be more exclusive and offer better quality education, so many high-income families send their children there.
The result is a segregated educational system that reflects extreme income disparities and reinforces social inequality.
However, efforts to change this are making impacts.
The University of São Paulo is the second best university in Latin America, according to recent 2019 QS World University Rankings.
Of the top 20 Latin American universities, eight are Brazilian.
Most of them are public.
Attending an institution of higher education is required by Law of Guidelines and Bases of Education.
Kindergarten, elementary and medium education are required of all students.
Media and communication
Main articles: Telecommunications in Brazil and Television in Brazil
See also: Concentration of media ownership § Brazil
Former President Dilma Rousseff at Jornal Nacional news program.
Rede Globo is the world's second-largest commercial television network.
The Brazilian press was officially born in Rio de Janeiro on 13 May 1808 with the creation of the Royal Printing National Press by the Prince Regent Dom João.
The Gazeta do Rio de Janeiro, the first newspaper published in the country, began to circulate on 10 September 1808. The largest newspapers nowadays are Folha de S.Paulo, Super Notícia, O Globo and O Estado de S. Paulo.
Radio broadcasting began on 7 September 1922, with a speech by then President Pessoa, and was formalized on 20 April 1923 with the creation of "Radio Society of Rio de Janeiro".
Television in Brazil began officially on 18 September 1950, with the founding of TV Tupi by Assis Chateaubriand.
Since then television has grown in the country, creating large commercial broadcast networks such as Globo, SBT, RecordTV, Bandeirantes and RedeTV. Today it is the most important factor in popular culture of Brazilian society, indicated by research showing that as much as 67% of the general population follow the same daily soap opera broadcast.
Digital Television, using the SBTVD standard (based on the Japanese standard ISDB-T), was adopted on 29 June 2006 and launched on 2 November 2007. In May 2010, the Brazilian government launched TV Brasil Internacional, an international television station, initially broadcasting to 49 countries.
Commercial television channels broadcast internationally include Globo Internacional, RecordTV Internacional and Band Internacional.
Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of Brazil and Brazilians
See also: Immigration to Brazil and List of Brazilian states by population density
Population density of Brazilian municipalities
The population of Brazil, as recorded by the 2008 PNAD, was approximately 190 million (22.31 inhabitants per square kilometer or 57.8/sq mi), with a ratio of men to women of 0.95:1 and 83.75% of the population defined as urban.
The population is heavily concentrated in the Southeastern (79.8 million inhabitants) and Northeastern (53.5 million inhabitants) regions, while the two most extensive regions, the Center-West and the North, which together make up 64.12% of the Brazilian territory, have a total of only 29.1 million inhabitants.
The first census in Brazil was carried out in 1872 and recorded a population of 9,930,478. From 1880 to 1930, 4 million Europeans arrived.
Brazil's population increased significantly between 1940 and 1970, because of a decline in the mortality rate, even though the birth rate underwent a slight decline.
In the 1940s the annual population growth rate was 2.4%, rising to 3.0% in the 1950s and remaining at 2.9% in the 1960s, as life expectancy rose from 44 to 54 years and to 72.6 years in 2007.
It has been steadily falling since the 1960s, from 3.04% per year between 1950 and 1960 to 1.05% in 2008 and is expected to fall to a negative value of –0.29% by 2050 thus completing the demographic transition.
In 2008, the illiteracy rate was 11.48% and among the youth (ages 15–19) 1.74%. It was highest (20.30%) in the Northeast, which had a large proportion of rural poor.
Illiteracy was high (24.18%) among the rural population and lower (9.05%) among the urban population.
Race and ethnicity
Main article: Race and ethnicity in Brazil
Race and ethnicity in Brazil
White (47.7%)  Pardo (Multiracial) (43.1%)  Black (7.6%)  East Asian (1.1%)  Natives (0.4%)
According to the National Research by Household Sample (PNAD) of 2008, 48.43% of the population (about 92 million) described themselves as White; 43.80% (about 83 million) as Pardo (brown), 6.84% (about 13 million) as Black; 0.58% (about 1.1 million) as East Asian (officially called yellow or amarela); and 0.28% (about 536 thousand) as Amerindian (officially called indígena, Indigenous), while 0.07% (about 130 thousand) did not declare their race.
Since the arrival of the Portuguese in 1500, considerable genetic mixing between Amerindians, Europeans, and Africans has taken place in all regions of the country (with European ancestry being dominant nationwide according to the vast majority of all autosomal studies undertaken covering the entire population, accounting for between 65% to 77%). From the 19th century, Brazil opened its borders to immigration.
About five million people from over 60 countries migrated to Brazil between 1808 and 1972, most of them of Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, Ukrainian, Polish, Jewish, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, and Arab origin.
Brazil has the second largest Jewish community in Latin America making up 0.06% of its population.
Brazilian society is more markedly divided by social class lines, although a high income disparity is found between race groups, so racism and classism often overlap.
Socially significant closeness to one racial group is taken in account more in the basis of appearance (phenotypes) rather than ancestry, to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different "racial" groups.
Socioeconomic factors are also significant, because a minority of pardos are likely to start declaring themselves White or Black if socially upward.
Skin color and facial features do not line quite well with ancestry (usually, Afro-Brazilians are evenly mixed and European ancestry is dominant in Whites and pardos with a significant non-European contribution, but the individual variation is great). The brown population (officially called pardo in Portuguese, also colloquially moreno) is a broad category that includes caboclos (assimilated Amerindians in general, and descendants of Whites and Natives), mulatos (descendants of primarily Whites and Afro-Brazilians) and cafuzos (descendants of Afro-Brazilians and Natives). Higher percents of Blacks, mulattoes and tri-racials can be found in the eastern coast of the Northeastern region from Bahia to Paraíba and also in northern Maranhão, southern Minas Gerais and in eastern Rio de Janeiro.
People of considerable Amerindian ancestry form the majority of the population in the Northern, Northeastern and Center-Western regions.
In 2007, the National Indian Foundation estimated that Brazil has 67 different uncontacted tribes, up from their estimate of 40 in 2005. Brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world.
Religion
Main article: Religion in Brazil
Further information: Catholic Church in Brazil and Protestantism in Brazil
Religion in Brazil (2010 Census)
Catholicism (64.6%)  Protestantism (22.2%)  Spiritism (2.0%)  Other (3.2%)  No religion (8.0%)
Roman Catholicism is the country's predominant faith.
Brazil has the world's largest Catholic population.
According to the 2010 Demographic Census (the PNAD survey does not inquire about religion), 64.63% of the population followed Roman Catholicism; 22.2% Protestantism; 2.0% Kardecist spiritism; 3.2% other religions, undeclared or undetermined; while 8.0% have no religion.
Religion in Brazil was formed from the meeting of the Catholic Church with the religious traditions of enslaved African peoples and indigenous peoples.
This confluence of faiths during the Portuguese colonization of Brazil led to the development of a diverse array of syncretistic practices within the overarching umbrella of Brazilian Catholic Church, characterized by traditional Portuguese festivities,
Religious pluralism increased during the 20th century, and the Protestant community has grown to include over 22% of the population.
The most common Protestant denominations are Evangelical Pentecostal ones.
Other Protestant branches with a notable presence in the country include the Baptists, Seventh-day Adventists, Lutherans and the Reformed tradition.
However, in the last ten years Protestantism, particularly in forms of Pentecostalism and Evangelicalism, has spread in Brazil, while the proportion of Catholics has dropped significantly.
After Protestantism, individuals professing no religion are also a significant group, exceeding 8% of the population as of the 2010 census.
The cities of Boa Vista, Salvador, and Porto Velho have the greatest proportion of Irreligious residents in Brazil.
Teresina, Fortaleza, and Florianópolis were the most Roman Catholic in the country.
Greater Rio de Janeiro, not including the city proper, is the most irreligious and least Roman Catholic Brazilian periphery, while Greater Porto Alegre and Greater Fortaleza are on the opposite sides of the lists, respectively.
In October 2009, the Brazilian Senate approved and enacted by the President of Brazil in February 2010, an agreement with the Vatican, in which the Legal Statute of the Catholic Church in Brazil is recognized.
The agreement confirmed norms that were normally complied with regarding religious education in public elementary schools (which also ensures the teaching of other beliefs), marriage and spiritual assistance in prisons and hospitals.
The project was criticized by parliamentarians who understood the end of the secular state with the approval of the agreement.
Language
Main articles: Languages of Brazil, Portuguese language, Brazilian Portuguese, and List of endangered languages in Brazil
Museum of the Portuguese Language in São Paulo
The official language of Brazil is Portuguese (Article 13 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil), which almost all of the population speaks and is virtually the only language used in newspapers, radio, television, and for business and administrative purposes.
Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas, making the language an important part of Brazilian national identity and giving it a national culture distinct from those of its Spanish-speaking neighbors.
Brazilian Portuguese has had its own development, mostly similar to 16th-century Central and Southern dialects of European Portuguese (despite a very substantial number of Portuguese colonial settlers, and more recent immigrants, coming from Northern regions, and in minor degree Portuguese Macaronesia), with a few influences from the Amerindian and African languages, especially West African and Bantu restricted to the vocabulary only.
As a result, the language is somewhat different, mostly in phonology, from the language of Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries (the dialects of the other countries, partly because of the more recent end of Portuguese colonialism in these regions, have a closer connection to contemporary European Portuguese). These differences are comparable to those between American and British English.
The sign language law legally recognized in 2002, (the law was regulated in 2005) the use of the Brazilian Sign Language, more commonly known by its Portuguese acronym LIBRAS, in education and government services.
The language must be taught as a part of the education and speech and language pathology curricula.
LIBRAS teachers, instructors and translators are recognized professionals.
Schools and health services must provide access ("inclusion") to deaf people.
In the region of Pomerode, Santa Catarina, Hunsrückisch and East Pomeranian are two of the minor languages (see Brazilian German).
Minority languages are spoken throughout the nation.
One hundred and eighty Amerindian languages are spoken in remote areas and a significant number of other languages are spoken by immigrants and their descendants.
In the municipality of São Gabriel da Cachoeira, Nheengatu (a currently endangered South American creole language – or an 'anti-creole', according to some linguists – with mostly Indigenous Brazilian languages lexicon and Portuguese-based grammar that, together with its southern relative língua geral paulista, once was a major lingua franca in Brazil, being replaced by Portuguese only after governmental prohibition led by major political changes)[excessive detail?], Baniwa and Tucano languages had been granted co-official status with Portuguese.
There are significant communities of German (mostly the Brazilian Hunsrückisch, a High German language dialect) and Italian (mostly the Talian, a Venetian dialect) origins in the Southern and Southeastern regions, whose ancestors' native languages were carried along to Brazil, and which, still alive there, are influenced by the Portuguese language.
Talian is officially a historic patrimony of Rio Grande do Sul, and two German dialects possess co-official status in a few municipalities.
Italian is also recognized as ethnic language in the Santa Teresa microregion and Vila Velha (Espirito Santo state), and is taught as mandatory second language at school.
Urbanization
Main article: List of cities in Brazil by population
According to IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) urban areas already concentrate 84.35% of the population, while the Southeast region remains the most populated one, with over 80 million inhabitants.
The largest urban agglomerations in Brazil are São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Belo Horizonte – all in the Southeastern Region – with 21.1, 12.3, and 5.1 million inhabitants respectively.
The majority of state capitals are the largest cities in their states, except for Vitória, the capital of Espírito Santo, and Florianópolis, the capital of Santa Catarina.
Largest urban agglomerations in Brazil2017 Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics estimates
Rank
Name
State
Pop.
Rank
Name
State
Pop.
São PauloRio de Janeiro
São Paulo
São Paulo
Belém
Pará
2,157,180
Belo HorizonteRecife
Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro
Manaus
Amazonas
2,130,264
Belo Horizonte
Minas Gerais
5,142,260
Campinas
São Paulo
2,105,600
Recife
Pernambuco
4,021,641
Vitória
Espírito Santo
1,837,047
Brasília
Federal District
3,986,425
Baixada Santista
São Paulo
1,702,343
Porto Alegre
Rio Grande do Sul
3,894,232
São José dos Campos
São Paulo
1,572,943
Salvador
Bahia
3,863,154
São Luís
Maranhão
1,421,569
Fortaleza
Ceará
3,594,924
Natal
Rio Grande do Norte
1,349,743
Curitiba
Paraná
3,387,985
Maceió
Alagoas
1,231,965
Goiânia
Goiás
2,347,557
João Pessoa
Paraíba
1,168,941
Culture
Main article: Culture of Brazil
Parade of Portela samba school at the Rio Carnival, the largest carnival in the world
The core culture of Brazil is derived from Portuguese culture, because of its strong colonial ties with the Portuguese Empire.
Among other influences, the Portuguese introduced the Portuguese language, Roman Catholicism and colonial architectural styles.
The culture was, however, also strongly influenced by African, indigenous and non-Portuguese European cultures and traditions.
Some aspects of Brazilian culture were influenced by the contributions of Italian, German and other European as well as Japanese, Jewish and Arab immigrants who arrived in large numbers in the South and Southeast of Brazil during the 19th and 20th centuries.
The indigenous Amerindians influenced Brazil's language and cuisine; and the Africans influenced language, cuisine, music, dance and religion.
Brazilian art has developed since the 16th century into different styles that range from Baroque (the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century) to Romanticism, Modernism, Expressionism, Cubism, Surrealism and Abstractionism.
Brazilian cinema dates back to the birth of the medium in the late 19th century and has gained a new level of international acclaim since the 1960s.
Architecture
Main article: Architecture of Brazil
The Cathedral of Brasilia, designed by Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer for the federal capital, an example of Modern architecture
The architecture of Brazil is influenced by Europe, especially Portugal.
It has a history that goes back 500 years to the time when Pedro Álvares Cabral landed in Brazil in 1500. Portuguese colonial architecture was the first wave of architecture to go to Brazil.
It is the basis for all Brazilian architecture of later centuries.
In the 19th century during the time of the Empire of Brazil, the country followed European trends and adopted Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture.
Then in the 20th century especially in Brasilia, Brazil experimented with Modernist architecture.
The colonial architecture of Brazil dates to the early 16th century when Brazil was first explored, conquered and settled by the Portuguese.
The Portuguese built architecture familiar to them in Europe in their aim to colonize Brazil.
They built Portuguese colonial architecture which included churches, civic architecture including houses and forts in Brazilian cities and the countryside.
During 19th century, Brazilian architecture saw the introduction of more European styles to Brazil such as Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture.
This was usually mixed with Brazilian influences from their own heritage which produced a unique form of Brazilian architecture.
In the 1950s, the modernist architecture was introduced when Brasilia was built as new federal capital in the interior of Brazil to help develop the interior.
The architect Oscar Niemeyer idealized and built government buildings, churches and civic buildings in the modernist style.
Music
Main article: Music of Brazil
Tom Jobim, one of the creators of bossa nova, and Chico Buarque, one of the leading names of MPB.
The music of Brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of European, Native Indigenous, and African elements.
Until the nineteenth century, Portugal was the gateway to most of the influences that built Brazilian music, although many of these elements were not of Portuguese origin, but generally European.
The first was José Maurício Nunes Garcia, author of sacred pieces with influence of Viennese classicism.
The major contribution of the African element was the rhythmic diversity and some dances and instruments that had a bigger role in the development of popular music and folk, flourishing especially in the twentieth century.
Popular music since the late eighteenth century began to show signs of forming a characteristically Brazilian sound, with samba considered the most typical and on the UNESCO cultural heritage list.
Maracatu and Afoxê are two music traditions that have been popularized by their appearance in the annual Brazilian Carnivals.
Capoeira is usually played with its own music referred to as capoeira music, which is usually considered to be a call-and-response type of folk music.
Forró is a type of folk music prominent during the Festa Junina in northeastern Brazil.
Jack A. Draper III, a professor of Portuguese at the University of Missouri, argues that Forró was used as a way to subdue feelings of nostalgia for a rural lifestyle.
Choro is a very popular music instrumental style.
Its origins are in 19th-century Rio de Janeiro.
In spite of the name, the style often has a fast and happy rhythm, characterized by virtuosity, improvisation, subtle modulations and full of syncopation and counterpoint.
Bossa nova is also a well-known style of Brazilian music developed and popularized in the 1950s and 1960s.
The phrase "bossa nova" means literally "new trend". A lyrical fusion of samba and jazz, bossa nova acquired a large following starting in the 1960s.
Literature
Main article: Brazilian literature
Machado de Assis, poet and novelist, founder of the Brazilian Academy of Letters.
Brazilian literature dates back to the 16th century, to the writings of the first Portuguese explorers in Brazil, such as Pêro Vaz de Caminha, filled with descriptions of fauna, flora and commentary about the indigenous population that fascinated European readers.
Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism – novelists like Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain.
Alencar, in his long career, also treated indigenous people as heroes in the Indigenist novels O Guarani, Iracema and Ubirajara.
Machado de Assis, one of his contemporaries, wrote in virtually all genres and continues to gain international prestige from critics worldwide.
Brazilian Modernism, evidenced by the Modern Art Week in 1922, was concerned with a nationalist avant-garde literature, while Post-Modernism brought a generation of distinct poets like João Cabral de Melo Neto, Carlos Drummond de Andrade, Vinicius de Moraes, Cora Coralina, Graciliano Ramos, Cecília Meireles, and internationally known writers dealing with universal and regional subjects like Jorge Amado, João Guimarães Rosa, Clarice Lispector and Manuel Bandeira.
Cuisine
Main article: Brazilian cuisine
See also: List of Brazilian dishes
Feijoada is one of the main dishes of Brazilian cuisine
Brazilian cuisine varies greatly by region, reflecting the country's varying mix of indigenous and immigrant populations.
This has created a national cuisine marked by the preservation of regional differences.
Examples are Feijoada, considered the country's national dish; and regional foods such as beiju, feijão tropeiro, vatapá, moqueca, polenta (from Italian cuisine) and acarajé (from African cuisine).
The national beverage is coffee and cachaça is Brazil's native liquor.
Cachaça is distilled from sugar cane and is the main ingredient in the national cocktail, Caipirinha.
A typical meal consists mostly of rice and beans with beef, salad, french fries and a fried egg.
Often, it is mixed with cassava flour (farofa). Fried potatoes, fried cassava, fried banana, fried meat and fried cheese are very often eaten in lunch and served in most typical restaurants.
Popular snacks are pastel (a fried pastry); coxinha (a variation of chicken croquete); pão de queijo (cheese bread and cassava flour / tapioca); pamonha (corn and milk paste); esfirra (a variation of Lebanese pastry); kibbeh (from Arabic cuisine); empanada (pastry) and empada, little salt pies filled with shrimps or heart of palm.
Brazil has a variety of desserts such as brigadeiros (chocolate fudge balls), bolo de rolo (roll cake with goiabada), cocada (a coconut sweet), beijinhos (coconut truffles and clove) and romeu e julieta (cheese with goiabada). Peanuts are used to make paçoca, rapadura and pé-de-moleque.
Local common fruits like açaí, cupuaçu, mango, papaya, cocoa, cashew, guava, orange, lime, passionfruit, pineapple, and hog plum are turned in juices and used to make chocolates, ice pops and ice cream.
Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Brazil
Festival de Gramado, the biggest film festival in the country
The Brazilian film industry began in the late 19th century, during the early days of the Belle Époque.
While there were national film productions during the early 20th century, American films such as Rio the Magnificent were made in Rio de Janeiro to promote tourism in the city.
The films Limite (1931) and Ganga Bruta (1933), the latter being produced by Adhemar Gonzaga through the prolific studio Cinédia, were poorly received at release and failed at the box office, but are acclaimed nowadays and placed among the finest Brazilian films of all time.
The 1941 unfinished film It's All True was divided in four segments, two of which were filmed in Brazil and directed by Orson Welles; it was originally produced as part of the United States' Good Neighbor Policy during Getúlio Vargas' Estado Novo government.
During the 1960s, the Cinema Novo movement rose to prominence with directors such as Glauber Rocha, Nelson Pereira dos Santos, Paulo Cesar Saraceni and Arnaldo Jabor.
Rocha's films Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol (1964) and Terra em Transe (1967) are considered to be some of the greatest and most influential in Brazilian film history.
During the 1990s, Brazil saw a surge of critical and commercial success with films such as O Quatrilho (Fábio Barreto, 1995), O Que É Isso, Companheiro? (Bruno Barreto, 1997) and Central do Brasil (Walter Salles, 1998), all of which were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the latter receiving a Best Actress nomination for Fernanda Montenegro.
The 2002 crime film City of God, directed by Fernando Meirelles, was critically acclaimed, scoring 90% on Rotten Tomatoes, being placed in Roger Ebert's Best Films of the Decade list and receiving four Academy Award nominations in 2004, including Best Director.
Notable film festivals in Brazil include the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro International Film Festivals and the Gramado Festival.
Theatre
Augusto Boal presenting a workshop on the Theatre of the Oppressed at Riverside Church in New York City in 2008
The theatre in Brazil has its origins in the period of Jesuit expansion when theater was used for the dissemination of Catholic doctrine in the 16th century. in the 17th and 18th centuries the first dramatists who appeared on the scene of European derivation was for court or private performances.
During the 19th century, dramatic theater gained importance and thickness, whose first representative was Luis Carlos Martins Pena (1813–1848), capable of describing contemporary reality.
Always in this period the comedy of costume and comic production was imposed.
Significant, also in the nineteenth century, was also the playwright Antônio Gonçalves Dias.
There were also numerous operas and orchestras.
The Brazilian conductor Antônio Carlos Gomes became internationally known with operas like Il Guarany.
At the end of the 19th century orchestrated dramaturgias became very popular and were accompanied with songs of famous artists like the conductress Chiquinha Gonzaga.
Already in the early 20th century there was the presence of theaters, entrepreneurs and actor companies, but paradoxically the quality of the products staggered, and only in 1940 the Brazilian theater received a boost of renewal thanks to the action of Paschoal Carlos Magno and his student's theater, the comedians group and the Italian actors Adolfo Celi, Ruggero Jacobbi and Aldo Calvo, founders of the Teatro Brasileiro de Comedia.
From the 1960s it was attended by a theater dedicated to social and religious issues and to the flourishing of schools of dramatic art.
The most prominent authors at this stage were Jorge Andrade and Ariano Suassuna.
Visual arts
Main article: Brazilian painting
Candido Portinari in 1962, one of the most important Brazilian painters
Brazilian painting emerged in the late 16th century, influenced by Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism, Modernism, Expressionism, Surrealism, Cubism and Abstracionism making it a major art style called Brazilian academic art.
The French Artistic Mission arrived in Brazil in 1816 proposing the creation of an art academy modeled after the respected Académie des Beaux-Arts, with graduation courses both for artists and craftsmen for activities such as modeling, decorating, carpentry and others and bringing artists like Jean-Baptiste Debret.
Upon the creation of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, new artistic movements spread across the country during the 19th century and later the event called Modern Art Week definitely broke with academic tradition in 1922 and started a nationalist trend which was influenced by modernist arts.
Among the best-known Brazilian painters are Ricardo do Pilar and Manuel da Costa Ataíde (baroque and rococo), Victor Meirelles, Pedro Américo and Almeida Júnior (romanticism and realism), Anita Malfatti, Ismael Nery, Lasar Segall, Emiliano di Cavalcanti, Vicente do Rego Monteiro, and Tarsila do Amaral (expressionism, surrealism and cubism), Aldo Bonadei, José Pancetti and Cândido Portinari (modernism).
Sports
Main article: Sport in Brazil
See also: Brazil at the Olympics
Players at the podium with the first Olympic Gold of the Brazil national football team, won in the 2016 Summer Olympics.
Football is the most popular sport in the country.
The most popular sport in Brazil is football.
The Brazilian men's national team is ranked among the best in the world according to the FIFA World Rankings, and has won the World Cup tournament a record five times.
Volleyball, basketball, auto racing, and martial arts also attract large audiences.
The Brazil men's national volleyball team, for example, currently holds the titles of the World League, World Grand Champions Cup, World Championship and the World Cup.
In auto racing, three Brazilian drivers have won the Formula One world championship eight times.
The country has also produced significant achievements in other sports such as sailing, swimming, tennis, surfing, skateboarding, MMA, gymnastics, boxing, judo, athletics and table tennis.
Some sport variations have their origins in Brazil: beach football, futsal (indoor football) and footvolley emerged in Brazil as variations of football.
In martial arts, Brazilians developed Capoeira, Vale tudo, and Brazilian jiu-jitsu.
Brazil has hosted several high-profile international sporting events, like the 1950 FIFA World Cup and recently has hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup, 2019 Copa América and 2021 Copa América . The São Paulo circuit, Autódromo José Carlos Pace, hosts the annual Grand Prix of Brazil.
São Paulo organized the IV Pan American Games in 1963, and Rio de Janeiro hosted the XV Pan American Games in 2007. On 2 October 2009, Rio de Janeiro was selected to host the 2016 Olympic Games and 2016 Paralympic Games, making it the first South American city to host the games and second in Latin America, after Mexico City.
Furthermore, the country hosted the FIBA Basketball World Cups in 1954 and 1963. At the 1963 event, the Brazil national basketball team won one of its two world championship titles.
See also
Brazil portal
South America portal
Outline of Brazil
Notes
European Portuguese: [bɾɐˈziɫ]
includes Arab Brazilian, Jewish Brazilian, and Romani Brazilian
includes Caboclo, Mulatto, and Zambo
The Brazilian census uses the term amarela (or yellow in English) as a racial category to describe people of East Asian background.
This category therefore excludes those of other Asian origins, such as West Asians/Arabs and South Asians
References
Exército Brasileiro. "Hino à Bandeira Nacional" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 29 January 2014.
a b c IBGE – Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics). 2010 Census.
Retrieved 7 August 2012.
"2010 Population Census – General characteristics of population, religion and persons with disabilities (Portuguese)". ibge.gov.br (in Portuguese). 16 November 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
"2010 Population Census – General characteristics of population, religion and persons with disabilities (Portuguese)". ibge.gov.br (in Portuguese). 16 November 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
"Brazil". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 24 September 2022.
a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2021". Imf.
International Monetary Fund.
Retrieved 28 February 2022.
"GINI index (World Bank estimate) – Brazil". World Bank.
Retrieved 8 April 2021.
"Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022.
José María Bello (1966). A History of Modern Brazil: 1889–1964. Stanford University Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-8047-0238-6.
"Área Territorial Brasileira" [Brazilian Territorial Area] (in Portuguese). Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística.
Archived from the original on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2018. Para a superfície do Brasil foi obtido o valor de 8.515.759,090 km2, publicado no DOU nº 124 de 30/06/2017, conforme Resolução Nº 02, de 29 de junho de 2017.
Philander, S. George (2012). Encyclopedia of Global Warming and Climate Change, Second Edition.
Vol. 1 (Second ed.). Los Angeles: Princeton University. p. 148. ISBN 978-1-4129-9261-9. OCLC 970592418.
Vallance, Monique M. (2012). "Preface and Observations on Contemporary Brazil".  In Crocitti, John J. (ed.). Brazil Today: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic.
Contributing editor Monique M. Vallance.
ABC-CLIO. p. xxiii.
ISBN 978-0-313-34672-9. OCLC 787850982.
"Os migrantes de hoje". BBC Brasil.
Retrieved 24 October 2018.
a b c d e f g h i "Brazil § geography". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 4 May 2018. (Archived 2018 edition)
"Brazil – Land". Permanent Missions.
United Nations.
Geography.
Archived from the original on 23 October 2014.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p "Brazilian Federal Constitution" (in Portuguese). Presidency of the Republic. 1988. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007. Retrieved 3 June 2008. "Brazilian Federal Constitution". v-brazil.com. 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018. Retrieved 3 June 2008. Unofficial translate
"UNESCO World Heritage Centre — World Heritage List". UNESCO. Retrieved 25 May 2012.
M. Schaefer; J. Poffenbarger (2014). The Formation of the BRICS and its Implication for the United States: Emerging Together.
Springer. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-137-38794-3.
Sean W. Burges (2016). Latin America and the Shifting Sands of Globalization.
Routledge. pp. 114–15. ISBN 978-1-317-69658-2.
Gardini, Gian Luca (2016). "Brazil: What Rise of What Power?". Bulletin of Latin American Research. 35: 5–19. doi:10.1111/blar.12417.
FRIDE: The international arena and emerging powers: stabilising or destabilising forces? Archived 15 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Susanne Gratius, April 2008
Peter Collecott (29 October 2011). "Brazil's Quest for Superpower Status". The Diplomatic Courier.
Retrieved 10 August 2014.
Clendenning, Alan (17 April 2008). "Booming Brazil could be world power soon". USA Today.
The Associated Press. p. 2. Retrieved 12 December 2008.
Jorge Dominguez; Byung Kook Kim (2013). Between Compliance and Conflict: East Asia Latin America and the New Pax Americana.
Center for International Affairs, Harvard University. pp. 98–99. ISBN 978-1-136-76983-2.
"FTSE Country Classification" (PDF). FTSE Group.
September 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018.
"International Monetary Fund". imf.org.
"CIA – The World Factbook – Country Comparisons – GDP (purchasing power parity)". Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011.
"Country and Lending Groups". World Bank.
Archived from the original on 18 March 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2011. Uppermiddle Income defined as a per capita income between $3,976 – $12,275
"World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019". IMF.org.
International Monetary Fund.
Retrieved 29 September 2019.
a b Jeff Neilson; Bill Pritchard (2011). Value Chain Struggles.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 102. ISBN 978-1-4443-5544-4.
Fausto, Boris (1999). A Concise History of Brazil.
Cambridge University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-521-56526-4.
Jon S. Vincent. (2003). Culture and Customs of Brazil.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-313-30495-8.
Richard P. Tucker (2007). Insatiable Appetite: The Ecological Degradation of the Tropical World.
University of Michigan. p. 186. ISBN 978-0-7425-5365-1.
Wayne E. Lee (2011). Empires and Indigenes: Intercultural Alliance, Imperial Expansion, and Warfare in the Early Modern World.
NYU Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-8147-6527-2.
Daly, Charles P. (1880). "Maps and Map-making Before Mercator". The Popular Science Monthly.
Bonnier Corporation. 473–495, see page 493. ISSN 0161-7370.
Jean de Léry (1990). History of a Voyage to the Land of Brazil, Otherwise Called America.
University of California Press. p. 242. ISBN 978-0-520-91380-6.
Jayme A. Sokolow. (2003). The Great Encounter: Native Peoples and European Settlers in the Americas, 1492–1800. M.E. Sharpe. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-7656-0982-3.
Maria Herrera-Sobek (2012). Celebrating Latino Folklore.
ABC-CLIO. p. 155. ISBN 978-0-313-34340-7.
Romero, Simon (27 March 2014). "Discoveries Challenge Beliefs on Humans' Arrival in the Americas". New York Times.
Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2014.
About.com, 
Robert M. Levine; John J. Crocitti (1999). The Brazil Reader: History, Culture, Politics.
Duke University Press. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-0-8223-2290-0. Retrieved 12 December 2012.
Science Magazine, 13 December 1991 
Mann, Charles C. (2006) . 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus.
Vintage Books. pp. 326–33. ISBN 978-1-4000-3205-1.
Levine, Robert M. (2003). The History of Brazil.
Palgrave Macmillan. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-4039-6255-3.
Levine (2003), p. 31.
a b Fausto, Carlos (2000).  Zahar, Jorge (ed.). Os Índios antes do Brasil [The Indians before Brazil] (in Portuguese). pp. 45–46, 55. ISBN 978-85-7110-543-0.
Gomes, Mercio P. The Indians and Brazil University Press of Florida 2000 ISBN 0-8130-1720-3 pp. 28–29
Fausto (2000), pp. 78–80.
Fausto (2000), p. 50.
Boxer, p. 98.
a b Boxer, p. 100.
Boxer, pp. 100–101.
a b Skidmore, p. 27.
Boxer, p. 101.
Meuwese, Mark "Brothers in Arms, Partners in Trade: Dutch-Indigenous Alliances in the Atlantic World, 1595–1674" Koninklijke Brill NV 2012 ISBN 978-90-04-21083-7 Chapter III
Metcalf, Alida C. "Go-betweens And the Colonization of Brazil: 1500–1600" University of Texas Press 2005, pp. 70, 79, 202 View on Google Books
Crocitti & Vallance (2012).
Minahan, James B. "Ethnic Groups of the Americas" ABC-CLIO 2013 ISBN 978-1-61069-163-5 p. 300, View on Google Books
Skidmore, p. 36.
Richard Middleton and Anne Lombard "Colonial America: A History to 1763" Wiley-Blackwell Publishing 1st edition 1992 ISBN 978-1-4443-9628-7 Chapter 2, Section 4 (final, last page and half of previous one) View on Google Books
Boxer, p. 110
Skidmore, p. 34.
Boxer, p. 102.
Skidmore, pp. 32–33.
Murray, Stuart A. P. (2009). The Library An Illustrated History.
New York: Skyhorse Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-60239-706-4.
Boxer, p. 164.
Boxer, pp. 168, 170.
Boxer, p. 169.
Kohn, George C. (1986). Dictionary of Wars (1st ed.). Facts on File, Inc. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-4381-2916-7.
George Richard Potter; Henry Clifford Darby; Harold Fullard (1957). The New Cambridge Modern History.
Vol. 3 (1st ed.). CUP Archive. p. 498.
Corrado, Jacopo "The Creole Elite and the Rise of Angolan Protonationalism" Cambria Press 2008 ISBN 978-1-60497-529-1 pp. 95 (Brazil) and 145, note 5 View on Google Books
Bethell, Leslie "Colonial Brazil" Cambridge University Press 1987 pp. 19, 74, 86, 169–70
Schwartz, Stuart B. "Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels" Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 1992 ISBN 0-252-06549-2 Chapter 4 View on Google Books
MacLachlan, Colin M. "A History of Modern Brazil: The Past Against the Future"; Scholarly Resources Inc. 2003 p. 3 View on Google Books
Boxer, p. 213
Marta Barcellos & Simone Azevedo; Histórias do Mercado de Capitais no Brasil ("Financial Markets' Histories in Brazil") (Portuguese) Campus Elsevier 2011 ISBN 85-352-3994-4 Introduction (by Ney Carvalho), Intro. p. xiv
Bueno, p. 145.
Jeffrey C. Mosher (2008). Political Struggle, Ideology, and State Building: Pernambuco and the Construction of Brazil, 1817–1850. U of Nebraska Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-8032-3247-1.
Jeremy Adelman (2006). Sovereignty and Revolution in the Iberian Atlantic.
Princeton University Press. pp. 334–. ISBN 978-0-691-12664-7.
Lustosa, pp. 109–110
Lustosa, pp. 117–19
Lustosa, pp. 150–153
Vianna, p. 418
Diégues 2004, pp. 168, 164, 178
Diégues 2004, pp. 179–80
Lustosa, p. 208
Fausto (1999), pp. 82–83.
Lyra (v. 1), p. 17
Carvalho 2007, p. 21
Fausto (1999), Chapter 2, 2.1 to 2.3.
a b Fausto (1999).
Bethell, Leslie "The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: Britain, Brazil and the Slave Trade" Cambridge University Press 1970, "Cambridge Latin American Studides", Chapters 9 to 12. View on Google Books
Scott, Rebecca and others, The Abolition of Slavery and the Aftermath of Emancipation in Brazil, Duke University Press 1988 ISBN 0-8223-0888-6 Seymour Drescher, Chap. 2: "Brazilian Abolition in Comparative Perspective"
Levine, Robert M. "The history of Brazil" Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. 1999, p. 62, View on Google Books
Lyra (v.1), pp. 164, 225, 272
Fausto (1999), Chapter 2, p. 83, and 2.6 "The Paraguayan War".
Ermakoff 2006, p. 189.
Smallman, Shawn C. (2002). "The Overthrow of the Empire". Fear in Memory in the Brazilian Army and Society.
University of North Carolina Press. pp. 16–18. ISBN 978-0-8078-5359-7.
"Brazil's Proclamation of the Republic through the press". The Brazilian Report. 15 November 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2018.
Smallman (2002), end of Chapter 1, from p. 18 "Military rule".
Smallman (2002), pp. 21–26.
Triner, Gail D. "Banking and Economic Development: Brazil, 1889–1930" Palgrave 2000, pp. 69–74 ISBN 0-312-23399-X
Needell, Jeffrey D. "A Tropical Belle Epoque: Elite Culture and Society in Turn-of-the-Century Rio de Janeiro" Cambridge University Press 2010, pp. 10, 12
David R. Mares; "Violent peace: militarized interstate bargaining in Latin America" Columbia University Press 2001 Chapter 5 p. 125
Bradford Burns 1993, p. 305
M.Sharp, I. Westwell & J.Westwood; "History of World War I, Volume 1" Marshall Cavendish Corporation 2002, p. 97
Uma história diplomática do Brasil, 1531–1945, pp. 265–69
Charles Howard Ellis; "The origin, structure & working of the League of Nations" The LawBook Exchange Ltd 2003 pp. 105, 145
Viscount of Taunay (1893), O encilhamento: scenas contemporaneas da bolsa em 1890, 1891 e 1892, Melhoramentos
Nassif, Luís (2007), Os cabeças-de-planilha, Ediouro, pp. 69–107, ISBN 978-85-00-02094-0
de Carvalho, Ney O. Ribeiro (2004), O Encilhamento: anatomia de uma bolha brasileira, Bovespa, ISBN 978-85-904019-1-9
Martins, Hélio L (1997), A Revolta da Armada, BibliEx
Moniz, Edmundo (1984), Canudos: a luta pela terra, Global
Sevcenko, Nicolau (2010), A Revolta da Vacina, Cosac Naify, ISBN 978-85-7503-868-0
de Moura, Aureliano P (2003), Contestado: a guerra cabocla, Biblioteca do Exército
Thompson, Arthur (1934), Guerra civil do Brazil de 1893–1895, Ravaro
Roland, Maria Inês (2000), A Revolta da Chibata, Saraiva, ISBN 978-85-02-03095-4
Forjaz, Maria CS (1977), Tenentismo e politica, Paz e Terra
Levine; Robert M. & Crocitti; John J. The Brazil Reader: History, Culture, Politics, Duke University Press 1999, IV – The Vargas Era
Keen, Benjamin / Haynes, Kate A History of Latin America; Volume 2, Waldsworth Cengage Learning 2004, pp. 356–57
McCann; Frank D. Soldiers of the Patria: A History of the Brazilian Army, 1889–1937, Stanford University Press 2004, p. 303 ISBN 0-8047-3222-1
Ibidem Williams 2001
E. Bradford Burns; A History of Brazil Columbia University Press 1993 p. 352 ISBN 978-0-231-07955-6
Dulles, John W.F. Anarchists and Communists in Brazil, 1900–1935 University of Texas Press 2012 ISBN 0-292-74076-X
Frank M. Colby, Allen L. Churchill, Herbert T. Wade & Frank H. Vizetelly; The New international year book Dodd, Mead & Co. 1989, p. 102 "The Fascist Revolt"
Bourne, Richard Getulio Vargas of Brazil, 1883–1954 C. Knight 1974, p. 77
Scheina, Robert L. Latin America's Wars Vol.II: The Age of the Professional Soldier, 1900–2001. Potomac Books, 2003 ISBN 1-57488-452-2 Part 9; Ch. 17 – World War II, Brazil, and Mexico, 1942–45
Thomas M. Leonard & John F. Bratzel; Latin America during World War II Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc. 2007 p. 150
Mónica Hirst & Andrew Hurrell; The United States and Brazil: A Long Road of Unmet Expectations, Taylor & Francis Books 2005 ISBN 0-415-95066-X pp. 4–5
Castro, Celso; Izecksohn, Vitor; Kraay, Hendrik (2004), Nova história militar brasileira, Fundação Getúlio Vargas, pp. 13–14, ISBN 978-85-225-0496-1
McCann 2004, p. 441
Roett; Riordan Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society, GreenWood Publishing Group 1999, pp. 106–08 ISBN 0-275-95899-X
Keen & Haynes 2004, pp. 361–62
Skidmore, p. 201
Skidmore, pp. 202–203
Skidmore, p. 204
Skidmore, pp. 204–205
Skidmore, pp. 209–210
Skidmore, p. 210
Fausto (2005), p. 397
Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada, pp. 141–42.
Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada, p. 35.
Crocitti & Vallance (2012), p. 395, last paragraph.
Richard Young, Odile Cisneros "Historical Dictionary of Latin American Literature and Theater" Scare Crow Press 2011, p. 224, 2nd § View on Google Books
Laurence Burgorgue-Larsen & Amaya Úbeda de Torres "The Inter-American Court of Human Rights: Case Law and Commentary" Oxford University Press 2011 ISBN 978-0-19-958878-7 p. 299 View on Google Books
Crocitti & Vallance (2012), p. 396.
Crocitti & Vallance (2012), p. 395–97.
Bradford Burns 1993, p. 457
Fausto (1999), Chapter 6 "The military government and the transition to democracy (1964–1984)".
Fausto (2005), pp. 464–65.
Fausto (2005), pp. 465, 475.
Skidmore, p. 311.
Fausto (1999), Epilogue.
Fausto (2005), p. 482.
Fausto (2005), p. 474.
Fausto (2005), p. 502.
Zirin, 2014. Chapter 3
"Global protest grows as citizens lose faith in politics and the State" article on "the Guardian"
Zirin, 2014. Chapter 7 & Conclusion.
Jonathan Watts & Donna Bowater. "Dilma Rousseff impeached by Brazilian senate". The Guardian.
Retrieved 31 August 2016.
Article of New York Times about the denouement of Rousseff's impeachment process.
Article in Financial Times (18 April 2016) about the political ambiance in Brazil on the day vote for the Deputies chamber decision about open an impeachment procedure against President Dilma. 2nd to 4th paragraph.
"Brazil supreme court judge orders probe into nine ministers – paper". Reuters. 11 April 2017.
"President Michel Temer of Brazil Is Charged With Corruption". The New York Times. 26 June 2017.
"A scary election in Brazil". The Economist.
Retrieved 1 October 2018.
"Jair Bolsonaro é eleito presidente do Brasil". veja.abril.com.br.
a b Guerin, Orla (9 July 2021). "Covid-19 pandemic: 'Everything you should not do, Brazil has done'". BBC News.
Brasília: BBC. Retrieved 2 August 2021.
Phillips, Tom (10 April 2021). "Bolsonaro's 'genocidal' Covid response has led to Brazilian catastrophe, Dilma Rousseff says". The Guardian.
Rio de Janeiro: Guardian News & Media Limited.
Retrieved 2 August 2021.
"Covid: Brazil's Bolsonaro calls governors 'tyrants' over lockdowns". BBC News.
BBC. 22 March 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021.
a b "Land and Resources". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2008.[dubious  – discuss]
Official Area (In Portuguese) Archived 6 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine IBGE: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística.
Retrieved 8 January 2010.
"Hora Legal Brasileira". Observatório Nacional.
Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2014.
a b c d e "Natural Regions". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2008.[dubious  – discuss]
a b "Rivers and Lakes". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2008.[dubious  – discuss]
a b c d e "Brazil". Country Guide.
BBC Weather.
Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2008.
a b c d e "Natural Regions". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2008.[dubious  – discuss]
a b c "Temperature in Brazil". Brazil Travel.
Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2008.
a b Embrapa. "Annual averages of Mandacaru Agro-meteorological station" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 August 2007. Retrieved 21 October 2008.
"CPD: South America, Site SA19, Caatinga of North-eastern Brazil, Brazil". Botany.si.edu.
Archived from the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 29 October 2009.
"Drought, Smallpox, and Emergence of Leishmania braziliensis in Northeastern Brazil" Archived 29 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
"Ó Gráda, C.: Famine: A Short History" Archived 12 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Princeton University Press.
"Inland fishery enhancements". FAO.
Felin, Bruno (10 December 2020). "STATEMENT: Brazil Sets Weak 2030 Emission Reduction Target". World Resources Institute.
Retrieved 3 January 2021.
"Amazon – World's largest tropical rain forest and river basin". World Wide Fund for Nature.
Retrieved 3 June 2010.
a b Palmerlee, Danny (2007). South America on a Shoestring.
Lonely Planet Publications. p. 275. ISBN 978-1-74104-443-0. OCLC 76936293.
Da Silva, M. and D.W. Minter. 1995. Fungi from Brazil recorded by Batista and Co-workers.
Mycological Papers 169. CABI, Wallingford, UK. 585 pp.
Chapman, A.D (September 2005). "Numbers of Living Species in Australia and the World: A Report for the Department of the Environment and Heritage". Australian Biological Resources Study.
Australian Biodiversity Information Services.
Archived from the original on 1 November 2007. Retrieved 26 November 2007.
"One fifth of the world's freshwater". Amazon.
World Wide Fund for Nature. 6 August 2007. Retrieved 12 June 2008.
a b c d "Plant and Animal Life". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 12 June 2008.
"Atlantic Forest, Brazil". Map: Biodiversity hotspots.
BBC News. 1 October 2004. Retrieved 12 June 2008.
a b "Forest Pulse: The Latest on the World's Forests". WRI.org.
World Resources Institute. 28 April 2022. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022.
"Amazon Against the Clock: A Regional Assessment on Where and How to Protect 80% by 2025" (PDF). Amazon Watch.
September 2022. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2022. Graphic 2: Current State of the Amazon by country, by percentage / Source: RAISG (Red Amazónica de Información Socioambiental Georreferenciada) Elaborated by authors.
a b c d Hansen, M. C.; Potapov, P. V.; Moore, R.; Hancher, M.; Turubanova, S. A.; Tyukavina, A.; Thau, D.; Stehman, S. V.; Goetz, S. J.; Loveland, T. R.; Kommareddy, A.; Egorov, A.; Chini, L.; Justice, C. O.; Townshend, J. R. G. (15 November 2013). "High-Resolution Global Maps of 21st-Century Forest Cover Change". Science. 342 (6160): 850–853. Bibcode:2013Sci...342..850H. doi:10.1126/science.1244693. PMID 24233722. S2CID 23541992.
"Preserved native vegetation occupies 61% of Brazil's area, says Embrapa". 27 January 2017.
"How Europe has multiplied its forests and why this can be a problem". BBC News Brasil.
Ruiz, Sarah (12 November 2021). "Climate change is pushing Brazil's farmland out of agricultural suitability range". Woodwell climate research center.
Nature Climate Change.
Retrieved 22 September 2022.
Shoichet, Catherine E.; McKirdy, Euan. "Brazil's Senate ousts Rousseff in impeachment vote". CNN. Retrieved 31 August 2016.
"Democracy Index 2010" (PDF). eiu.com.
Retrieved 12 February 2016.
a b "Embassy of Brazil – Ottawa". Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 19 July 2007. Political Institutions – The Executive
"City Mayors". Retrieved 19 July 2007. Brazil federal, state and local government
Fontaine, Edward (1872). "Contributions to the Physical Geography of the Mississippi River, and Its Delta". Journal of the American Geographical Society of New York. 3: 343–78. doi:10.2307/196424. ISSN 1536-0407. JSTOR 196424.
"Government – Brazil". Southtravels.com. 5 October 1988. Archived from the original on 28 November 2011. Retrieved 17 March 2010.
"The Brazilian Legal System", Organization of American States.
Retrieved 17 May 2007.
José Afonso da Silva, Curso de Direito Constitucional Positivo (Malheiros, 2004; ISBN 85-7420-559-1), p. 46.
"Amendments to the Brazilian Constitution". Brazilian Law Compiled.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
Silva, Curso de Direito Constitucional Positivo, p. 592.
Fabiano Deffenti; Welber Oliveira Barral (2011). Introduction to Brazilian Law.
Kluwer Law International. pp. 20–. ISBN 978-90-411-2506-4. Retrieved 6 June 2013.
Miguel Glugoski and Odete Medauar, "Nossos direitos nas suas mãos", USP Journal, 24–30 November 2003. Retrieved 17 May 2007.
Diego Abreu, "Primeira Corte do mundo a ter canal de vídeo no YouTube é o STF", G1. (in Portuguese) Accessed 12 October 2009.
"STF: Primeira corte do mundo no YouTube". ESMA-PB. (in Portuguese) Accessed 12 October 2009.
"Página do STF no Twitter está no ar" (12 January 2009). STF Official Website. (in Portuguese) Consulted on 5 December 2009.
Uma Nova Agenda Militar Archived 25 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Revista Época.
Retrieved on 19 February 2009.
"2021 Military Strength Ranking". Global Firepower.
Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2022.
"Brazil is among the 10 largest military powers in the world". OCP News.
Archived from the original on 21 July 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2022.
The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, retrieved 26 March 2010
"Decreto Nº 5.670 de 10 de Janeiro de 2006" (in Portuguese). Presidência da República.
Retrieved 2 October 2010.
"Military Power". Brasil.
Retrieved 27 June 2010.
Exército (ed.). "Brigada de Operações Especiais". Archived from the original on 23 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013.
"Defesanet – Brigada de operações especiais". Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"Brigada de Operações Especiais – Bda Op Esp". tropaselite.t35.com.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2010. Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"Military Power". Brasil.
Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"Brigada de Infantaria Pára-quedista". Exército.
Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 21 September 2013.
"1º Batalhão de Infantaria de Selva (Aeromóvel)". Exército.
Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"12º Brigada de Infantaria Leve (Aeromóvel)". Brasil: Exército.
Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"Força de Ação Rápida – FAR". tropaselite.t35.com.
Archived from the original on 18 October 2010. Retrieved 27 June 2010.
Scheina (1987), p. 81.
"Grupamento de Mergulhadores de Combate – GruMeC". tropaselite.t35.com.
Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 27 June 2010.
"Porta-Helicópteros Atlântico agora é Navio-Aeródromo Multipropósito" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Poder Naval. 26 November 2020.
Mizokami, Kyle (5 April 2022). "Every.
Single.
Aircraft Carrier.
In the World". Popular Mechanics.
"Sala de imprensa – FAB em números" (in Portuguese). Força Aérea Brasileira.
Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Especial – NOTÍCIAS – Uma nova agenda militar". Revistaepoca.globo.com.
Retrieved 19 June 2010.
"Brazil". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2 October 2013. (Archived 2013 edition)
"People's Daily Online – Bolivia bans Argentina from reselling gas to Chile". English.peopledaily.com.cn. 25 October 2006. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
"Fresh anger over Bolivia gas plan". BBC News. 16 April 2004. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
"Especial – NOTÍCIAS – Os pés de barro de um gigante". Revistaepoca.globo.com.
Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
Rohter, Larry (1 August 2004). "Brazil Is Leading a Largely South American Mission to Haiti". The New York Times.
Retrieved 1 April 2010.
Article 4 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil Archived 28 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine V-Brazil.
Retrieved on 20 September 2011.
Article 84 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil Archived 19 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine V-Brazil.
Retrieved on 20 September 2011.
U.S. Congressional Report on Brazil United States Congress.
Retrieved on 23 June 2009.
Georges D. Landau, "The Decision-making Process in Foreign Policy: The Case of Brazil", Center for Strategic and International Studies: Washington DC: March 2003
a b c d e Cabral and Weinstock 2010. Brazil: an emerging aid player (Archived 13 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine). London: Overseas Development Institute
Cabral, Lidia 2010. Brazil's development cooperation with the South: a global model in waiting (Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine). London: Overseas Development Institute
"Ordem pública é prioridade da Força Nacional de Segurança". Portal Brasil. 29 April 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
"Brasil tem maior número absoluto de homicídios do mundo". O Estado de S. Paulo. 10 December 2014.
"Taxa de delito por 100 mil habitantes". Secretaria de Segurança Pública do Estado de São Paulo. 31 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2011.
"A Year of Violence Sees Brazil's Murder Rate Hit Record High". The New York Times. 10 August 2018. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022.
"Os estados com mais homicídios no Brasil". Exame. 11 November 2014. Retrieved 5 February 2015.
"Brasil passa a Rússia e tem a terceira maior população carcerária do mundo". Folha de S.Paulo. 5 June 2014.
"Brasil tem hoje deficit de 200 mil vagas no sistema prisional". G1. 15 January 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014.
"Brasil será maior exportador agrícola mundial em 2024" (in Portuguese). EXAME. 1 July 2015. Archived from the original on 9 May 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2018.
"Embraer vê clientes mais dispostos à compra de aviões". Exame Magazine. 10 October 2010. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
"6. Brazil". Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Retrieved 3 October 2022. Brazil is rich in a variety of natural resources and is the world's leading producer of tin, iron ore and phosphate.
It has large deposits of diamonds, manganese, chromium, copper, bauxite and many other minerals.
"Labor force, total - Brazil". World Bank.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) - Brazil". World Bank.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"BANCO CENTRAL DO BRASIL - SDDS". 
"Poverty headcount ratio at $2.15 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) - Brazil". World Bank.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"Poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) - Brazil". World Bank.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
France, Guilherme (29 January 2019). "Brazil: Overview of corruption and anti-corruption" (PDF). Transparency International.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Corruption remains one of the biggest impediments to economic development in Brazil.
Alok Bansal; Yogeshwari Phatak; I C Gupta; Rajendra Jain (2009). Transcending Horizons Through Innovative Global Practices.
Excel Books. p. 29. ISBN 978-81-7446-708-9.
"GDP – composition, by sector of origin". The World Factbook.
Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"FAOSTAT". 
"How are agricultural co-operatives making a difference in Brazil? | ICA". ica.coop.
"Production of Brazil, by FAO".
"Brasil extrai cerca de 2 gramas de ouro por habitante em 5 anos". R7.com. 29 June 2019.
"Nióbio: G1 visita em MG complexo industrial do maior produtor do mundo". G1.
"Serviço Geológico do Brasil". cprm.gov.br.
"Rio Grande do Sul: o maior exportador de pedras preciosas do Brasil". Band.com.br.
"Fazcomex Tecnologia para Comércio Exterior – Soluções para Comex". Fazcomex | Tecnologia para Comércio Exterior.
"Agronegócio tem oito entre os dez produtos líderes das exportações brasileiras em 2019". Avicultura Industrial.
"List of importing markets for the product exported by Brazil in 2021". International Trade Centre.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"List of supplying markets for the product imported by Brazil in 2021". International Trade Centre.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"Brazil Trade". World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS). Retrieved 3 October 2022.
"Official History of Automobile Industry in Brazil". National Association of Vehicles Industries. 23 January 2022.
"Alimentos Processados | A indústria de alimentos e bebidas na sociedade brasileira atual". alimentosprocessados.com.br.
"Produção nacional de celulose cai 6,6% em 2019, aponta Ibá". Valor Econômico.
"Indústrias calçadistas em Franca, SP registram queda de 40% nas vagas de trabalho em 6 anos". G1.
Comércio, Diário do (24 January 2020). "Minas Gerais produz 32,3% do aço nacional em 2019".
"O novo mapa das montadoras, que agora rumam para o interior do País". 8 March 2019.
"Indústria automobilística do Sul do Rio impulsiona superavit na economia". G1.
"Indústria Química no Brasil" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
"Estudo de 2018" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
"Produção nacional da indústria de químicos cai 5,7% em 2019, diz Abiquim". economia.uol.com.br.
"Industria Textil no Brasil". Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2020.
"Setor de serviços sustenta o crescimento do PIB de 2018". VEJA.
"Produtividade e Comércio Exterior". SECINT e SEPEC.
"Pequenos negócios já representam 30% do Produto Interno Bruto do país".
UNWTO Tourism Highlights. 2016. doi:10.18111/9789284418145. ISBN 978-92-844-1814-5.
"UNWTO Tourism Highlights – 2011 Edition" (PDF). World Tourism Organization.
June 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2011.
"Estatisticas e Indicadores: Receita Cambial" (in Portuguese). Ministério do Turismo. 2012. Retrieved 13 February 2012.
Ministério do Turismo (13 January 2012). "Turismo Brasileiro com novo recorde em 2011" (in Portuguese). No Pátio.
Archived from the original on 22 August 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2012.
Highlights of international tourism. 2019. doi:10.18111/9789284421152. ISBN 9789284421152. S2CID 240665765. Archived from the original on 30 August 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2021.
Guilherme Lohmann Palhares (2012). Tourism in Brazil: Environment, Management and Segments.
Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-415-67432-4.
"The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2015" (PDF). World Economic Forum.
May 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
a b Jennifer Blanke; Thea Chiesa, eds. (2013). "Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2013" (PDF). World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland.
Retrieved 14 April 2013. See Table 4, pp. 18–19 and Country/Economy Profile: Brazil, pp. 116–17.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Staff (2006). OECD Economic Surveys: Brazil 2006. OECD Publishing. p. 94. ISBN 978-92-64-02999-6.
United Nations Educational, Scientific (2010). UNESCO Science Report 2010: The Current Status of Science Around the World.
UNESCO. pp. 110–18. ISBN 978-92-3-104132-7.
Brian Harvey; Henk H.F. Smid; Thâeo Pirard (2010). Emerging Space Powers: The New Space Programs of Asia, the Middle East and South-America.
Springer. p. 324. ISBN 978-1-4419-0874-2.
Crocitti & Vallance (2012), p. 628.
NASA Signs International Space Station Agreement With Brazil NASA.
O.C. Ferreira. "O Sistema Elétrico Brasileiro". Retrieved 21 March 2013.
"Previsão de lançamento". Marinha do Brasil (in Portuguese). Retrieved 25 January 2022.
"Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität". Elsa.physik.uni-bonn.de. 18 August 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
"CEITEC". Portal Brasil.
Brasil.gov.br.
Archived from the original on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
"Brasil cai duas posições em ranking mundial", Folha de S.Paulo, 26 March 2010, retrieved 26 March 2010
"Global Innovation Index 2021". World Intellectual Property Organization.
United Nations.
Retrieved 5 March 2022.
"Global Innovation Index 2019". 
"RTD – Item". ec.europa.eu.
Retrieved 2 September 2021.
"Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
"M. Santos Dumont Rounds Eiffel Tower" (PDF). The New York Times. 20 October 1901. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2010.
"Engelberg, Inc". Vintage Machinery. 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Abreu, Manuel de, pag. 17 – Grande Enciclopédia Universal – edição de 1980 – Ed.Amazonas
"Portable stereo's creator got his due, eventually". Archived from the original on 9 March 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2015.
Exposição destaca centenário do CEFET-MG Sítio do Cefet-MG, acessado em 13 de novembro de 2010 Archived 13 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Ministério da Ciência, Tecnologia e Inovação. "50 anos do Méson-Pi". Archived from the original on 26 May 2011. Retrieved 29 December 2010.
"Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas – Coleção Galileo: Textos de Física" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 March 2013. Retrieved 21 October 2014.
"Atta-Ur-Rahman, José Leite Lopes and Juan Martín Maldacena receive UNESCO science prizes". UNESCOPRESS. Retrieved 21 October 2014.
Brasileiro ganha a Medalha Fields, considerada o "Nobel da Matemática".
West, David A. 2003. Fritz Müller: a naturalist in Brazil.
Blacksburg: Pocahontas Press
Fernanda Castello Branco. "As 11 estradas mais incríveis do Brasil". iG. Archived from the original on 11 April 2018. Retrieved 22 September 2014.
"Brazilian road network in 2019". anuariodotransporte.cnt.org.br.
"Road system in Brazil". Nationsencyclopedia.com.
Retrieved 30 October 2010.
"Anuário CNT do Transporte". anuariodotransporte.cnt.org.br.
Pereira, L.A.G; Lessa, S.N.; Cardoso, A.D., Planejamento e Transporte Rodoviário no Brasil
Sydney Alberto Latini; "A Implantação da Indústria Automobilística no Brasil"; Editora Alaúde 2007 ISBN 978-85-98497-55-6
"OPrincipais ferrovias". Ministerio dos Transportes (in Portuguese) Archived 29 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine
a b Country Comparison to the World: Gini Index – Brazil Archived 13 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine The World Factbook.
Retrieved on 3 April 2012.
"Ociosidade atinge 70% dos principais aeroportos". O Globo, 12 August 2007. (in Portuguese)
Guilherme Lohmann Palhares (2012). Tourism in Brazil: Environment, Management and Segments.
Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-67432-4.
"Mercado Brasileiro Terminais de Contêineres", Santos Brasil. (in Portuguese)
G1, Fábio AmatoDo; Brasília, em (24 March 2013). "Navios esperam até 16 dias para atracar em porto do país, diz MDIC". Economia.
Michael Schmidt; Vincent Onyango; Dmytro Palekhov (2011). Implementing Environmental and Resource Management.
Springer. p. 42. ISBN 978-3-540-77568-3.
OECD; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Staff (2001). OECD Economic Surveys: Brazil 2001. OECD Publishing. p. 193. ISBN 978-92-64-19141-9.
"RENEWABLE CAPACITY STATISTICS 2022" (PDF). IRENA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022.
Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser: Solar Power Generation
a b Matriz Energética e Elétrica
%3A%2F%2Fantigo.aneel.gov.br%2Fweb%2Fguest%2Fsala-de-imprensa-exibicao-2%3Fp_p_id%3D101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6%26p_p_lifecycle%3D0%26p_p_state%3Dnormal%26p_p_mode%3Dview%26p_p_col_id%3Dcolumn-2%26p_p_col_pos%3D2%26p_p_col_count%3D3%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_advancedSearch%3Dfalse%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_keywords%3D%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_delta%3D15%26p_r_p_564233524_resetCur%3Dfalse%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_cur%3D5%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_andOperator%3Dtrue National Agency of Energy
Brasil anuncia aumento da produção de petróleo em 10% para ajudar a estabilizar preços
"Produção de petróleo e gás no Brasil ultrapassa 4 milhões de boe/d pela primeira vez". Archived from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
Gerard Martin La Forgia; Bernard F. Couttolenc (2008). Hospital Performance in Brazil: The Search for Excellence.
World Bank Publications. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-8213-7359-0.
"20 Anos do SUS". Conselho Nacional de Saúde.
Retrieved 13 April 2012.
Lawrence F. Wolper (2004). Health Care Administration: Planning, Implementing, and Managing Organized Delivery Systems.
Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7637-3144-1.
"Physicians (per 1,000 people)". World Health Organization's Global Health Workforce Statistics.
"Hospital beds (per 1,000 people)". World Health Organization The World Bank.
a b "Saúde" (PDF). Radar social.
Ministério do Planejamento.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2008.
"Measuring overall health system performance for 191 countries" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2000. Retrieved 30 April 2014.
Usa Ibp Usa (2005). Brazil: Tax Guide.
Int'l Business Publications. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-7397-3279-3.
a b "IBGE: Analfabetismo cai no país, mas fica estagnado no Nordeste". Globo.com (in Portuguese).
The Central Intelligence Agency (2010). The World Factbook 2010 (CIA 2009 ed.). Potomac Books, Inc. p. 143. ISBN 978-1-59797-541-4.
World Bank (2001). Rural Poverty Alleviation in Brazil: Towards an Integrated Strategy.
World Bank Publications. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-8213-5206-9.
Laplane, Mario. "Efforts towards inclusion". D + C, Development and cooperation.
"QS University Rankings Latin America". QS World University Rankings.
Retrieved 11 November 2018.
"Rede Globo se torna a 2ª maior emissora do mundo" (in Portuguese). O Fuxico.
Archived from the original on 14 May 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2012.
Roberto Gonzalez Echevarría; Enrique Pupo-Walker (1996). The Cambridge History of Latin American Literature.
Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-41035-9.
Donald H. Johnston (2003). Encyclopedia of international media and communications.
Vol. 3. Academic Press. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-12-387671-3.
Jon S. Vincent (2003). Culture and Customs of Brazil.
Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 97–100. ISBN 978-0-313-30495-8.
Bryan McCann (2004). Hello, Hello Brazil: Popular Music in the Making of Modern Brazil.
Duke University Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-8223-3273-2.
David Ward (2007). Television and Public Policy: Change and Continuity in an Era of Global Liberalization.
Routledge. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-203-87728-9.
"Um ponto de IBOPE equivale a quantas pessoas? E domicílios?". IBOPE. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 23 March 2013.
"Top 10 das novelas". MSN Brasil.
Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 23 March 2013.
Marcelo S. Alencar (2009). Digital Television Systems.
Cambridge University Press. pp. 179–81. ISBN 978-0-521-89602-3.
"Brazil launches international TV station for Africa". BBC News. 25 May 2010. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade"
2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade"
2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade".
"Brazil population reaches 190.8 million" Archived 9 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
Brasil.gov.br.
"Shaping Brazil: The Role of International Migration". Migration Policy Institute.
José Alberto Magno de Carvalho, "Crescimento populacional e estrutura demográfica no Brasil" Archived 19 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine Belo Horizonte: UFMG/Cedeplar, 2004 (PDF file), p. 5.
"Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística". IBGE. 29 November 1999. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
"Projeção da População do Brasil – Brazil's populational projection". IBGE. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
Magno de Carvalho, "Crescimento populacional e estrutura demográfica no Brasil"[dead link], pp. 7–8.
PNAD 2008, IBGE. "Pessoas de 5 anos ou mais de idade por situação, sexo, alfabetização e grupos de idade e grupos de idade".
PNAD 2008, IBGE. "Pessoas de 5 anos ou mais de idade por situação, sexo, alfabetização e grupos de idade"
PNAD 2008, IBGE. "Pessoas de 5 anos ou mais de idade por situação, sexo e alfabetização".
"Tendências Demográficas: Uma análise da população com base nos resultados dos Censos Demográficos 1940 e 2000". Ibge.gov.br.
Retrieved 7 April 2012.
Antonio Carlos Lacerda (5 April 2011). "Demographical census reveals Brazil as older and less white". Port.pravda.ru.
Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2012.
"Self-declared White Brazilians decrease in number, says IBGE". Fatimanews.com.br.
Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 7 April 2012.
2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por cor ou raça, situação e sexo".
De Assis Poiares, Lilian; De Sá Osorio, Paulo; Spanhol, Fábio Alexandre; Coltre, Sidnei César; Rodenbusch, Rodrigo; Gusmão, Leonor; Largura, Alvaro; Sandrini, Fabiano; Da Silva, Cláudia Maria Dornelles (2010). "Allele frequencies of 15 STRs in a representative sample of the Brazilian population" (PDF). Forensic Science International: Genetics. 4 (2): e61–63. doi:10.1016/j.fsigen.2009.05.006. PMID 20129458. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2011.
Brazilian DNA is nearly 80% European, indicates study.
NMO Godinho O impacto das migrações na constituição genética de populações latino-americanas Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
PhD Thesis, Universidade de Brasília (2008).
a b Pena, Sérgio D. J.; Di Pietro, Giuliano; Fuchshuber-Moraes, Mateus; Genro, Julia Pasqualini; Hutz, Mara H.; Kehdy Fde, Fernanda de Souza Gomes; Kohlrausch, Fabiana; Magno, Luiz Alexandre Viana; Montenegro, Raquel Carvalho;  et al. (2011).  Harpending, Henry (ed.). "The Genomic Ancestry of Individuals from Different Geographical Regions of Brazil Is More Uniform Than Expected". PLOS ONE. 6 (2): e17063. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...617063P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017063. PMC 3040205. PMID 21359226.
Maria Stella Ferreira-Levy (1974). "O papel da migração internacional na evolução da população brasileira (1872 a 1972)". Revista de Saúde Pública. 8 (supl): 49–90. doi:10.1590/S0034-89101974000500003., Table 2, p. 74. (in Portuguese)
Zirin, 2014. Chapter 2, Section "The Beginning of the 'Mosaic' ".
"The Jewish Community in Brazil". Beit Hatfutsot.
Parra, Flavia C.; Amado, Roberto C.; Lambertucci, José R.; Rocha, Jorge; Antunes, Carlos M.; Pena, Sérgio D. J. (7 January 2003). "Color and genomic ancestry in Brazilians". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 100 (1): 177–82. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100..177P. doi:10.1073/pnas.0126614100. PMC 140919. PMID 12509516.
RIBEIRO, Darcy.
O Povo Brasileiro, Companhia de Bolso, fourth reprint, 2008 (2008).
Negros de origem européia. afrobras.org.br
Guerreiro-Junior, Vanderlei; Bisso-Machado, Rafael; Marrero, Andrea; Hünemeier, Tábita; Salzano, Francisco M.; Bortolini, Maria Cátira (2009). "Genetic signatures of parental contribution in black and white populations in Brazil". Genetics and Molecular Biology. 32 (1): 1–11. doi:10.1590/S1415-47572009005000001. PMC 3032968. PMID 21637639.
Pena, S.D.J.; Bastos-Rodrigues, L.; Pimenta, J.R.; Bydlowski, S.P. (2009). "Genetic heritage variability of Brazilians in even regional averages, 2009 study". Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research. 42 (10): 870–76. doi:10.1590/S0100-879X2009005000026. PMID 19738982.
a b Coelho (1996), p. 268.
a b Vesentini (1988), p. 117.
Adas, Melhem Panorama geográfico do Brasil, 4th ed (São Paulo: Moderna, 2004), p. 268 ISBN 85-16-04336-3
Azevedo (1971), pp. 2–3.
a b c Moreira (1981), p. 108.
Azevedo (1971), pp. 74–75.
Enciclopédia Barsa, vol. 10 (Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987), p. 355.
Azevedo (1971), p. 74.
a b Azevedo (1971), p. 161.
Enciclopédia Barsa, vol. 4, pp. 254–55, 258, 265.
"In Amazonia, Defending the Hidden Tribes", The Washington Post (8 July 2007).
"The Global Catholic Population". Pew Research Center. 13 February 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2020.
"Brazil". International Religious Freedom Report. U.S. Department of State. 8 November 2005. Retrieved 8 June 2008.
Kevin Boyle; Juliet Sheen (2013). Freedom of Religion and Belief: A World Report.
Routledge. p. 211. ISBN 978-1-134-72229-7.
"Brazil". Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs.
Archived from the original on 25 August 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2011.
Brian Morris (2006). Religion and Anthropology: A Critical Introduction.
Cambridge University Press. p. 223. ISBN 978-0-521-85241-8.
William Jeynes; David W. Robinson (2012). International Handbook of Protestant Education.
Springer. p. 405. ISBN 978-94-007-2386-3.
"2010 census results" (PDF).
"Brazil". Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs.
Archived from the original on 25 August 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2011. See drop-down essay on "The Growth of Religious Pluralism"
a b Do G1, em São Paulo (23 August 2011). "G1 – País tem menor nível de adeptos do catolicismo desde 1872, diz estudo – notícias em Brasil". G1.globo.com.
Retrieved 7 April 2012.
"Senado aprova acordo com o Vaticano". O Globo. 2009. Retrieved 28 June 2020.
"Decreto nº 7.107, de 11 de fevereiro de 2010". Casa Civil da Presidência da República.
Retrieved 28 June 2020.
"Brazil – Language". countrystudies.us.
"Learn About Portuguese Language". Sibila.com.br.
Retrieved 7 April 2012.
a b c "Languages of Brazil". Ethnologue.
Retrieved 9 June 2008.
LEI Nº 10.436, DE 24 DE ABRIL DE 2002. Presidência da República, Casa Civil, Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicos.
Retrieved on 19 May 2012.
Brazilian decree nº 5626, 22 December 2005. Planalto.gov.br (23 December 2005). Retrieved on 19 May 2012.
Charles J. Russo (2011). The Legal Rights of Students with Disabilities: International Perspectives.
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-4422-1085-1.
Campbell, Lyle; Grondona, Verónica; Muysken, Peter (2012). "Contacts between indigenous languages in South America". The Indigenous Languages of South America: A Comprehensive Guide.
Walter de Gruyter. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-11-025803-5. Nheengatú (also called língua geral of Amazonia, or lingua Brasilica) originated in the 17th century in what are now the states of Pará Maranhão, as lingua franca on the basis of Tupinambá lexicon but with strong grammatical influence from Portuguese, also due to intervention by Jesuit missionaries [...] Around 1700 it was spoken in a large area in Brazil, as a contact language between whites and indians, but it lost some support with the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1758 [...] Its sister language in the colonial period was Língua Geral Paulista (in the state of São Paolo) a lingua franca which is now extinct.
Rohter, Larry (28 August 2005). "Language Born of Colonialism Thrives Again in Amazon". New York Times.
Retrieved 14 July 2008.
"O alemão lusitano do Sul do Brasil". DW-World.de.
"ELB". labeurb.unicamp.br.
"Approvato il progetto che dichiara il 'Talian' come patrimonio del Rio Grande del Sud – Brasile". Sitoveneto.
Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
Patrick Stevenson (1997). The German Language and the Real World: Sociolinguistic, Cultural, and Pragmatic Perspectives on Contemporary German.
Oxford University Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-19-823738-9.
"Constituição de 1988 da República Federativa do Brasil/Título II – Wikisource". pt.m.wikisource.org.
"IDBGE" (in Portuguese). IBGE. 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
a b "Mais da metade da população vive em 294 arranjos formados por contiguidade urbana e por deslocamentos para trabalho e estudo" (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.
Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"Arranjos Populacionais e Concentrações Urbanas do Brasil" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. p. 148. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"Estimativas da população residente no Brasil e Unidades da Federação com data de referência em 1º de julho de 2016" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.
Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"Principal Cities". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2008.[dubious  – discuss]
"Arranjos Populacionais e Concentrações Urbanas do Brasil" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. p. 148. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
"Estimativas da população residente no Brasil e Unidades da Federação com data de referência em 1º de julho de 2017" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.
Retrieved 14 May 2018.
Largest Carnival Guinness World Records.
Teresa A. Meade (2009). A Brief History of Brazil.
Infobase Publishing. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-8160-7788-5.
David Levinson (1998). Ethnic Groups Worldwide: A Ready Reference Handbook.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 325. ISBN 978-1-57356-019-1.
Jeffrey Lesser (2013). Immigration, Ethnicity, and National Identity in Brazil, 1808 to the Present.
Cambridge University Press. pp. 150–55. ISBN 978-0-521-19362-7.
Freyre, Gilberto (1986). "The Afro-Brazilian experiment: African influence on Brazilian culture". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2008.
Leandro Karnal, Teatro da fé: Formas de representação religiosa no Brasil e no México do século XVI, São Paulo, Editora Hucitec, 1998; available on fflch.usp.br Archived 24 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine
"The Brazilian Baroque", Encyclopaedia Itaú Cultural Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine
Leslie Marsh (2012). Brazilian Women's Filmmaking: From Dictatorship to Democracy.
University of Illinois Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-252-09437-8.
Hue, Jorge de Souza (1999). Uma visão da arquitectura colonial no Brasil [A vision of Colonial Architecture in Brazil] (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro.
Boxer, Charles Ralph (1962). The Golden Age of Brazil, 1695–1750: Growing Pains of a Colonial Society.
University of California Press.
Guimaraens, Cêça de.
Arquitetura Archived 15 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Portal do Ministério das Relações Exteriores.
Claro, Mauro. "Ambientes modernos.
A casa modernista da Rua Santa Cruz, de Gregori Warchavchik, e outras casas da modernidade". In: Drops, 2008; 09 (025.03)
a b Duduka Da Fonseca; Bob Weiner (1991). Brazilian Rhythms for Drumset.
Alfred Music Publishing. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7692-0987-6.
Donna M. Di Grazia (2013). Nineteenth-Century Choral Music.
Routledge. p. 457. ISBN 978-1-136-29409-9.
"UNESCO Culture Sector – Intangible Heritage – 2003 Convention". Unesco.org.
Retrieved 4 June 2013.
Larry Crook (2009). Focus: Music of Northeast Brazil.
Taylor & Francis. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-415-96066-3.
Peter Fryer (2000). Rhythms of Resistance: African Musical Heritage in Brazil.
Pluto Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-7453-0731-2.
"Brazil From A TO Z: FORRÓ". Brazilian Experience. 25 December 2015.
"Jack A. Draper III". Romance Languages and Literatures: University of Missouri.
Draper, Jack A., III (2010). Forró and redemptive regionalism from the Brazilian northeast: popular music in a culture of migration.
New York: Lang.
ISBN 978-1-4331-1076-4. OCLC 643568832.
MacGowan, Chris; Pessanha, Ricardo (1998). The Brazilian Sound: Samba, Bossa Nova, and the Popular Music of Brazil.
Temple University Press. pp. 159–61. ISBN 978-1-56639-545-8.
MacGowan & Pessanha (1998), p. 6.
Gayle Kassing (2007). History of Dance: An Interactive Arts Approach.
Human Kinetics 10%. p. 236. ISBN 978-0-7360-6035-6.
Michael Campbell (2011). Popular Music in America: The Beat Goes on.
Cengage Learning. p. 299. ISBN 978-0-8400-2976-8.
Crocitti & Vallance (2012), p. 360.
"Brazilian Literature: An Introduction". Embassy of Brasil – Ottawa.
Visited on 2 November 2009.
Candido; Antonio. (1970) Vários escritos.
São Paulo: Duas Cidades. p. 18
Caldwell, Helen (1970) Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and his Novels.
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London, University of California Press.
Fernandez, Oscar Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and His Novels The Modern Language Journal, Vol. 55, No. 4 (Apr. 1971), pp. 255–56
Beatriz Mugayar Kühl, Arquitetura do ferro e arquitetura ferroviária em São Paulo: reflexões sobre a sua preservação, p. 202. Atelie Editorial, 1998.
Daniel Balderston and Mike Gonzalez, Encyclopedia of Latin American and Caribbean Literature, 1900–2003, p. 288. Routledge, 2004.
Sayers, Portugal and Brazil in Transitn, "Literature". U of Minnesota Press, 1 January 1999.
Marshall C. Eakin and Paulo Roberto de Almeida, Envisioning Brazil: A Guide to Brazilian Studies in the United States: "Literature, Culture and Civilization". University of Wisconsin Press, 31 October 2005.
"Way of Life". Encarta.
MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 8 June 2008.
Roger, "Feijoada: The Brazilian national dish" Archived 29 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine braziltravelguide.com.
Cascudo, Luis da Câmara.
História da Alimentação no Brasil.
São Paulo/Belo Horizonte: Editora USP/Itatiaia, 1983.
Bayor, Ronald H. (2011). Multicultural America: An Encyclopedia of the Newest Americans.
Georgia Institute of Technology. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-313-35786-2.
Barbosa, Lívia (2007). "Feijão com arroz e arroz com feijão: o Brasil no prato dos brasileiros". Horizontes Antropológicos. 13 (28): 87–116. doi:10.1590/S0104-71832007000200005.
Ferraccioli, Patrícia; Silveira, Eliane Augusta da (2010). "Cultural feeding influence on palative memories in the usual brazilian cuisine". Rev.
Enferm.
UERJ. 18 (2): 198–203.
Freyre, Gilberto.
Açúcar.
Uma Sociologia do Doce, com Receitas de Bolos e Doces do Nordeste do Brasil.
São Paulo, Companhia das Letras, 1997.
"Rio the Magnificent (1932)". YouTube.
Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 19 October 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
Larry, Rohter (9 November 2010). "Brazil's Best, Restored and Ready for a 21st-Century Audience". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2010.
Tose, Juliano. "Editorial". Contracampo – revista de cinema.
Revista Contracampo.
Retrieved 19 October 2015.
"Cidade de Deus (City of God) (2003) – Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes.
Flixster.
Retrieved 19 October 2015.
Ebert, Roger. "The best films of the decade". RogerEbert.com.
Retrieved 19 October 2015.
Padre Anchieta Brasil Escola.
a b "Brazilian Theatre: An Introduction". Ambasciata brasiliana a Ottawa.
Archived from the original on 5 February 2012.
O Teatro no Brasil Secretaria da Educação do Paraná.
Louzada, Maria Alice & Louzada, Julio.
Os Primeiros Momentos da Arte Brasileira Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Júlio Louzada Artes Plásticas Brasil.
Acesso 5 out 2010
Leite, José Roberto Teixeira & Lemos, Carlos A.C. Os Primeiros Cem Anos, in Civita, Victor.
Arte no Brasil.
São Paulo: Abril Cultural, 1979
a b Biscardi & Rocha 2006
Sevcenko, Nicolau.
Pindorama revisitada: cultura e sociedade em tempos de virada.
Série Brasil cidadão.
Editora Peirópolis, 2000. pp. 39–47
"Futebol, o esporte mais popular do Brasil, é destaque no Via Legal :: Notícias". Jusbrasil.com.br.
Archived from the original on 30 March 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2011.
"Football in Brazil". Goal Programme.
International Federation of Association Football. 15 April 2008. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
Zirin, 2014. Chapter 4 "Futebol: The Journey from Daring to Fear"
Donaldson, Gerald. "Emerson Fittipaldi". Hall of Fame.
The Official Formula 1 Website.
Retrieved 6 June 2008.
Donaldson, Gerald. "Nelson Piquet". Hall of Fame.
The Official Formula 1 Website.
Retrieved 6 June 2008.
Donaldson, Gerald. "Ayrton Senna". Hall of Fame.
The Official Formula 1 Website.
Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"Beach Soccer". International Federation of Association Football.
Archived from the original on 23 June 2007. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"Futsal". International Federation of Association Football.
Archived from the original on 3 June 2007. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"The art of capoeira". BBC. 20 September 2006. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"Brazilian Vale Tudo". I.V.C. Archived from the original on 30 May 1998. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"International Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Federation". International Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Federation.
Archived from the original on 20 April 2008. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"1950 FIFA World Cup Brazil". Previous FIFA World Cups.
International Federation of Association Football.
Archived from the original on 3 June 2007. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil". International Federation of Association Football.
Archived from the original on 9 June 2008. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
"The Official Formula 1 Website". Formula One Administration.
Archived from the original on 4 June 2008. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
Ming Li; Eric W. MacIntosh; Gonzalo A. Bravo (2011). International Sport Management.
Human Kinetics – College of Business at Ohio University. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-4504-2241-3.
"Olympics 2016: Tearful Pele and weeping Lula greet historic win for Rio", The Guardian, 2 October 2009.
"FIBA World Championship History (pdf)" (PDF). FIBA. 1 January 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
Bibliography
Azevedo, Aroldo.
O Brasil e suas regiões.
São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1971
Barman, Roderick J. Citizen Emperor: Pedro II and the Making of Brazil, 1825–1891. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8047-3510-7
Biscardi, Afrânio; Rocha, Frederico Almeida (May 2006), "O Mecenato Artístico de D. Pedro II e o Projeto Imperial", 19&20 – A revista eletrônica de DezenoveVinte, vol. I, no. 1
Boxer, Charles R. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire (1969)
O império marítimo português 1415–1825. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. ISBN 85-359-0292-9
Bueno, Eduardo.
Brasil: uma História.
São Paulo: Ática, 2003. ISBN 85-08-08213-4
Calmon, Pedro.
História da Civilização Brasileira.
Brasília: Senado Federal, 2002
Carvalho, José Murilo de. D. Pedro II. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2007
Coelho, Marcos Amorim.
Geografia do Brasil. 4th ed.
São Paulo: Moderna, 1996
Diégues, Fernando.
A revolução brasílica.
Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2004
Enciclopédia Barsa.
Volume 4: Batráquio – Camarão, Filipe.
Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987
Ermakoff, George (2006). Rio de Janeiro – 1840–1900 – Uma crônica fotográfica (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro: G. Ermakoff Casa Editorial.
ISBN 978-85-98815-05-3.
Fausto, Boris and Devoto, Fernando J. Brasil e Argentina: Um ensaio de história comparada (1850–2002), 2nd ed.
São Paulo: Editoria 34, 2005. ISBN 85-7326-308-3
Gaspari, Elio.
A ditadura envergonhada.
São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. ISBN 85-359-0277-5
Janotti, Aldo.
O Marquês de Paraná: inícios de uma carreira política num momento crítico da história da nacionalidade.
Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1990
Lyra, Heitor.
História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Ascenção (1825–1870). v. 1. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
Lyra, Heitor.
História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Declínio (1880–1891). v. 3. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
Lustosa, Isabel. D. Pedro I: um herói sem nenhum caráter.
São Paulo: Companhia das letras, 2006. ISBN 85-359-0807-2
Moreira, Igor A. G. O Espaço Geográfico, geografia geral e do Brasil. 18. Ed.
São Paulo: Ática, 1981
Munro, Dana Gardner.
The Latin American Republics; A History.
New York: D. Appleton, 1942.
Peres, Damião (1949) O Descobrimento do Brasil por Pedro Álvares Cabral: antecedentes e intencionalidade Porto: Portucalense.
Scheina, Robert L. Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987. ISBN 0-87021-295-8
Lilia Schwarcz (30 November 1998). As barbas do imperador: D. Pedro II, um monarca nos trópicos (in Portuguese). São Paulo: Companhia das Letras.
ISBN 978-85-7164-837-1. OL 142027M. Wikidata Q18238040.
Stuart B. Schwartz Sovereignty and Society in Colonial Brazil (1973)
Early Latin America (1983)
Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society (1985)
Skidmore, Thomas E. Brazil: Five Centuries of Change (Oxford University Press, 1999)
Uma História do Brasil. 4th ed.
São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 2003. ISBN 85-219-0313-8
Souza, Adriana Barreto de.
Duque de Caxias: o homem por trás do monumento.
Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2008. ISBN 978-85-200-0864-5.
Wright, Simon. 1992. Villa-Lobos.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0-19-315475-7
Vainfas, Ronaldo.
Dicionário do Brasil Imperial.
Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2002. ISBN 85-7302-441-0
Vesentini, José William.
Brasil, sociedade e espaço – Geografia do Brasil. 7th Ed.
São Paulo: Ática, 1988
Vianna, Hélio.
História do Brasil: período colonial, monarquia e república, 15th ed.
São Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1994
Zirin, Dave.
Brazil's Dance with the Devil: The World Cup, The Olympics, and the Fight for Democracy Haymarket Books 2014. ISBN 978-1-60846-360-2
Further reading
Alencastro Felipe, Luiz Felipe de.
The Trade in the Living: The Formation of Brazil in the South Atlantic, Sixteenth to Seventeenth Centuries (SUNY Press,  2019)
Alves, Maria Helena Moreira (1985). State and Opposition in Military Brazil.
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Amann, Edmund (1990). The Illusion of Stability: The Brazilian Economy under Cardoso.
World Development (pp. 1805–19).
"Background Note: Brazil". US Department of State.
Retrieved 16 June 2011.
Bellos, Alex (2003). Futebol: The Brazilian Way of Life.
London: Bloomsbury Publishing plc.
Bethell, Leslie (1991). Colonial Brazil.
Cambridge: CUP.
Costa, João Cruz (1964). A History of Ideas in Brazil.
Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Fausto, Boris (1999). A Concise History of Brazil.
Cambridge: CUP.
Furtado, Celso (1963). The Economic Growth of Brazil: A Survey from Colonial to Modern Times.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lamoureux, Andrew Jackson; and three others (1911). "Brazil" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp. 438–463.
Leal, Victor Nunes (1977). Coronelismo: The Municipality and Representative Government in Brazil.
Cambridge: CUP.
Levine, Robert M. Historical Dictionary of Brazil (2019)
Malathronas, John (2003). Brazil: Life, Blood, Soul.
Chichester: Summersdale.
Martinez-Lara, Javier (1995). Building Democracy in Brazil: The Politics of Constitutional Change.
Macmillan.
Prado Júnior, Caio (1967). The Colonial Background of Modern Brazil.
Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Schneider, Ronald (1995). Brazil: Culture and Politics in a New Economic Powerhouse.
Boulder Westview.
Skidmore, Thomas E. (1974). Black into White: Race and Nationality in Brazilian Thought.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-501776-2.
Wagley, Charles (1963). An Introduction to Brazil.
New York, New York: Columbia University Press.
External links
Brazil  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata
Government
Brazilian Federal Government
Official Tourist Guide of Brazil
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
Wikimedia Atlas of Brazil
Geographic data related to Brazil at OpenStreetMap
Brazil History
Timeline
Indigenous peoples
Colonial Brazil (1500–1815)
United Kingdom (1815–1822)
Empire (1822–1889)
First (Old) Republic (1889–1930)
Vargas Era (1930–1946)
Fourth Republic (1946–1964)
Military dictatorship (1964–1985)
Sixth (New) Republic (1985–present)
Geography
Amazon basin
Brazilian Antarctica
Climate
Coastline
Extreme points
Geology
Islands
Largest cities
Mountains
Pantanal
Protected areas
Regions
Rivers
Time Zone
Water resources
Wildlife
World Heritage Sites
Politics
Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights
Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Military
National Congress
Political parties
President of the Republic
Economy
Agriculture
Animal husbandry
Automotive industry
Central Bank
Economic history
Energy
Exports
Industry
Mining
Real (currency)
Science and technology
Stock index
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Society
Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health
Immigration
Income inequality
Languages
People
Religion
Social issues
States by HDI
Unemployment
Water supply and sanitation
Welfare
Youth
Culture
Animation
Arts
Carnaval
Cinema
Comics
Cuisine
Literature
Malandragem
Music
Mythology
National symbols
Newspapers
Painting
Public holidays
Sculpture
Science fiction
Sports
Television
Outline
Category
Portal
Topics related to Brazil
Geographic locale
Lat. and Long. 15°45′S 47°57′W﻿ / ﻿15.750°S 47.950°W﻿ / -15.750; -47.950 (Brasilia)
Countries and dependencies of South AmericaSovereignstatesEntire
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
In part
France
French Guiana
Dependencies
Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
UK
International membership
Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)MembershipMembers
Angola
Brazil
Cape Verde
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Mozambique
Portugal
São Tomé and Príncipe
Timor-Leste 
Observers
Andorra
Argentina
Canada
Chile
Czech Republic
France
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
India
Italy
Ireland
Ivory Coast
Japan
Luxembourg
Mauritius
Organization of Ibero-American States
Namibia
Peru
Qatar
Romania
Senegal
Slovakia
Spain
Serbia
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Organization
Executive Secretariat
Flag of the CPLP
CPLP Games
CPLP Summits
I – Lisbon
II – Praia
III – Maputo
IV – Brasília
V – São Tomé
VI – Bissau
VII – Lisbon
VIII – Luanda
IX – Maputo
X – Díli
XI – Brasília
XII – Ilha do Sal
Culture
Portuguese language
Portuguese literature
Lusophone
Lusitanic
Lusophone music
ACOLOP
Lusophony Games
Countries with Portuguese as an official language
International organizations with Portuguese as an official languages
Category
Union of South American NationsMembersFull Members
Bolivia
Guyana
Suriname
Venezuela
Suspended Members
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Summits
Topics
Cusco Declaration
Constitutive Treaty
President Pro Tempore
Secretary General
Bank of the South
South American Parliament
Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America
Mercosur
Andean Community
Mercosur · Mercosul(Southern Common Market)Politics
Treaty of Asunción
Protocol of Ouro Preto
Visa policies
MembersFull Members
Argentina
Brazil
Paraguay
Uruguay
Venezuela (suspended)
Associated States
Bolivia (being transitioned into full membership)
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Peru
Suriname
Observers
Mexico
New Zealand
Institutions
Parliament
Currencies
Argentine peso
Brazilian real
Paraguayan guaraní
Uruguayan peso
Venezuelan bolívar
Integration
Citizenship
Vehicle registration plates
RelationsEuropean Union
Organization of American States (OAS)Members
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Barbados
Brazil
Belize
Bahamas
Bolivia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Organization
General Assembly
Secretariat for Political Affairs
Secretariat for Integral Development
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
Inter-American Commission of Women
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Inter-American Telecommunication Commission
Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Pan American Union Building
Politics
Charter
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
American Convention on Human Rights
Pan-American Conference
Summit of the Americas
Group of Eight (G8) and Group of Eight + Five (G8+5)G8 members
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Russia (suspended)
United Kingdom
United States
Representative
European Union
G8+5
Brazil
China
India
Mexico
South Africa
See also
G6
G7
G7+1
G4 (Europe)
G4 (UN)
G20 major economies
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
European Union
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Republic of Korea
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15)Summits
Members
Algeria
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Egypt
India
Indonesia
Iran
Jamaica
Kenya
Malaysia
Mexico
Nigeria
Senegal
Sri Lanka
Venezuela
Zimbabwe
BRICSMembership
Brazil
Russia
India
China
South Africa
Summits
Yekaterinburg 2009
Brasília 2010
Sanya 2011
New Delhi 2012
Durban 2013
Fortaleza 2014
Ufa 2015
Goa 2016
Xiamen 2017
Johannesburg 2018
Brasília 2019
Saint Petersburg 2020
New Delhi 2021
Beijing 2022
Bilateral relations
Brazil–China
Brazil–India
Brazil–Russia
Brazil–South Africa
China–India
China–Russia
China–South Africa
India–Russia
India–South Africa
Russia–South Africa
Leaders
Bolsonaro (Brazil)
Putin (Russia)
Modi (India)
Xi (China)
Ramaphosa (South Africa)
Related
New Development Bank
BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement
BRICS Leaders
BRICS Cable
BRICS Universities League
BRICS U-17 Football Cup
Arab League
Arab League
Lists
Politics
Charter
Council
Flag
Geography
Headquarters
History
Military
Joint Defence Council
Parliament
Arab Union
MembershipMembers
Algeria
Bahrain
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Observers
Armenia
Brazil
Eritrea
India
Venezuela
Suspended
Syria
Candidates
South Sudan
Diplomacy
Arab Peace Initiative
Arab League monitors in Syria
Arab League–European Union relations
Foreign relations
Life
Demographics
Economy
GDP
Economic and Social Council
Institutions
Sport
Transport
Pan-Arabism
Union of Arab National Olympic Committees
Pan Arab Games
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Sweden
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 08:52 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
