Broadcasting - Wikipedia
Broadcasting
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Distribution of audio or audiovisual content to dispersed audiences
"Broadcast" redirects here.
For other uses, see Broadcast (disambiguation).
A broadcasting antenna in Stuttgart
Broadcasting is the distribution of audio or video content to a dispersed audience via any electronic mass communications medium, but typically one using the electromagnetic spectrum (radio waves), in a one-to-many model.
Broadcasting began with AM radio, which came into popular use around 1920 with the spread of vacuum tube radio transmitters and receivers.  Before this, all forms of electronic communication (early radio, telephone, and telegraph) were one-to-one, with the message intended for a single recipient.  The term broadcasting evolved from its use as the agricultural method of sowing seeds in a field by casting them broadly about.
It was later adopted for describing the widespread distribution of information by printed materials or by telegraph.
Examples applying it to "one-to-many" radio transmissions of an individual station to multiple listeners appeared as early as 1898.
Over the air broadcasting is usually associated with radio and television, though more recently, both radio and television transmissions have begun to be distributed by cable (cable television). The receiving parties may include the general public or a relatively small subset; the point is that anyone with the appropriate receiving technology and equipment (e.g., a radio or television set) can receive the signal.
The field of broadcasting includes both government-managed services such as public radio, community radio and public television, and private commercial radio and commercial television.
The U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, title 47, part 97 defines "broadcasting" as "transmissions intended for reception by the general public, either direct or relayed".  Private or two-way telecommunications transmissions do not qualify under this definition.
For example, amateur ("ham") and citizens band (CB) radio operators are not allowed to broadcast.
As defined, "transmitting" and "broadcasting" are not the same.
Transmission of radio and television programs from a radio or television station to home receivers by radio waves is referred to as "over the air" (OTA) or terrestrial broadcasting and in most countries requires a broadcasting license.  Transmissions using a wire or cable, like cable television (which also retransmits OTA stations with their consent), are also considered broadcasts but do not necessarily require a license (though in some countries, a license is required).  In the 2000s, transmissions of television and radio programs via streaming digital technology have increasingly been referred to as broadcasting as well.
Contents
History
Main article: History of broadcasting
The earliest broadcasting consisted of sending telegraph signals over the airwaves, using Morse code, a system developed in the 1830s by Samuel Morse, physicist Joseph Henry and Alfred Vail.
They developed an electrical telegraph system which sent pulses of electric current along wires which controlled an electromagnet that was located at the receiving end of the telegraph system.
A code was needed to transmit natural language using only these pulses, and the silence between them.
Morse therefore developed the forerunner to modern International Morse code.
This was particularly important for ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore communication, but it became increasingly important for business and general news reporting, and as an arena for personal communication by radio amateurs.
In 1894, Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi began developing a wireless communication using the then-newly discovered phenomenon of radio waves, showing by 1901 that they could be transmitted across the Atlantic Ocean.
This was the start of wireless telegraphy by radio.
Audio radio broadcasting began experimentally in the first decade of the 20th century.
On 17 December 1902, a transmission from the Marconi station in Glace Bay, Nova Scotia, Canada, became the world's first radio message to cross the Atlantic from North America.
In 1904, a commercial service was established to transmit nightly news summaries to subscribing ships, which incorporated them into their onboard newspapers.
World War I accelerated the development of radio for military communications.
After the war, commercial radio AM broadcasting began in the 1920s and became an important mass medium for entertainment and news.
World War II again accelerated the development of radio for the wartime purposes of aircraft and land communication, radio navigation, and radar.
Development of stereo FM broadcasting of radio began in the 1930s in the United States and the 1970s in the United Kingdom, displacing AM as the dominant commercial standard.
On 25 March 1925, John Logie Baird demonstrated the transmission of moving pictures at the London department store Selfridges.
Baird's device relied upon the Nipkow disk and thus became known as the mechanical television.
It formed the basis of experimental broadcasts done by the British Broadcasting Corporation beginning on 30 September 1929. However, for most of the 20th century, televisions depended on the cathode ray tube invented by Karl Braun.
The first version of such a television to show promise was produced by Philo Farnsworth and demonstrated to his family on 7 September 1927. After World War II, interrupted experiments resumed and television became an important home entertainment broadcast medium, using VHF and UHF spectrum.
Satellite broadcasting was initiated in the 1960s and moved into general industry usage in the 1970s, with DBS (Direct Broadcast Satellites) emerging in the 1980s.
Originally all broadcasting was composed of analog signals using analog transmission techniques but in the 2000s, broadcasters switched to digital signals using digital transmission.
An analog signal is any continuous signal representing some other quantity, i.e., analogous to another quantity.
For example, in an analog audio signal, the instantaneous signal voltage varies continuously with the pressure of the sound waves.
In contrast, a digital signal represents the original time-varying quantity as a sampled sequence of quantized values which imposes some bandwidth and dynamic range constraints on the representation.
In general usage, broadcasting most frequently refers to the transmission of information and entertainment programming from various sources to the general public.
Analog audio radio (AM, FM) vs.
Digital audio radio (HD Radio), Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB), Satellite radio and Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM)
Analog television vs.
Digital television
Wireless
The world's technological capacity to receive information through one-way broadcast networks more than quadrupled during the two decades from 1986 to 2007, from 432 exabytes of (optimally compressed) information, to 1.9 zettabytes.
This is the information equivalent of 55 newspapers per person per day in 1986, and 175 newspapers per person per day by 2007.
Methods
In a broadcast system, the central high-powered broadcast tower transmits a high-frequency electromagnetic wave to numerous low-powered receivers.
The high-frequency wave sent by the tower is modulated with a signal containing visual or audio information.
The receiver is then tuned so as to pick up the high-frequency wave and a demodulator is used to retrieve the signal containing the visual or audio information.
The broadcast signal can be either analog (signal is varied continuously with respect to the information) or digital (information is encoded as a set of discrete values).
Historically, there have been several methods used for broadcasting electronic media audio and video to the general public:
Telephone broadcasting (1881–1932): the earliest form of electronic broadcasting (not counting data services offered by stock telegraph companies from 1867, if ticker-tapes are excluded from the definition). Telephone broadcasting began with the advent of Théâtrophone ("Theatre Phone") systems, which were telephone-based distribution systems allowing subscribers to listen to live opera and theatre performances over telephone lines, created by French inventor Clément Ader in 1881. Telephone broadcasting also grew to include telephone newspaper services for news and entertainment programming which were introduced in the 1890s, primarily located in large European cities.
These telephone-based subscription services were the first examples of electrical/electronic broadcasting and offered a wide variety of programming.[citation needed]
Radio broadcasting (experimentally from 1906, commercially from 1920); audio signals sent through the air as radio waves from a transmitter, picked up by an antenna and sent to a receiver.
Radio stations can be linked in radio networks to broadcast common radio programs, either in broadcast syndication, simulcast or subchannels.
Television broadcasting (telecast), experimentally from 1925, commercially from the 1930s: an extension of radio to include video signals.
Cable radio (also called "cable FM", from 1928) and cable television (from 1932): both via coaxial cable,  originally serving principally as transmission media for programming produced at either radio or television stations, but later expanding into a broad universe of cable-originated channels.
Direct-broadcast satellite (DBS) (from c. 1974) and satellite radio (from c. 1990): meant for direct-to-home broadcast programming (as opposed to studio network uplinks and down-links), provides a mix of traditional radio or television broadcast programming, or both, with dedicated satellite radio programming. (See also: Satellite television)
Webcasting of video/television (from c. 1993) and audio/radio (from c. 1994) streams: offers a mix of traditional radio and television station broadcast programming with dedicated Internet radio and Internet television.
Economic models
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are several means of providing financial support for continuous broadcasting:
Commercial broadcasting: for-profit, usually privately owned stations, channels, networks, or services providing programming to the public, supported by the sale of air time to advertisers for radio or television advertisements during or in breaks between programs, often in combination with cable or pay cable subscription fees.
Public broadcasting: usually non-profit, publicly owned stations or networks supported by license fees, government funds, grants from foundations, corporate underwriting, audience memberships, contributions or a combination of these.
Community broadcasting: a form of mass media in which a television station, or a radio station, is owned, operated or programmed, by a community group to provide programs of local interest known as local programming.
Community stations are most commonly operated by non-profit groups or cooperatives; however, in some cases they may be operated by a local college or university, a cable company or a municipal government.
Internet Webcast: the audience pays to recharge and buy virtual gifts for the anchor, and the platform converts the gifts into virtual currency.
The anchor withdraws the virtual currency, which is drawn by the platform.
If the anchor belongs to a trade union, it will be settled by the trade union and the live broadcasting platform, and the anchor will get the salary and part of the bonus.
This is the most common profit model of live broadcast products.
Broadcasters may rely on a combination of these business models.
For example, in the United States, National Public Radio (NPR) and the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS, television)  supplement public membership subscriptions and grants with funding from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB), which is allocated bi-annually by Congress.
US public broadcasting corporate and charitable grants are generally given in consideration of underwriting spots which differ from commercial advertisements in that they are governed by specific FCC restrictions, which prohibit the advocacy of a product or a "call to action".
Recorded and live forms
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A television studio production control room in Olympia, Washington, August 2008
An "On Air" sign is illuminated, usually in red, while a broadcast or recording session is taking place.
Radio Maria studio in Switzerland
The first regular television broadcasts started in 1937. Broadcasts can be classified as "recorded" or "live". The former allows correcting errors, and removing superfluous or undesired material, rearranging it, applying slow-motion and repetitions, and other techniques to enhance the program.
However, some live events like sports television can include some of the aspects including slow-motion clips of important goals/hits, etc., in between the live television telecast.
American radio-network broadcasters habitually forbade prerecorded broadcasts in the 1930s and 1940s, requiring radio programs played for the Eastern and Central time zones to be repeated three hours later for the Pacific time zone (See: Effects of time on North American broadcasting). This restriction was dropped for special occasions, as in the case of the German dirigible airship Hindenburg disaster at Lakehurst, New Jersey, in 1937. During World War II, prerecorded broadcasts from war correspondents were allowed on U.S. radio.
In addition, American radio programs were recorded for playback by Armed Forces Radio radio stations around the world.
A disadvantage of recording first is that the public may learn the outcome of an event before the recording is broadcast, which may be a "spoiler". Prerecording may be used to prevent announcers from deviating from an officially approved script during a live radio broadcast, as occurred with propaganda broadcasts from Germany in the 1940s and with Radio Moscow in the 1980s.
Many events are advertised as being live, although they are often "recorded live" (sometimes called "live-to-tape"). This is particularly true of performances of musical artists on radio when they visit for an in-studio concert performance.
Similar situations have occurred in television production ("The Cosby Show is recorded in front of a live television studio audience") and news broadcasting.
A broadcast may be distributed through several physical means.
If coming directly from the radio studio at a single station or television station, it is simply sent through the studio/transmitter link to the transmitter and hence from the television antenna located on the radio masts and towers out to the world.
Programming may also come through a communications satellite, played either live or recorded for later transmission.
Networks of stations may simulcast the same programming at the same time, originally via microwave link, now usually by satellite.
Distribution to stations or networks may also be through physical media, such as magnetic tape, compact disc (CD), DVD, and sometimes other formats.
Usually these are included in another broadcast, such as when electronic news gathering (ENG) returns a story to the station for inclusion on a news programme.
The final leg of broadcast distribution is how the signal gets to the listener or viewer.
It may come over the air as with a radio station or television station to an antenna and radio receiver, or may come through cable television or cable radio (or "wireless cable") via the station or directly from a network.
The Internet may also bring either internet radio or streaming media television to the recipient, especially with multicasting allowing the signal and bandwidth to be shared.
The term "broadcast network" is often used to distinguish networks that broadcast an over-the-air television signals that can be received using a tuner (television) inside a television set with a television antenna from so-called networks that are broadcast only via cable television (cablecast) or satellite television that uses a dish antenna.
The term "broadcast television" can refer to the television programs of such networks.
Social impact
Radio station WTUL studio, Tulane University, New Orleans
The sequencing of content in a broadcast is called a schedule.
As with all technological endeavors, a number of technical terms and slang have developed.
A list of these terms can be found at List of broadcasting terms.
Television and radio programs are distributed through radio broadcasting or cable, often both simultaneously.
By coding signals and having a cable converter box with decoding equipment in homes, the latter also enables subscription-based channels, pay-tv and pay-per-view services.
In his essay, John Durham Peters wrote that communication is a tool used for dissemination.
Peters stated, "Dissemination is a lens—sometimes a usefully distorting one—that helps us tackle basic issues such as interaction, presence, and space and time ... on the agenda of any future communication theory in general".: 211  Dissemination focuses on the message being relayed from one main source to one large audience without the exchange of dialogue in between.
It is possible for the message to be changed or corrupted by government officials once the main source releases it.
There is no way to predetermine how the larger population or audience will absorb the message.
They can choose to listen, analyze, or simply ignore it.
Dissemination in communication is widely used in the world of broadcasting.
Broadcasting focuses on getting a message out and it is up to the general public to do what they wish with it.
Peters also states that broadcasting is used to address an open-ended destination.: 212  There are many forms of broadcasting, but they all aim to distribute a signal that will reach the target audience.
Broadcasters typically arrange audiences into entire assemblies.: 213  In terms of media broadcasting, a radio show can gather a large number of followers who tune in every day to specifically listen to that specific disc jockey.
The disc jockey follows the script for his or her radio show and just talks into the microphone.
He or she does not expect immediate feedback from any listeners.
The message is broadcast across airwaves throughout the community, but there the listeners cannot always respond immediately, especially since many radio shows are recorded prior to the actual air time.
Broadcast engineering
Main article: Broadcast engineering
Broadcast engineering is the field of electrical engineering, and now to some extent computer engineering and information technology, which deals with radio and television broadcasting.  Audio engineering and RF engineering are also essential parts of broadcast engineering, being their own subsets of electrical engineering.
Broadcast engineering involves both the studio and transmitter aspects (the entire airchain), as well as remote broadcasts.  Every station has a broadcast engineer, though one may now serve an entire station group in a city.
In small media markets the engineer may work on a contract basis for one or more stations as needed.
See also
Analog television
Bandplan
Broadcast engineering
Broadcast quality
Broadcast television systems – contains the standards of the topic
Broadcasting in the United States
Cablecast
Frank Conrad
Dead air
Digital television
Electronic media
European Broadcasting Union (EBU)
List of broadcast satellites
List of broadcasting terms
List of radio awards
List of television awards
Narrowcasting
NaSTA
Nonbroadcast Multiple Access Network (NBMA)
North American broadcast television frequencies
Outside broadcast
Radio Act of 1927, United States
Reality television
Society of Broadcast Engineers (SBE)
Television broadcasting in Australia
Television transmitter
Transposer
Wilkinsburg
Notes and references
Peters, John Durham (1999). Speaking into the Air.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-66276-3. OCLC 40452957. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022.
a b Douglas, Susan J. (1987). Inventing American Broadcasting, 1899–1922. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8018-3832-3. OCLC 15485739.
The Hand-book of Wyoming and Guide to the Black Hills and Big Horn Regions Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine, 1877, p. 74: "in the case of the estimates sent broadcast by the Department of Agriculture, in its latest annual report, the extent has been sadly underestimated".
"Medical Advertising" Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Saint Louis Medical and Surgical Journal, December 1886, p. 334: "operations formerly described in the city press alone, are now sent broadcast through the country by multiple telegraph".
"Wireless Telegraphy" Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The Electrician (London), 14 October 1898, p. 815: "there are rare cases where, as Dr.
Lodge once expressed it, it might be advantageous to 'shout' the message, spreading it broadcast to receivers in all directions".
Electronic Code of Federal Regulation. (28 September 2017). Retrieved 2 October 2017.
Maccise, Diana Larrea; Montaser Marai (2018). "Mobile Journalism" (PDF). AlJazeera Media Training and Development Centre.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021.
Vujovic, Ljubo (1998). "Tesla Biography". Tesla Memorial Society of New York.
Archived from the original on 14 January 2016.
"TR Center - Talking Across the Ocean". 
Thompson, R.J. Jr. (2011). Crystal Clear: The Struggle for Reliable Communications Technology in World War II. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
ISBN 9781118104644.
Théberge, P.; Devine, K.; Everrett, T (2015). Living Stereo: Histories and Cultures of Multichannel Sound.
New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.
ISBN 9781623566654.
"The Pioneers". MZTV Museum of Television. 2006. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013.
Postman, Neil (29 March 1999). "Philo Farnsworth". Time.
Archived from the original on 30 September 2009.
"Analogue Signal - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics". 
"Digital Signal Processing | Journal | ScienceDirect.com by Elsevier". 
"The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information" Archived 31 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Martin Hilbert and Priscila López (2011), Science, 332(6025), 60–65; free access to the article through here: martinhilbert.net/WorldInfoCapacity.html
"video animation on The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information from 1986 to 2010". Ideas.economist.com.
Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
Haykin, Simon (2001). Communication Systems (4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons. pp. 1–3. ISBN 978-0-471-17869-9.
How Radio Works Archived 2 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, HowStuffWorks.com, 2006.
"Информационно – развлекательный портал – DIWAXX.RU – мобильная связь, безопасность ПК и сетей, компьютеры и программы, общение, железо, секреты Windows, web-дизайн, раскрутка и оптимизация сайта, партнерские программы". Diwaxx.ru.
Archived from the original on 3 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017.
"Broadcast Terminology". Qsl.net.
Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017.
a b c d Peters, John Durham (2006), "Communication as Dissemination", Communication as…: Perspectives on Theory, Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 211–222, doi:10.4135/9781483329055.n23, ISBN 978-1-4129-0658-6, archived from the original on 22 August 2022, retrieved 22 August 2022
a b Pizzi, Skip (2014). A Broadcast Engineering Tutorial for Non-Engineers.
Graham Jones (4th ed.). Hoboken: Taylor and Francis.
ISBN 978-1-317-90683-4. OCLC 879025861.
"about.com - Broadcast Technician or Sound Engineering Technician: Career Information". Careerplanning.about.com. 8 November 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2013.
"Transmission Engineer - TV". skillset. 25 July 2012. Archived from the original on 8 May 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2013.
Bibliography
Carey, James (1989), Communication as Culture, New York and London: Routledge, pp. 201–30
Kahn, Frank J., ed.
Documents of American Broadcasting, fourth edition (Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1984).
Lichty Lawrence W., and Topping Malachi C., eds, American Broadcasting: A Source Book on the History of Radio and Television (Hastings House, 1975).
Meyrowitz, Joshua, Mediating Communication: What Happens? in Downing, J., Mohammadi, A., and Sreberny-Mohammadi, A. (eds), Questioning The Media (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 1995), pp. 39–53
Peters, John Durham (2006), "Communication as Dissemination", Communication as…: Perspectives on Theory, 2455 Teller Road, Thousand Oaks California 91320 United States: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 211–222, doi:10.4135/9781483329055.n23, ISBN 978-1-4129-0658-6, archived from the original on 22 August 2022, retrieved 22 August 2022{{citation}}:  CS1 maint: location (link)
Thompson, J., The Media and Modernity, in Mackay, H., and O'Sullivan, T. (eds), The Media Reader: Continuity and Transformation (London: Sage, 1999), pp. 12–27
International bibliography – History of wireless and radio broadcasting
Further reading
Barnouw Erik.
The Golden Web (Oxford University Press, 1968); The Sponsor (1978); A Tower in Babel (1966).
Covert Cathy, and Stevens John L. Mass Media Between the Wars (Syracuse University Press, 1984).
Tim Crook; International Radio Journalism: History, Theory and Practice Routledge, 1998
John Dunning;  On the Air: The Encyclopedia of Old-Time Radio Oxford University Press, 1998
Ewbank Henry and Lawton Sherman P. Broadcasting: Radio and Television (Harper & Brothers, 1952).
Maclaurin W. Rupert.
Invention and Innovation in the Radio Industry (The Macmillan Company, 1949).
Robert W. McChesney; Telecommunications, Mass Media, and Democracy: The Battle for the Control of U.S. Broadcasting, 1928-1935 Oxford University Press, 1994
Gwenyth L. Jackaway; Media at War: Radio's Challenge to the Newspapers, 1924-1939 Praeger Publishers, 1995
Lazarsfeld Paul F. The People Look at Radio (University of North Carolina Press, 1946).
Schramm Wilbur, ed.
Mass Communications (University of Illinois Press, 1960).
Schwoch James.
The American Radio Industry and Its Latin American Activities, 1900-1939 (University of Illinois Press, 1990).
Slater Robert.
This ... is CBS: A Chronicle of 60 Years (Prentice Hall, 1988).
Sterling Christopher H. Electronic Media, A Guide to Trends in Broadcasting and Newer Technologies 1920-1983 (Praeger, 1984).
Sterling Christopher, and Kittross John M. Stay Tuned: A Concise History of American Broadcasting (Wadsworth, 1978).
Wells, Alan, World Broadcasting: A Comparative View, Greenwood Publishing Group, 1996. ISBN 1-56750-245-8
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Broadcasting.
Look up broadcasting in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Radio Locator, for American radio station with format, power, and coverage information.
Jim Hawkins' Radio and Broadcast Technology Page – History of broadcast transmitter
Indie Digital Cinema Services – Broadcast Industry Glossary
BroadcastingMedium
Radio
Radio program
Cable
Digital
Satellite
Telephone
Mobile television
Teletext
Television
Television show
Analog
Cable
Digital
Digital terrestrial television
Satellite
Internet television and radio (Webcast
Streaming media
Web television
Peer-to-peer television
BitTorrent television and movies)
Broadcastingniche
Campus radio
Commercial broadcasting
Community radio
Multichannel television
Pay television
Pay-per-view
News broadcasting
Pirate radio / Pirate television
Public broadcasting
Religious broadcasting
Talk radio
Specialtychannels
Adult television channels
Children's interest channel / Children's television series
Documentary channel
Men's interest channel
Movie television channels
Music radio / Music television
Quiz channel
Shopping channel
News broadcasting
Business channels
Public affairs
Livestreamed news
Sports broadcasting
Women's interest channel
Productionand funding
Broadcast designer
Broadcast license
Broadcast network
Broadcast-safe
Broadcast television systems
Digital on-screen graphic
Director of network programming
Lower third
Network affiliate
News ticker
On-screen display
Outside broadcasting
Press box
Press pool
Score bug
Television news screen layout
Television licence
Television studio
TelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
Telecommunication portal
Category
Outline
Commons
Wireless video and data distribution methodsRadio
Digital radio
Internet radio
Radio broadcasting
Satellite radio
Video
Amateur television
Internet television
Mobile television
Terrestrial television
Digital
Satellite television
Visual sensor network
Data
Mobile broadband
Satellite Internet access
Wireless broadband
Wireless local loop
Standards
Long Term Evolution (LTE)
Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS)
Digital Video Broadcasting
Terrestrial (DVB-T)
Handheld (DVB-H)
Satellite (DVB-S2)
IEEE 802 family
Mobile WiMAX
Mobile broadband wireless access
IEEE 802.15.3 (UWB)
Wi-Fi
WiMAX
WRAN
Advanced Wireless Services (AWS)
Educational Broadband Service (EBS)
HomeRF
Multichannel Video and Data Distribution Service (MVDDS)
Multipoint Video Distribution System (MVDS)
Wireless USB
Technologies
Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS)
Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS)
Related
Broadcasting
Ku band
Microwave
Analog and digital audio broadcastingTerrestrialRadio modulation
AM
FM
COFDM
Frequency allocations
LW (LF)
MW (MF)
SW (HF)
VHF (low / mid / high)
L band (UHF)
Digital systems
CAM-D
DAB/DAB+
DRM/DRM+
FMeXtra
HD Radio
CDR
DVB-T2 Lite
SatelliteFrequency allocations
C band
Ku band
L band
S band
Digital systems
ADR
DAB-S
DVB-SH
S-DMB
SDR
Commercial radio providers
Sirius XM
Canada
Codecs
AAC
AMR-WB+
HDC
HE-AAC
MPEG-1 Audio Layer II
DRA+
Subcarrier signals
AMSS
DirectBand
PAD
RDS/RBDS
SCA/SCMO
DARC
Related topicsTechnical (audio)
Audio data compression
Audio signal processing
Technical (AM stereo formats)
Belar
C-QUAM
Harris
Kahn-Hazeltine
Magnavox
Technical (emission)
AM broadcasting
AM expanded band
Cable radio
Digital radio
Error detection and correction
FM broadcast band
FM broadcasting
FM extended band in Brazil
Multipath propagation
Shortwave relay station
Cultural
History of radio
International broadcasting
Radio portal
Comparison of radio systems
Communication studies
History
Outline
Topics and terminology
Biocommunication
Broadcasting
Communication
Computer-mediated communication
Conversation
History of communication
Information
Intercultural / Interpersonal / Intrapersonal communication
Journalism
Mass media
Meaning
Media ecology
Meta-communication
Models of communication
New media
Nonverbal communication
Nonviolent communication
Propaganda
Reading
Speech
Symbol
Telecommunication
Text and conversation theory
Writing
Subfields
Communication design
Communication theory
Communicology
Crisis communication
Climate communication
Cross-cultural communication
Development communication
Discourse analysis
Environmental communication
Global communication
Health communication
International communication
Mass communication
Media studies
Mediated cross-border communication
Organizational communication
Political communication
Risk communication
Science communication
Technical communication
Visual communication
Closed-loop communication
Scholars
Adorno
Barthes
Bateson
Benjamin
Burke
Castells
Chomsky
Craig
Fisher
Flusser
Gasset
Gerbner
Goffman
Habermas
Horkheimer
Huxley
Innis
Jakobson
Janis
Johnson
Kincaid
Lippman
Luhmann
Marcuse
McLuhan
Mead
Morgan
Ong
Packard
Peirce
Postman
Quebral
Richards
Rogers
Schramm
Tankard
Tannen
Wertheimer
Category
Authority control National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Other
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilge한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaItalianoעבריתKriyòl gwiyannenМакедонскиBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPatoisPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishکوردیСрпски / srpskiSvenskaதமிழ்ไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 4 October 2022, at 13:42 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
