Calendar - Wikipedia
Calendar
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
System for organizing the days of year
This article is about the dating system.
For the physical object, see Calendar (stationery). For other uses, see Calendar (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with calender.
‹ The template below (Globalize) is being considered for merging.
See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. ›The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Eurasia and the Near East and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject.
You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
October
Su
Mo
Tu
We
Th
Fr
Sa
British calendar, 1851, gilt bronze and malachite, height: 20.3 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)
Indonesian modern Gregorian calendar for a Catholic church
A calendar is a system of organizing days.
This is done by giving names to periods of time, typically days, weeks, months and years.
A date is the designation of a single, specific day within such a system.
A calendar is also a physical record (often paper) of such a system.
A calendar can also mean a list of planned events, such as a court calendar or a partly or fully chronological list of documents, such as a calendar of wills.
Periods in a calendar (such as years and months) are usually, though not necessarily, synchronized with the cycle of the sun or the moon.
The most common type of pre-modern calendar was the lunisolar calendar, a lunar calendar that occasionally adds one intercalary month to remain synchronized with the solar year over the long term.
Contents
Etymology
The term calendar is taken from kalendae, the term for the first day of the month in the Roman calendar, related to the verb calare 'to call out', referring to the "calling" of the new moon when it was first seen.
Latin calendarium meant 'account book, register' (as accounts were settled and debts were collected on the calends of each month). The Latin term was adopted in Old French as calendier and from there in Middle English as calender by the 13th century (the spelling calendar is early modern).
History
Main article: History of calendars
Further information: Week, Calendar epoch, Month, Lunisolar calendar, and Computus
Equinox seen from the astronomic calendar of Pizzo Vento at Fondachelli Fantina, Sicily
The course of the sun and the moon are the most salient natural, regularly recurring events useful for timekeeping, thus in pre-modern societies worldwide lunation and the year were most commonly used as time units.
Nevertheless, the Roman calendar contained remnants of a very ancient pre-Etruscan 10-month solar year.
The first recorded physical calendars, dependent on the development of writing in the Ancient Near East, are the Bronze Age Egyptian and Sumerian calendars.
The Vedic India developed a sophisticated time keeping methodology and calendars for Vedic rituals.
According to Yukio Ohashi, the Vedanga calendar in ancient India was based on actual astronomical studies during the Vedic Period, and not derived from other cultures.
A large number of Ancient Near East calendar systems based on the Babylonian calendar date from the Iron Age, among them the calendar system of the Persian Empire, which in turn gave rise to the Zoroastrian calendar and the Hebrew calendar.[citation needed]
A great number of Hellenic calendars developed in Classical Greece, and in the Hellenistic period gave rise to both the ancient Roman calendar and to various Hindu calendars.
Calendars in antiquity were lunisolar, depending on the introduction of intercalary months to align the solar and the lunar years.
This was mostly based on observation, but there may have been early attempts to model the pattern of intercalation algorithmically, as evidenced in the fragmentary 2nd-century Coligny calendar.
The Roman calendar was reformed by Julius Caesar in 46 BC. The Julian calendar was no longer dependent on the observation of the new moon but simply followed an algorithm of introducing a leap day every four years.
This created a dissociation of the calendar month from the lunation.
The Islamic calendar is based on the prohibition of intercalation (nasi') by Muhammad, in Islamic tradition dated to a sermon held on 9 Dhu al-Hijjah AH 10 (Julian date: 6 March 632). This resulted in an observation-based lunar calendar that shifts relative to the seasons of the solar year.
Modern reforms
Main article: Calendar reform
The first calendar reform of the early modern era was the Gregorian calendar, introduced in 1582 based on the observation of a long-term shift between the Julian calendar and the solar year.
There have been several modern proposals for reform of the calendar, such as the World Calendar, International Fixed Calendar, Holocene calendar, and, recently, the Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar.
Such ideas are mooted from time to time but have failed to gain traction because of the loss of continuity, massive upheaval in implementation, and religious objections.
Systems
A so-called universal calendar, combining different calendars
A full calendar system has a different calendar date for every day.
Thus the week cycle is by itself not a full calendar system; neither is a system to name the days within a year without a system for identifying the years.
The simplest calendar system just counts time periods from a reference date.
This applies for the Julian day or Unix Time.
Virtually the only possible variation is using a different reference date, in particular, one less distant in the past to make the numbers smaller.
Computations in these systems are just a matter of addition and subtraction.
Other calendars have one (or multiple) larger units of time.
Calendars that contain one level of cycles:
week and weekday – this system (without year, the week number keeps on increasing) is not very common
year and ordinal date within the year, e.g., the ISO 8601 ordinal date system
Calendars with two levels of cycles:
year, month, and day – most systems, including the Gregorian calendar (and its very similar predecessor, the Julian calendar), the Islamic calendar, the Solar Hijri calendar and the Hebrew calendar
year, week, and weekday – e.g., the ISO week date
Cycles can be synchronized with periodic phenomena:
Sun and Moon, Schedel's Nuremberg Chronicle, 1493
Lunar calendars are synchronized to the motion of the Moon (lunar phases); an example is the Islamic calendar.
Solar calendars are based on perceived seasonal changes synchronized to the apparent motion of the Sun; an example is the Persian calendar.
Lunisolar calendars are based on a combination of both solar and lunar reckonings; examples include the traditional calendar of China, the Hindu calendar in India and Nepal, and the Hebrew calendar.
The week cycle is an example of one that is not synchronized to any external phenomenon (although it may have been derived from lunar phases, beginning anew every month).
Very commonly a calendar includes more than one type of cycle or has both cyclic and non-cyclic elements.
Most calendars incorporate more complex cycles.   For example, the vast majority of them track years, months, weeks and days.   The seven-day week is practically universal, though its use varies.
It has run uninterrupted for millennia.
Solar
Main article: Solar calendar
Solar calendars assign a date to each solar day.
A day may consist of the period between sunrise and sunset, with a following period of night, or it may be a period between successive events such as two sunsets.
The length of the interval between two such successive events may be allowed to vary slightly during the year, or it may be averaged into a mean solar day.
Other types of calendar may also use a solar day.
Lunar
Main article: Lunar calendar
Not all calendars use the solar year as a unit.
A lunar calendar is one in which days are numbered within each lunar phase cycle.  Because the length of the lunar month is not an even fraction of the length of the tropical year, a purely lunar calendar quickly drifts against the seasons, which do not vary much near the equator.  It does, however, stay constant with respect to other phenomena, notably tides.
An example is the Islamic calendar.
Alexander Marshack, in a controversial reading, believed that marks on a bone baton (c. 25,000 BC) represented a lunar calendar.
Other marked bones may also represent lunar calendars.
Similarly, Michael Rappenglueck believes that marks on a 15,000-year-old cave painting represent a lunar calendar.
Lunisolar
A lunisolar calendar is a lunar calendar that compensates by adding an extra month as needed to realign the months with the seasons.
Prominent examples of lunisolar calendar are Hindu calendar and Buddhist calendar that are popular in South Asia and Southeast Asia.
Another example is the Hebrew calendar, which uses a 19-year cycle.
Subdivisions
See also: Decade, Century, and Millennium
Nearly all calendar systems group consecutive days into "months" and also into "years". In a solar calendar a year approximates Earth's tropical year (that is, the time it takes for a complete cycle of seasons), traditionally used to facilitate the planning of agricultural activities.
In a lunar calendar, the month approximates the cycle of the moon phase.
Consecutive days may be grouped into other periods such as the week.
Because the number of days in the tropical year is not a whole number, a solar calendar must have a different number of days in different years.
This may be handled, for example, by adding an extra day in leap years.
The same applies to months in a lunar calendar and also the number of months in a year in a lunisolar calendar.
This is generally known as intercalation.
Even if a calendar is solar, but not lunar, the year cannot be divided entirely into months that never vary in length.
Cultures may define other units of time, such as the week, for the purpose of scheduling regular activities that do not easily coincide with months or years.
Many cultures use different baselines for their calendars' starting years.
Historically, several countries have based their calendars on regnal years, a calendar based on the reign of their current sovereign.
For example, the year 2006 in Japan is year 18 Heisei, with Heisei being the era name of Emperor Akihito.
Other types
Arithmetical and astronomical
Calendar of the Qahal, 5591 (1831)
An astronomical calendar is based on ongoing observation; examples are the religious Islamic calendar and the old religious Jewish calendar in the time of the Second Temple.
Such a calendar is also referred to as an observation-based calendar.
The advantage of such a calendar is that it is perfectly and perpetually accurate.
The disadvantage is that working out when a particular date would occur is difficult.
An arithmetic calendar is one that is based on a strict set of rules; an example is the current Jewish calendar.
Such a calendar is also referred to as a rule-based calendar.
The advantage of such a calendar is the ease of calculating when a particular date occurs.
The disadvantage is imperfect accuracy.
Furthermore, even if the calendar is very accurate, its accuracy diminishes slowly over time, owing to changes in Earth's rotation.
This limits the lifetime of an accurate arithmetic calendar to a few thousand years.
After then, the rules would need to be modified from observations made since the invention of the calendar.
Complete and incomplete
This section's factual accuracy is disputed.
Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:Calendar.
Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Calendars may be either complete or incomplete.
Complete calendars provide a way of naming each consecutive day, while incomplete calendars do not.
The early Roman calendar, which had no way of designating the days of the winter months other than to lump them together as "winter", is an example of an incomplete calendar, while the Gregorian calendar is an example of a complete calendar.
Usage
Current usage of civil calendars in the world.
Some countries use an additional calendar not listed here that determine holidays and other traditions, for example the Chinese or Islamic calendars.
The primary practical use of a calendar is to identify days: to be informed about or to agree on a future event and to record an event that has happened.
Days may be significant for agricultural, civil, religious, or social reasons.
For example, a calendar provides a way to determine when to start planting or harvesting, which days are religious or civil holidays, which days mark the beginning and end of business accounting periods, and which days have legal significance, such as the day taxes are due or a contract expires.
Also, a calendar may, by identifying a day, provide other useful information about the day such as its season.
Calendars are also used to help people manage their personal schedules, time, and activities, particularly when individuals have numerous work, school, and family commitments.
People frequently use multiple systems and may keep both a business and family calendar to help prevent them from overcommitting their time.
Calendars are also used as part of a complete timekeeping system: date and time of day together specify a moment in time.  In the modern world, timekeepers can show time, date, and weekday.
Some may also show the lunar phase.
Gregorian
The Gregorian calendar is the de facto international standard and is used almost everywhere in the world for civil purposes.
The widely used  solar aspect is a cycle of leap days in a 400-year cycle designed to keep the duration of the year aligned with the solar year.
There is a lunar aspect which approximates the position of the moon during the year, and is used in the  calculation of the date of Easter. 
Each Gregorian year has either 365 or 366 days (the leap day being inserted as 29 February), amounting to an average Gregorian year of 365.2425 days (compared to a solar year of 365.2422 days). It was introduced in 1582 as a refinement to the Julian calendar which had been in use throughout the European Middle Ages, amounting to a 0.002% correction in the length of the year.
During the Early Modern period, however, its adoption was mostly limited to Roman Catholic nations, but by the 19th century, it became widely adopted worldwide for the sake of convenience in international trade.
The last European country to adopt the reform was Greece, in 1923.
The calendar epoch used by the Gregorian calendar is inherited from the medieval convention established by Dionysius Exiguus and associated with the Julian calendar.
The year number is variously given as AD (for Anno Domini) or CE (for Common Era or Christian Era).
Religious
A Hindu almanac (pancanga) for the year 1871/2 from Rajasthan (Library of Congress, Asian Division)
The most important use of pre-modern calendars is keeping track of the liturgical year and the observation of religious feast days.
While the Gregorian calendar is itself historically motivated to the calculation of the Easter date, it is now in worldwide secular use as the de facto standard.
Alongside the use of the Gregorian calendar for secular matters, there remain several calendars in use for religious purposes.
Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church and generally include the liturgical seasons of Advent, Christmas, Ordinary Time (Time after Epiphany), Lent, Easter, and Ordinary Time (Time after Pentecost). Some Christian calendars do not include Ordinary Time and every day falls into a denominated season.
Eastern Christians, including the Orthodox Church, use the Julian calendar.
The Islamic calendar or Hijri calendar is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 lunar months in a year of 354 or 355 days.
It is used to date events in most of the Muslim countries (concurrently with the Gregorian calendar) and used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper day on which to celebrate Islamic holy days and festivals.
Its epoch is the Hijra (corresponding to AD 622)
With an annual drift of 11 or 12 days, the seasonal relation is repeated approximately every 33 Islamic years.
Various Hindu calendars remain in use in the Indian subcontinent, including the Nepali calendars, Bengali calendar, Malayalam calendar, Tamil calendar, Vikrama Samvat used in Northern India, and Shalivahana calendar in the Deccan states.
The Buddhist calendar and the traditional lunisolar calendars of Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and Thailand are also based on an older version of the Hindu calendar.
Most of the Hindu calendars are inherited from a system first enunciated in Vedanga Jyotisha of Lagadha, standardized in the Sūrya Siddhānta and subsequently reformed by astronomers such as Āryabhaṭa (AD 499), Varāhamihira (6th century) and Bhāskara II (12th century).
The Hebrew calendar is used by Jews worldwide for religious and cultural affairs, also influences civil matters in Israel (such as national holidays) and can be used business dealings (such as for the dating of cheques).
Followers of the Baháʼí Faith use the Baháʼí calendar.
The Baháʼí Calendar, also known as the Badi Calendar was first established by the Bab in the Kitab-i-Asma.
The Baháʼí Calendar is also purely a solar calendar and comprises 19 months each having nineteen days.
National
The Chinese, Hebrew, Hindu, and Julian calendars are widely used for religious and social purposes.
The Iranian (Persian) calendar is used in Iran and some parts of Afghanistan.
The Assyrian calendar is in use by the members of the Assyrian community in the Middle East (mainly Iraq, Syria, Turkey, and Iran) and the diaspora.
The first year of the calendar is exactly 4750 years prior to the start of the Gregorian calendar.
The Ethiopian calendar or Ethiopic calendar is the principal calendar used in Ethiopia and Eritrea, with the Oromo calendar also in use in some areas.
In neighboring Somalia, the Somali calendar co-exists alongside the Gregorian and Islamic calendars.
In Thailand, where the Thai solar calendar is used, the months and days have adopted the western standard, although the years are still based on the traditional Buddhist calendar.
Fiscal
Main article: Fiscal calendar
The Payment of the Tithes (The tax-collector), also known as Village Lawyer, by Pieter Brueghel the Younger
A fiscal calendar generally means the accounting year of a government or a business.
It is used for budgeting, keeping accounts, and taxation.
It is a set of 12 months that may start at any date in a year.
The US government's fiscal year starts on 1 October and ends on 30 September.
The government of India's fiscal year starts on 1 April and ends on 31 March.
Small traditional businesses in India start the fiscal year on Diwali festival and end the day before the next year's Diwali festival.
In accounting (and particularly accounting software), a fiscal calendar (such as a 4/4/5 calendar) fixes each month at a specific number of weeks to facilitate comparisons from month to month and year to year.
January always has exactly 4 weeks (Sunday through Saturday), February has 4 weeks, March has 5 weeks, etc.
Note that this calendar will normally need to add a 53rd week to every 5th or 6th year, which might be added to December or might not be, depending on how the organization uses those dates.
There exists an international standard way to do this (the ISO week). The ISO week starts on a Monday and ends on a Sunday.
Week 1 is always the week that contains 4 January in the Gregorian calendar.
Formats
A calendar from the Petaluma and Santa Rosa Railroad
The term calendar applies not only to a given scheme of timekeeping but also to a specific record or device displaying such a scheme, for example, an appointment book in the form of a pocket calendar (or personal organizer), desktop calendar, a wall calendar, etc.
In a paper calendar, one or two sheets can show a single day, a week, a month, or a year.
If a sheet is for a single day, it easily shows the date and the weekday.
If a sheet is for multiple days it shows a conversion table to convert from weekday to date and back.
With a special pointing device, or by crossing out past days, it may indicate the current date and weekday.
This is the most common usage of the word.
In the US Sunday is considered the first day of the week and so appears on the far left and Saturday the last day of the week appearing on the far right.
In Britain, the weekend may appear at the end of the week so the first day is Monday and the last day is Sunday.
The US calendar display is also used in Britain.
It is common to display the Gregorian calendar in separate monthly grids of seven columns (from Monday to Sunday, or Sunday to Saturday depending on which day is considered to start the week – this varies according to country) and five to six rows (or rarely, four rows when the month of February contains 28 days in common years beginning on the first day of the week), with the day of the month numbered in each cell, beginning with 1.   The sixth row is sometimes eliminated by marking 23/30 and 24/31 together as necessary.
When working with weeks rather than months, a continuous format is sometimes more convenient, where no blank cells are inserted to ensure that the first day of a new month begins on a fresh row.
Software
Main article: Calendaring software
Further information: Category:Calendaring standards
Calendaring software provides users with an electronic version of a calendar, and may additionally provide an appointment book, address book, or contact list.
Calendaring is a standard feature of many PDAs, EDAs, and smartphones.
The software may be a local package designed for individual use (e.g., Lightning extension for Mozilla Thunderbird, Microsoft Outlook without Exchange Server, or Windows Calendar) or maybe a networked package that allows for the sharing of information between users (e.g., Mozilla Sunbird, Windows Live Calendar, Google Calendar, or Microsoft Outlook with Exchange Server).
See also
List of calendars
Advent calendar
Calendar reform
Calendrical calculation
Docket (court)
History of calendars
Horology
List of international common standards
List of unofficial observances by date
Real-Time Clock (RTC), which underlies the Calendar software on modern computers.
Unit of time
References
Citations
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
"Religion in the Etruscan period" in Roman religion in Encyclopædia Britannica
Shirley, Lawrence (11 February 2009). "The Mayan and Other Ancient Calendars". Convergence.
Washington, DC. doi:10.4169/loci003264.
Plofker, Kim (2009). Mathematics in India.
Princeton University Press. pp. 10, 35–36, 67. ISBN 978-0-691-12067-6.
Andersen, Johannes (31 January 1999). Highlights of Astronomy, Volume 11B: As Presented at the XXIIIrd General Assembly of the IAU, 1997. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 719. ISBN 978-0-7923-5556-4.
"Calendar - The early Roman calendar". Encyclopedia Britannica. 24 December 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
"The History of the Calendar". Archived from the original on 2 December 2020.
Zerubavel 1985.
James Elkins, Our beautiful, dry, and distant texts (1998) 63ff.
"Oldest lunar calendar identified". BBC News. 16 October 2000. Retrieved 14 March 2013.
a b Blackburn & Holford-Strevens 2003, pp. 682–683.
Blackburn & Holford-Strevens 2003, pp. 817–820.
Dershowitz & Reingold 2008, pp. 47, 187.
Blackburn & Holford-Strevens 2003, pp. 682–689.
Blackburn & Holford-Strevens 2003, Chapter: "Christian Chronology".
Sources
"calendar", American Heritage Dictionary (5th ed.), 2017
Birashk, Ahmad (1993), A Comparative Calendar of the Iranian, Muslim Lunar, and Christian Eras for Three Thousand Years, Mazda Publishers, ISBN 978-0-939214-95-2
Björnsson, Árni (1995) , High Days and Holidays in Iceland, Reykjavík: Mál og menning, ISBN 978-9979-3-0802-7, OCLC 186511596
Blackburn, Bonnie; Holford-Strevens, Leofranc (2003) , The Oxford Companion to the Year (corrected reprinting of 1st ed.), Oxford University Press
Dershowitz, Nachum; Reingold, Edward M (2008), Calendrical Calculations, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-70238-6
Doggett, L.E. (1992), "Calendars",  in Seidelmann, P. Kenneth (ed.), Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac, University Science Books, ISBN 978-0-935702-68-2
Richards, E.G. (1998), Mapping Time, the calendar and its history, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-850413-9
Rose, Lynn E. (1999), Sun, Moon, and Sothis, Kronos Press, ISBN 978-0-917994-15-9
Schuh, Dieter (1973), Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Tibetischen Kalenderrechnung (in German), Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, OCLC 1150484
Spier, Arthur (1986), The Comprehensive Hebrew Calendar, Feldheim Publishers, ISBN 978-0-87306-398-2
Zerubavel, Eviatar (1985), The Seven Day Circle: The History and Meaning of the Week, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-98165-9
Further reading
Fraser, Julius Thomas (1987), Time, the Familiar Stranger (illustrated ed.), Amherst: Univ of Massachusetts Press, Bibcode:1988tfs..book.....F, ISBN 978-0-87023-576-4, OCLC 15790499
Whitrow, Gerald James (2003), What is Time?, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-860781-6, OCLC 265440481
C.K, Raju (2003), The Eleven Pictures of Time, SAGE Publications Pvt.
Ltd, ISBN 978-0-7619-9624-8
C.K, Raju (1994), Time: Towards a Consistent Theory, Springer, ISBN 978-0-7923-3103-2
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Calendars.
Look up calendar in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
"Calendar" . Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.
"Calendar" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
Calendar converter, including all major civil, religious and technical calendars.
CalendarsSystems
Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar
In wide use
Astronomical
Buddhist
Chinese
Ethiopian
Gregorian
Hindu
Lunar Hijri
Solar Hijri
ISO
Unix time
In morelimited use
Akan
Armenian
Assamese (Bhāshkarābda)
Assyrian
Baháʼí
Badí‘
Balinese pawukon
Balinese saka
Bengali
Bangladeshi
Berber
Borana
Burmese
Chinese
Earthly Branches
Heavenly Stems
Minguo
Gaelic
Germanic heathen
Georgian
Hebrew
Hindu
Vikram Samvat
Saka
Igbo
Iranian
Jalali
medieval
Zoroastrian
Islamic
Fasli
Tabular
Jain
Japanese
Javanese
Korean
Juche
Kurdish
Lithuanian
Maithili
Malayalam
Mandaean
Manipuri (Meitei)
Melanau
Mongolian
Nepal
Nepal Sambat
Bikram Sambat
Yele Sambat
Nisg̱a'a
Odia
Punjabi
Nanakshahi
Romanian
Shona
Solar term
Somali
Sesotho
Slavic
Slavic Native Faith
Macedonian
Tamil
Thai
lunar
solar
Tibetan
Tripuri
Tulu
Vietnamese
Wicca
Xhosa
Yoruba
Zulu
Types
Runic
Mesoamerican
Long Count
Calendar round
Christian variants
Coptic
Ethiopian and Eritrean
Julian
Revised
Liturgical year
Eastern Orthodox
Saints
Historical
Arabian
Attic
Aztec
Tōnalpōhualli
Xiuhpōhualli
Babylonian
Bulgar
Byzantine
Cappadocian
Celtic
Cham
Culāsakaraj
Coligny
Egyptian
Enoch
Florentine
French Republican
Germanic
Greek
Hindu
Inca
Macedonian
Maya
Haab'
Tzolk'in
Muisca
Pentecontad
Pisan
Qumran
Rapa Nui
Roman
Rumi
Sexagenary
Soviet
Swedish
Turkmen
By specialty
Holocene
anthropological
Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian
historiographical
Darian
Martian
Dreamspell
New Age
Discordian
'Pataphysical
Reform proposals
Hanke–Henry Permanent
International Fixed
Pax
Positivist
Symmetry454
World
Fictional
Discworld (Discworld)
Greyhawk (Dungeons & Dragons)
Middle-earth (The Lord of the Rings)
Stardate (Star Trek)
Displays andapplications
Electronic
Perpetual
Wall
Year namingand numberingTerminology
Era
Epoch
Regnal name
Regnal year
Year zero
Systems
Ab urbe condita
Anka year
Anno Domini/Common Era
Anno Martyrum
Anno Mundi
Assyrian
Before Present
Chinese Imperial
Chinese Minguo
English regnal year
Human (Holocene)
Japanese
Korean
Seleucid
Spanish
Yugas
Satya
Treta
Dvapara
Kali
Vietnamese
List of calendars
Category
TimeKey concepts
Past
Present
Future
Eternity
Measurementand standardsChronometry
UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Orders of magnitude (time)
Measurementsystems
Italian six-hour clock
Thai six-hour clock
Hindu
Relative hour
Daylight saving time
Decimal
Hexadecimal
Metric
Sidereal
Solar
Time zone
Calendars
Main types
Solar
Lunar
Lunisolar
Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Solar Hijri
Chinese
Hindu Panchang
Maya
List
Clocks
Main types
astronomical
astrarium
atomic
quantum
hourglass
marine
sundial
watch
mechanical
stopwatch
water-based
Cuckoo clock
Digital clock
Grandfather clock
History
Timeline
ChronologyHistory
Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline
Philosophy of time
A series and B series
B-theory of time
Chronocentrism
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Perdurantism
Presentism
Static interpretation of time
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time
ReligionMythology
Ages of Man
Destiny
Immortality
Dreamtime
Kāla
Time and fate deities
Father Time
Wheel of time
Kalachakra
Human experienceand use of time
Chronemics
Generation time
Mental chronometry
Music
tempo
time signature
Rosy retrospection
Tense–aspect–mood
Time discipline
Time management
Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow
Time in scienceGeology
Geological time
age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period
Geochronology
Geological history of Earth
Physics
Absolute space and time
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Proper time
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time domain
Time translation symmetry
Time reversal symmetry
Other fields
Chronological dating
Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Clock reaction
Glottochronology
Time geography
Related topics
Memory
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time immemorial
Time travel
Category
Commons
Time measurement and standards
Chronometry
Orders of magnitude
Metrology
International standards
Coordinated Universal Time
offset
UT
ΔT
DUT1
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
ISO 31-1
ISO 8601
International Atomic Time
Barycentric Coordinate Time
Barycentric Dynamical Time
Civil time
Daylight saving time
Geocentric Coordinate Time
International Date Line
IERS Reference Meridian
Leap second
Solar time
Terrestrial Time
Time zone
Obsolete standards
Ephemeris time
Greenwich Mean Time
Prime meridian
Time in physics
Absolute space and time
Spacetime
Chronon
Continuous signal
Coordinate time
Cosmological decade
Discrete time and continuous time
Proper time
Theory of relativity
Time dilation
Gravitational time dilation
Time domain
Time translation symmetry
T-symmetry
Horology
Clock
Astrarium
Atomic clock
Complication
History of timekeeping devices
Hourglass
Marine chronometer
Marine sandglass
Radio clock
Watch
stopwatch
Water clock
Sundial
Dialing scales
Equation of time
History of sundials
Sundial markup schema
Calendar
Gregorian
Hebrew
Hindu
Holocene
Islamic (lunar Hijri)
Julian
Solar Hijri
Astronomical
Dominical letter
Epact
Equinox
Intercalation
Julian date
Leap year
Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar
Solstice
Tropical year
Weekday determination
Weekday names
Archaeology and geology
Chronological dating
Geologic time scale
International Commission on Stratigraphy
Astronomical chronology
Galactic year
Nuclear timescale
Precession
Sidereal time
Other units of time
Flick
Shake
Jiffy
Second
Minute
Moment
Hour
Day
Week
Fortnight
Month
Year
Olympiad
Lustrum
Decade
Century
Saeculum
Millennium
Related topics
Chronology
Duration
music
Mental chronometry
Decimal time
Metric time
System time
Time metrology
Time value of money
Timekeeper
ChronologyKey topics
Archaeology
Astronomy
Geology
History
Big History
Paleontology
Time
PeriodsErasEpochsCalendar eras
Human Era
Ab urbe condita
Anno Domini / Common Era
Anno Mundi
Bosporan era
Bostran era
Byzantine era
Seleucid era
Era of Caesar (Iberia)
Before present
Hijri
Egyptian
Sothic cycle
Hindu units of time (Yuga)
Mesoamerican
Long Count
Short Count
Tzolk'in
Haab'
Regnal year
Anka year
Canon of Kings
English regnal year
Lists of kings
Limmu
Era names
Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Vietnamese
CalendarsPre-Julian / Julian
Pre-Julian Roman
Original Julian
Proleptic Julian
Revised Julian
Gregorian
Gregorian
Proleptic Gregorian
Old Style and New Style dates
Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
Dual dating
Astronomical
Lunisolar (Hebrew, Hindu)
Solar
Lunar (Islamic)
Astronomical year numbering
Others
Chinese sexagenary cycle
Geologic Calendar
Iranian
ISO week date
Mesoamerican
Maya
Aztec
Winter count
New Earth Time
Astronomic time
Cosmic Calendar
Ephemeris
Galactic year
Metonic cycle
Milankovitch cycles
Geologic timeConcepts
Deep time
Geological history of Earth
Geological time units
Standards
Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP)
Methods
Chronostratigraphy
Geochronology
Isotope geochemistry
Law of superposition
Luminescence dating
Samarium–neodymium dating
ChronologicaldatingAbsolute dating
Amino acid racemisation
Archaeomagnetic dating
Dendrochronology
Ice core
Incremental dating
Lichenometry
Paleomagnetism
Radiometric dating
Lead–lead
Potassium–argon
Radiocarbon
Uranium–lead
Tephrochronology
Luminescence dating
Thermoluminescence dating
Relative dating
Fluorine absorption
Nitrogen dating
Obsidian hydration
Seriation
Stratigraphy
Genetic methods
Molecular clock
Linguistic methods
Glottochronology
Related topics
Chronicle
New Chronology
Synchronoptic view
Timeline
Year zero
Floruit
Terminus post quem
ASPRO chronology
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 16:45 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
