Caribbean - Wikipedia
Caribbean
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Region to the east of Central America
This article is about the group of islands.
For the indigenous inhabitants of Caribbean a group of people  of Caribbean descent, see Caribbean people.
For the body of water surrounding them, see Caribbean Sea.
For other uses, see Caribbean (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 14°31′32″N 75°49′06″W﻿ / ﻿14.52556°N 75.81833°W﻿ / 14.52556; -75.81833
CaribbeanArea2,754,000 km2 (1,063,000 sq mi)Population44,182,048Population density151.5/km2 (392/sq mi)Ethnic groupsAfrican, European, Indian, Latino or Hispanic (Spanish, Portuguese, Mestizo, Mulatto, Pardo, and Zambo), Chinese, Jewish, Arab, Amerindian, Javanese, Hmong, MultiracialReligionsChristianity, Hinduism, Islam, Afro-American religions, Traditional African religions, Rastafarianism, Native American religion, Judaism, Buddhism, Chinese folk religion (incl.
Taoism and Confucianism), Bahá’í, Kebatinan, Sikhism, Irreligion, othersDemonymCaribbean, West IndianCountries13 sovereign statesDependencies
Amapá (BR)[a]  Anguilla (UK)  Aruba (NL)  Bermuda (UK)[a]  Bonaire (NL)  British Virgin Islands (UK) Caribbean region of Colombia (CO)[a]  Cayman Islands (UK)  Curaçao (NL)  Guadeloupe (FR)  French Guiana (FR)[a]  Martinique (FR)  Montserrat (UK)  Navassa Island (US)  Puerto Rico (US) Quintana Roo (MX)[a] Saba (NL)  Saint Barthélemy (FR)  Saint Martin (FR)  Sint Eustatius (NL)  Sint Maarten (NL)  Turks and Caicos Islands (UK)  U.S. Virgin Islands (US) Venezuelan Caribbean (VE)[a]
Languages
English
Spanish
French
Dutch
French Creoles
English Creoles
Dutch Creoles
Spanish Creoles
Papiamento
Caribbean Hindustani
Chinese
among others
Time zonesUTC−5 to UTC−4Internet TLDMultipleCalling codeMultipleLargest cities
List of metropolitan areas in the Caribbean
CaracasSanto DomingoPort-au-PrinceMaracaiboBarranquillaSan JuanHavanaValenciaMaracayKingstonSantiago de los CaballerosSantiago de CubaCancúnCartagenaCiudad GuayanaBarcelonaCosta Oriental del LagoWillemstadOranjestadMacapáSanta MartaMonteríaPunta CanaMaturínValleduparMontego BayCumanáCamagüeySincelejoCap-HaïtienNassauParamariboChetumalSpanish TownPorlamarCayenneGeorgetownBridgetownNoordChaguanasSan FernandoPort of SpainBelize City
UN M49 code029 – Caribbean419 – Latin America019 – Americas001 – World
The Caribbean (/ˌkærɪˈbiːən, kəˈrɪbiən/, locally /ˈkærɪbiæn/) (Spanish: El Caribe; French: la Caraïbe; Haitian Creole: Karayib; Dutch: De Caraïben) is a region of the Americas that consists of the Caribbean Sea, its islands (some surrounded by the Caribbean Sea and some bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean) and the surrounding coasts.
The region is southeast of the Gulf of Mexico and the North American mainland, east of Central America, and north of South America.
Situated largely on the Caribbean Plate, the region has more than 700 islands, islets, reefs and cays (see the list of Caribbean islands). Island arcs delineate the eastern and northern edges of the Caribbean Sea: The Greater Antilles and the Lucayan Archipelago on the north and the Lesser Antilles and the on the south and east (which includes the Leeward Antilles). They form the West Indies with the nearby Lucayan Archipelago (the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands), which are considered to be part of the Caribbean despite not bordering the Caribbean Sea.
On the mainland, Belize, Nicaragua, the Caribbean region of Colombia, Cozumel, the Yucatán Peninsula, Margarita Island, and the Guianas (Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Guayana Region in Venezuela, and Amapá in Brazil) are often included due to their political and cultural ties with the region.
Geopolitically, the islands of the Caribbean (the West Indies) are often regarded as a region of North America, though sometimes they are included in Central America or left as a region of their own. and are organized into 30 territories including sovereign states, overseas departments, and dependencies.
From December 15, 1954, to October 10, 2010, there was a country known as the Netherlands Antilles composed of five states, all of which were Dutch dependencies.  From January 3, 1958, to May 31, 1962, there was also a short-lived political union called the West Indies Federation composed of ten English-speaking Caribbean territories, all of which were then British dependencies.
The West Indies cricket team continues to represent many of those nations.
Contents
Etymology and pronunciation
The region takes its name from that of the Caribs, an ethnic group present in the Lesser Antilles and parts of adjacent South America at the time of the Spanish conquest of the Americas.
The two most prevalent pronunciations of "Caribbean" outside the Caribbean are /ˌkærɪˈbiːən/ (KARR-ə-BEE-ən), with the primary stress on the third syllable, and /kəˈrɪbiən/ (kə-RIB-ee-ən), with the stress on the second.
Most authorities of the last century preferred the stress on the third syllable.
This is the older of the two pronunciations, but the stressed-second-syllable variant has been established for over 75 years.
It has been suggested that speakers of British English prefer /ˌkærɪˈbiːən/ (KARR-ə-BEE-ən) while North American speakers more typically use /kəˈrɪbiən/ (kə-RIB-ee-ən), but major American dictionaries and other sources list the stress on the third syllable as more common in American English too.
According to the American version of Oxford Online Dictionaries, the stress on the second syllable is becoming more common in UK English and is increasingly considered "by some" to be more up to date and more "correct".
The Oxford Online Dictionaries claim that the stress on the second syllable is the most common pronunciation in the Caribbean itself, but according to the Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage, the most common pronunciation in Caribbean English stresses the first syllable instead, /ˈkærɪbiæn/ (KARR-ih-bee-an).
Definition
Map of the Caribbean
The word "Caribbean" has multiple uses.
Its principal ones are geographical and political.
The Caribbean can also be expanded to include territories with strong cultural and historical connections to Africa, slavery, European colonisation and the plantation system.
The United Nations geoscheme for the Americas presents the Caribbean as a distinct region within the Americas.
Physiographically, the Caribbean region is mainly a chain of islands surrounding the Caribbean Sea.
To the north, the region is bordered by the Gulf of Mexico, the Straits of Florida and the Northern Atlantic Ocean, which lies to the east and northeast.
To the south lies the coastline of the continent of South America.
Politically, the "Caribbean" may be centred by considering narrower and wider socio-economic groupings:
At its core is the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), whose full members include the Commonwealth of the Bahamas in the Atlantic, the Co-operative Republic of Guyana and the Republic of Suriname in South America, and Belize in Central America; its associate members include Bermuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands in the Atlantic Ocean.
Most expansive is the Association of Caribbean States (ACS), which includes almost every nation in the region surrounding the Caribbean and also El Salvador on the Pacific Ocean.
According to the ACS, the total population of its member states is 227 million people.
Countries and territories of the Caribbean today
Main article: List of Caribbean islands
See also: Caribbean South America and West Indies
Islands in and near the CaribbeanMaritime boundaries between the Caribbean (island) nations
Flag
Country or territory
Sovereignty
Status
Area(km2)
Population(2021 est.)
Density(people per km2)
Capital
Anguilla
United Kingdom
British overseas territory
The Valley
Antigua and Barbuda
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
St.
John's
Aruba
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Constituent kingdom
Oranjestad
The Bahamas
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
Nassau
Barbados
Independent
Republic
Bridgetown
Bonaire
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Special Municipality
Kralendijk
British Virgin Islands
United Kingdom
British overseas territory
Road Town
Cayman Islands
United Kingdom
British overseas territory
George Town
Cuba
Independent
Republic
Havana
Curaçao
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Constituent kingdom
Willemstad
Dominica
Independent
Republic
Roseau
Dominican Republic
Independent
Republic
Santo Domingo
Federal Dependencies of Venezuela
Venezuela
Territories
2,155
6.3
Gran Roque
Grenada
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
St.
George's
Guadeloupe
France
Overseas department and region of France
1,628
Basse-Terre
Guyana
Independent
Republic
3.5
Georgetown
Haiti
Independent
Republic
Port-au-Prince
Jamaica
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
2,827,695
Kingston
Martinique
France
Overseas department
1,128
Fort-de-France
Montserrat
United Kingdom
British overseas territory
4,417
Plymouth (Brades)
Navassa Island
United States/Haiti
Territory (uninhabited)
0.0
n/a
Nueva Esparta
Venezuela
State
1,151
La Asunción
Puerto Rico
United States
Commonwealth
8,870
3,256,028
San Juan
Saba
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Special municipality
1,537
The Bottom
San Andrés and Providencia
Colombia
Department
San Andrés
Saint Barthélemy
France
Overseas collectivity
7,448
Gustavia
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
Basseterre
Saint Lucia
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
Castries
Saint Martin
France
Overseas collectivity
Marigot
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Independent
Constitutional monarchy
Kingstown
Sint Eustatius
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Special municipality
2,739
Oranjestad
Sint Maarten
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Constituent kingdom
Philipsburg
Trinidad and Tobago
Independent
Republic
5,130
1,525,663
Port of Spain
Turks and Caicos Islands
United Kingdom
British overseas territory
Cockburn Town
United States Virgin Islands
United States
Territory
Charlotte Amalie
Total
History
Main article: History of the Caribbean
Precolombian languages of the Antilles.Ciboney Taíno, Classic Taíno, and Iñeri were Arawakan, Karina and Yao were Cariban.
Macorix, Ciguayo and Guanahatabey are unclassified.
The oldest evidence of humans in the Caribbean is in southern Trinidad at Banwari Trace, where remains have been found from seven thousand years ago.
These pre-ceramic sites, which belong to the Archaic (pre-ceramic) age, have been termed Ortoiroid.
The earliest archaeological evidence of human settlement in Hispaniola dates to about 3600 BC, but the reliability of these finds is questioned.
Consistent dates of 3100 BC appear in Cuba.
The earliest dates in the Lesser Antilles are from 2000 BC in Antigua.
A lack of pre-ceramic sites in the Windward Islands and differences in technology suggest that these Archaic settlers may have Central American origins.
Whether an Ortoiroid colonization of the islands took place is uncertain, but there is little evidence of one.
DNA studies changed some of the traditional beliefs about pre-Columbian indigenous history.
According to National Geographic, "studies confirm that a wave of pottery-making farmers—known as Ceramic Age people—set out in canoes from the northeastern coast of South America starting some 2,500 years ago and island-hopped across the Caribbean.
They were not, however, the first colonizers.
On many islands they encountered a foraging people who arrived some 6,000 or 7,000 years ago...The ceramicists, who are related to today's Arawak-speaking peoples, supplanted the earlier foraging inhabitants—presumably through disease or violence—as they settled new islands."
Between 400 BC and 200 BC the first ceramic-using agriculturalists, the Saladoid culture, entered Trinidad from South America.
They expanded up the Orinoco River to Trinidad, and then spread rapidly up the islands of the Caribbean.
Some time after 250 AD another group, the Barancoid, entered Trinidad.
The Barancoid society collapsed along the Orinoco around 650 AD and another group, the Arauquinoid, expanded into these areas and up the Caribbean chain.
Around 1300 AD a new group, the Mayoid, entered Trinidad and remained the dominant culture until Spanish settlement.
At the time of the European discovery of most of the islands of the Caribbean, three major Amerindian indigenous peoples lived on the islands: the Taíno in the Greater Antilles, the Bahamas and the Leeward Islands, the Island Caribs and Galibi in the Windward Islands, and the Ciboney in western Cuba.
The Taínos are subdivided into Classic Taínos, who occupied Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, Western Taínos, who occupied Cuba, Jamaica, and the Bahamian archipelago, and the Eastern Taínos, who occupied the Leeward Islands.
Trinidad was inhabited by both Carib speaking and Arawak-speaking groups.
Soon after Christopher Columbus came to the Caribbean, both Portuguese and Spanish explorers began claiming territories in Central and South America.
These early colonies brought gold to Europe; most specifically England, the Netherlands, and France.
These nations hoped to establish profitable colonies in the Caribbean.
Colonial rivalries made the Caribbean a cockpit for European wars for centuries.
The Battle of the Saintes between British and French fleets in 1782, by Nicholas Pocock
The Caribbean was known for pirates, especially between 1640 and 1680. The term "buccaneer" is often used to describe a pirate operating in this region.
The Caribbean region was war-torn throughout much of its colonial history, but the wars were often based in Europe, with only minor battles fought in the Caribbean.
Some wars, however, were born of political turmoil in the Caribbean itself.
Counter-attack by Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces supported by T-34 tanks near Playa Giron during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, 19 April 1961
A Marine heavy machine gunner monitors a position along the international neutral corridor in Santo Domingo, 1965.
A Soviet-made BTR-60 armored personnel carrier seized by US forces during Operation Urgent Fury (1983)
US Army Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk, Bell AH-1 Cobra and Bell OH-58 Kiowa helicopters on deck of the US Navy aircraft carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower (CVN-69) off Haiti, 1994
Foreign interventions by Cuba
Main article: Foreign interventions by Cuba
This section may contain material unrelated or insufficiently related to the topic of the article.
Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page. (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A Cuban PT-76 tank crew performing routine security duties in Angola during the Cuban intervention into the country
From 1966 until the late 1980s, the Soviet government upgraded Cuba's military capabilities, and Cuban leader Fidel Castro saw to it that Cuba assisted with the independence struggles of several countries across the world, most notably Angola and Mozambique in southern Africa, and the anti-imperialist struggles of countries such as Syria, Algeria, Venezuela, Bolivia, and Vietnam.
Its Angolan involvement was particularly intense and noteworthy with heavy assistance given to the Marxist–Leninist MPLA in the Angolan Civil War.
Cuba sent 380,000 troops to Angola and 70,000 additional civilian technicians and volunteers. (The Cuban forces possessed 1,000 tanks, 600 armored vehicles and 1,600 artillery pieces.)
Cuba's involvement in the Angolan Civil War began in the 1960s, when relations were established with the leftist Movement for the Popular Liberation of Angola (MPLA). The MPLA was one of three organizations struggling to gain Angola's independence from Portugal, the other two being UNITA and the National Liberation Front of Angola (FNLA). In August and October 1975, the South African Defence Force (SADF) intervened in Angola in support of the UNITA and FNLA. On 14 October 1975, the SADF commenced Operation Savannah in an effort to capture Luanda from the south.
On 5 November 1975, without consulting Moscow, the Cuban government opted for a direct intervention with combat troops (Operation Carlota) in support of the MPLA and the combined MPLA-Cuban armies managed to stop the South African advance by 26 November.
During the Ogaden War (1977–78) in which Somalia attempted to invade an Ethiopia affected by civil war, Cuba deployed 18,000 troops along with armored vehicles, artillery, T-62 tanks, and MiGs to assist the Provisional Military Government of Socialist Ethiopia.
Cuban troops and warplanes played a major part in the expulsion of Somali regulars from the Ogaden.
US interventions
See also: Foreign interventions by the United States and American imperialism
The United States has conducted military operations in the Caribbean for at least 100 years.
Since the Monroe Doctrine, the United States gained a major influence on most Caribbean nations.
In the early part of the 20th century this influence was extended by participation in the Banana Wars.
Victory in the Spanish–American War and the signing of the Platt Amendment in 1901 ensured that the United States would have the right to interfere in Cuban political and economic affairs, militarily if necessary.
After the Cuban Revolution of 1959, relations deteriorated rapidly leading to the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and successive US attempts to destabilize the island, based upon Cold War fears of the Soviet threat.
The US invaded and occupied Hispaniola for 19 years (1915–34), subsequently dominating the Haitian economy through aid and loan repayments.
The US invaded Haiti again in 1994 and in 2004 were accused by CARICOM of arranging a coup d'état to remove elected Haitian leader Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In 1965, 23,000 US troops were sent to the Dominican Republic to quash a local uprising against military rule (see Dominican Civil War). President Lyndon Johnson had ordered the invasion to stem what he deemed to be a "Communist threat." However, the mission appeared ambiguous and was roundly condemned throughout the hemisphere as a return to gunboat diplomacy.
In 1983, the US invaded Grenada to remove populist left-wing leader Maurice Bishop.
The US maintains a naval military base in Cuba at Guantanamo Bay.
The base is one of five unified commands whose "area of responsibility" is Latin America and the Caribbean.
The command is headquartered in Miami, Florida.
Counter-attack by Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces supported by T-34 tanks near Playa Giron during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, 19 April 1961.
A Marine heavy machine gunner monitors a position along the international neutral corridor in Santo Domingo, 1965.
A Soviet-made BTR-60 armored personnel carrier seized by US forces during Operation Urgent Fury (1983)
US Army Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk, Bell AH-1 Cobra and Bell OH-58 Kiowa helicopters on deck of the US Navy aircraft carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower (CVN-69) off Haiti, 1994.
Geography and geology
The Caribbean Plate
The geography and climate in the Caribbean region varies: Some islands in the region have relatively flat terrain of non-volcanic origin.
These islands include Aruba (possessing only minor volcanic features), Curaçao, Barbados, Bonaire, the Cayman Islands, Saint Croix, the Bahamas, and Antigua.
Others possess rugged towering mountain-ranges like the islands of Saint Martin, Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Dominica, Montserrat, Saba, Sint Eustatius, Saint Kitts, Saint Lucia, Saint Thomas, Saint John, Tortola, Grenada, Saint Vincent, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Trinidad and Tobago.
Definitions of the terms Greater Antilles and Lesser Antilles often vary.
The Virgin Islands as part of the Puerto Rican bank are sometimes included with the Greater Antilles.
The term Lesser Antilles is often used to define an island arc that includes Grenada but excludes Trinidad and Tobago and the Leeward Antilles.
The waters of the Caribbean Sea host large, migratory schools of fish, turtles, and coral reef formations.
The Puerto Rico Trench, located on the fringe of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea just to the north of the island of Puerto Rico, is the deepest point in all of the Atlantic Ocean.
The region sits in the line of several major shipping routes with the Panama Canal connecting the western Caribbean Sea with the Pacific Ocean.
Climate
Tropical monsoon climate in San Andrés island, Caribbean, Colombia.
Köppen climate map of the islands of the Caribbean.
The climate of the area is tropical, varying from tropical rainforest in some areas to tropical monsoon and tropical savanna in others.
There are also some locations that are arid climates with considerable drought in some years, and the peaks of mountains tend to have cooler temperate climates.
Rainfall varies with elevation, size and water currents, such as the cool upwellings that keep the ABC islands arid.
Warm, moist trade winds blow consistently from the east, creating both rain forest and semi arid climates across the region.
The tropical rainforest climates include lowland areas near the Caribbean Sea from Costa Rica north to Belize, as well as the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, while the more seasonal dry tropical savanna climates are found in Cuba, northern  Colombia and Venezuela, and southern Yucatán, Mexico.
Arid climates are found along the extreme northern coast of Venezuela out to the islands including Aruba and Curacao, as well as the northwestern tip of Yucatán.
While the region generally is sunny much of the year, the wet season from May through November sees more frequent cloud cover (both broken and overcast), while the dry season from December through April is more often clear to mostly sunny.
Seasonal rainfall is divided into 'dry' and 'wet' seasons, with the latter six months of the year being wetter than the first half.
The air temperature is hot much of the year, varying from 25 to 33 C (77 F to 90 F) between the wet and dry seasons.
Seasonally, monthly mean temperatures vary from only about 5 C (7 F) in the northern most regions, to less than 3 C  in the southernmost areas of the Caribbean.
Hurricane season is from June to November, but they occur more frequently in August and September and more common in the northern islands of the Caribbean.
Hurricanes that sometimes batter the region usually strike northwards of Grenada and to the west of Barbados.
The principal hurricane belt arcs to northwest of the island of Barbados in the Eastern Caribbean.
A great example being recent events of Hurricane Irma devastating the island of Saint Martin during the 2017 hurricane season.
Sea surface temperatures change little annually, normally running from 30 °C (87 °F) in the warmest months to 26 °C (76 °F) in the coolest months.
The air temperature is warm year round, in the 70s, 80s and 90s, and only varies from winter to summer about 2–5 degrees on the southern islands and about a 10–20 degrees difference on the northern islands of the Caribbean.
The northern islands, like the Bahamas, Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, may be influenced by continental masses during winter months, such as cold fronts.
Aruba: Latitude 12°N
Climate data for Oranjestad, Aruba (1981–2010, extremes 1951–2010)
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
Daily mean °C (°F)
Average low °C (°F)
Record low °C (°F)
Average precipitation mm (inches)
8.7(0.34)
Source: DEPARTAMENTO METEOROLOGICO ARUBA, (extremes)
Puerto Rico: Latitude 18°N
Climate data for San Juan, Puerto Rico
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
Average low °C (°F)
Record low °C (°F)
Average precipitation mm (inches)
1,431(56.3)
Source: The National Weather Service 
Cuba: at Latitude 22°N
Climate data for Havana
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
Daily mean °C (°F)
Average low °C (°F)
Record low °C (°F)
5.1(41.2)
5.6(42.1)
5.4(41.7)
7.5(45.5)
5.1(41.2)
Average rainfall mm (inches)
1,189.2(46.84)
Source: World Meteorological Organisation (UN), Climate-Charts.com
A field in Pinar del Rio planted with Cuban tobacco
Puerto Rico's south shore, from the mountains of Jayuya
Grand Anse beach, St.
George's, Grenada
A church cemetery perched in the mountains of Guadeloupe
A view of Nevis island from the southeastern peninsula of Saint Kitts
Island groups
Lucayan Archipelago[c]
The Bahamas
Turks and Caicos Islands (United Kingdom)
Greater Antilles
Cayman Islands (United Kingdom)
Cuba
Hispaniola
Haiti
Dominican Republic
Jamaica
Puerto Rico (U.S. Commonwealth)
Spanish Virgin Islands
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
United States Virgin Islands  (U.S.)
Saint Croix
Saint Thomas
Saint John
Water Island
British Virgin Islands (United Kingdom)
Tortola
Virgin Gorda
Anegada
Jost Van Dyke
Anguilla (United Kingdom)
Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua
Barbuda
Redonda
Saint Martin, politically divided between
Saint Martin (France)
Sint Maarten (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Saba (Caribbean Netherlands, Netherlands)
Sint Eustatius (Caribbean Netherlands, Netherlands)
Saint Barthélemy (French Antilles, France)
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Kitts
Nevis
Montserrat (United Kingdom)
Guadeloupe (French Antilles, France) including
Les Saintes
Marie-Galante
La Désirade
Windward Islands
Dominica
Martinique (French Antilles, France)
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Saint Vincent
The Grenadines
Grenada
Grenada
Carriacou and Petite Martinique
Barbados
Trinidad and Tobago
Tobago
Trinidad
Leeward Antilles
Aruba (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Curaçao (Kingdom of the Netherlands)
Bonaire (Caribbean Netherlands, Netherlands)
Historical groupings
Main article: History of the Caribbean
Spanish Caribbean Islands in the American Viceroyalties 1600
Political evolution of Central America and the Caribbean from 1700 to present
The mostly Spanish-controlled Caribbean in the 18th century
The mostly Spanish-controlled Caribbean in the 16th century
All islands at some point were, and a few still are, colonies of European nations; a few are overseas or dependent territories:
British West Indies/Anglophone Caribbean – Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Bay Islands, Guyana, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Croix (briefly), Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago (from 1797) and the Turks and Caicos Islands
Danish West Indies – Possession of Denmark-Norway before 1814, then Denmark, present-day United States Virgin Islands
Dutch West Indies – Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten, Bay Islands (briefly), Saint Croix (briefly), Tobago, Surinam and Virgin Islands
French West Indies – Anguilla (briefly), Antigua and Barbuda (briefly), Dominica, Dominican Republic (briefly), Grenada, Haiti (formerly Saint-Domingue), Montserrat (briefly), Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sint Eustatius (briefly), Sint Maarten, St.
Kitts (briefly), Tobago (briefly), Saint Croix, the current French overseas départements of French Guiana, Martinique and Guadeloupe (including Marie-Galante, La Désirade and Les Saintes), the current French overseas collectivities of Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin
Portuguese West Indies – present-day Barbados, known as Os Barbados in the 16th century when the Portuguese claimed the island en route to Brazil.
The Portuguese left Barbados abandoned years before the British arrived.
Spanish West Indies – Cuba, Hispaniola (present-day Dominican Republic), Haiti (until 1659, lost to France), Puerto Rico, Jamaica (until 1655, lost to Great Britain), the Cayman Islands (until 1670 to Great Britain) Trinidad (until 1797, lost to Great Britain) and Bay Islands (until 1643, lost to Great Britain), coastal islands of Central America (except Belize), and some Caribbean coastal islands of Panama, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela.
Swedish West Indies – present-day French Saint-Barthélemy, Guadeloupe (briefly) and Tobago (briefly).
Courlander West Indies – Tobago (until 1691)
The British West Indies were united by the United Kingdom into a West Indies Federation between 1958 and 1962. The independent countries formerly part of the B.W.I. still have a joint cricket team that competes in Test matches, One Day Internationals and Twenty20 Internationals.
The West Indian cricket team includes the South American nation of Guyana, the only former British colony on the mainland of that continent.
In addition, these countries share the University of the West Indies as a regional entity.
The university consists of three main campuses in Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago, a smaller campus in the Bahamas and Resident Tutors in other contributing territories such as Trinidad.
Continental countries with Caribbean coastlines and islands
Belize
Ambergris Caye
Caye Caulker
Glover's Reef
Hick's Cayes
Lighthouse Reef
St.
George's Caye
Tobacco Caye
Turneffe Atoll
Colombia
Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina
Bajo Nuevo Bank
Crab Cay
Quita Sueño Bank
Roncador Bank
Roncador Cay
San Andrés (island)
Santa Catalina Island (Colombia)
Serrana Bank
Serranilla Bank
Rosario Islands
Costa Rica
Brava Island, Costa Rica
Isla Calero
Uvita Island
French Guiana
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Islas de la Bahía
Cayos Cochinos
Guanaja
Roatán
Swan Islands
Útila
Cayos Cochinos
Cayo Gorda
Bobel Cay
Nicaragua
Corn Islands
Miskito Cays
Pearl Cays
Calala Island
Rama Cay
Panama
Archipelago off Guna Yala coast (including the San Blas Islands)
Bocas del Toro Archipelago (approximately 300 islands)
Galeta Island (Panama)
Isla Grande
Soledad Miria
Cayos Limones
Mexico
Quintana Roo
Banco Chinchorro
Cozumel
Isla Blanca
Isla Contoy
Isla Holbox
Isla Mujeres
Suriname
Venezuela
Blanquilla Island
Coche Island
Cubagua Island
Isla Aves
Islas Los Frailes
Isla Margarita
La Orchila
La Sola Island
La Tortuga Island
Las Aves archipelago
Los Hermanos Archipelago
Los Monjes Archipelago
Los Roques archipelago
Los Testigos Islands
Patos Island
Cayo de Agua, Los Roques Archipelago, Venezuela
Palancar Beach in Cozumel Island, Mexico
Guanaja Island, Bay Islands, Honduras
Biodiversity
The Caribbean islands have one of the most diverse eco systems in the world.
The animals, fungi and plants, and have been classified as one of Conservation International's biodiversity hotspots because of their exceptionally diverse terrestrial and marine ecosystems, ranging from montane cloud forests, to tropical rainforest,  to cactus scrublands.
The region also contains about 8% (by surface area) of the world's coral reefs along with extensive seagrass meadows, both of which are frequently found in the shallow marine waters bordering the island and continental coasts of the region.
For the fungi, there is a modern checklist based on nearly 90,000 records derived from specimens in reference collections, published accounts and field observations.
That checklist includes more than 11,250 species of fungi recorded from the region.
As its authors note, the work is far from exhaustive, and it is likely that the true total number of fungal species already known from the Caribbean is higher.
The true total number of fungal species occurring in the Caribbean, including species not yet recorded, is likely far higher given the generally accepted estimate that only about 7% of all fungi worldwide have been discovered.
Though the amount of available information is still small, a first effort has been made to estimate the number of fungal species endemic to some Caribbean islands.
For Cuba, 2200 species of fungi have been tentatively identified as possible endemics of the island; for Puerto Rico, the number is 789 species; for the Dominican Republic, the number is 699 species; for Trinidad and Tobago, the number is 407 species.
Many of the ecosystems of the Caribbean islands have been devastated by deforestation, pollution, and human encroachment.
The arrival of the first humans is correlated with extinction of giant owls and dwarf ground sloths.
The hotspot contains dozens of highly threatened animals (ranging from birds, to mammals and reptiles), fungi and plants.
Examples of threatened animals include the Puerto Rican amazon, two species of solenodon (giant shrews) in Cuba and the Hispaniola island, and the Cuban crocodile.
Saona Island, Dominican Republic
The region's coral reefs, which contain about 70 species of hard corals and between 500–700 species of reef-associated fishes have undergone rapid decline in ecosystem integrity in recent years, and are considered particularly vulnerable to global warming and ocean acidification.
According to a UNEP report, the Caribbean coral reefs might get extinct in next 20 years due to population explosion along the coast lines, overfishing, the pollution of coastal areas and global warming.
Some Caribbean islands have terrain that Europeans found suitable for cultivation for agriculture.
Tobacco was an important early crop during the colonial era, but was eventually overtaken by sugarcane production as the region's staple crop.
Sugar was produced from sugarcane for export to Europe.
Cuba and Barbados were historically the largest producers of sugar.
The tropical plantation system thus came to dominate Caribbean settlement.  Other islands were found to have terrain unsuited for agriculture, for example Dominica, which remains heavily forested.
The islands in the southern Lesser Antilles, Aruba, Bonaire and Curaçao, are extremely arid, making them unsuitable for agriculture.
However, they have salt pans that were exploited by the Dutch.
Sea water was pumped into shallow ponds, producing coarse salt when the water evaporated.
The natural environmental diversity of the Caribbean islands has led to recent growth in eco-tourism.
This type of tourism is growing on islands lacking sandy beaches and dense human populations.
Plants and animals
See also: List of invasive marine fish in the Caribbean
Epiphytes (bromeliads, climbing palms) in the rainforest of Dominica
A green and black poison frog, Dendrobates auratus
Caesalpinia pulcherrima, Guadeloupe
Costus speciosus, a marsh plant, Guadeloupe
An Atlantic ghost crab (Ocypode quadrata) in Martinique
Crescentia cujete, or calabash fruit, Martinique
Thalassoma bifasciatum (bluehead wrasse fish), over Bispira brunnea (social feather duster worms)
Two Stenopus hispidus (banded cleaner shrimp) on a Xestospongia muta (giant barrel sponge)
A pair of Cyphoma signatum (fingerprint cowry), off coastal Haiti
The Martinique amazon, Amazona martinicana, is an extinct species of parrot in the family Psittacidae.
Anastrepha suspensa, a Caribbean fruit fly
Hemidactylus mabouia, a tropical gecko, in Dominica.
Edited by: Taniya Brooks
Demographics
Indigenous groups
Main article: Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean
Arawak peoples
Igneri
Taíno
Caquetio people
Ciboney
Ciguayo
Garifuna
Kalina
Kalinago
Lucayan
Macorix
Raizal
A linen market in Dominica in the 1770s
Agostino Brunias.
Free Women of Color with Their Children and Servants in a Landscape Brooklyn Museum
Asian Indians in the late nineteenth century singing and dancing in Trinidad and Tobago
Street scene, Matanzas, Cuba
At the time of European contact, the dominant ethnic groups in the Caribbean included the Taíno of the Greater Antilles and northern Lesser Antilles, the Island Caribs of the southern Lesser Antilles, and smaller distinct groups such as the Guanajatabey of western Cuba and the Ciguayo of eastern Hispaniola.
The population of the Caribbean is estimated to have been around 750,000 immediately before European contact, although lower and higher figures are given.
After contact, social disruption and epidemic diseases such as smallpox and measles (to which they had no natural immunity) led to a decline in the Amerindian population.
From 1500 to 1800 the population rose as slaves arrived from West Africa such as the Kongo, Igbo, Akan, Fon and Yoruba as well as military prisoners from Ireland, who were deported during the Cromwellian reign in England.[citation needed] Immigrants from Britain, Italy, France, Spain, the Netherlands, Portugal and Denmark also arrived, although the mortality rate was high for both groups.
The population is estimated to have reached 2.2 million by 1800. Immigrants from India, China, Indonesia, and other countries arrived in the mid-19th century as indentured servants.  After the ending of the Atlantic slave trade, the population increased naturally.
The total regional population was estimated at 37.5 million by 2000.
In Haiti and most of the French, Anglophone and Dutch Caribbean, the population is predominantly of African origin; on many islands there are also significant populations of mixed racial origin (including Mulatto-Creole, Dougla, Mestizo, Quadroon, Cholo, Castizo, Criollo, Zambo, Pardo, Asian Latin Americans, Chindian, Cocoa panyols, and Eurasian), as well as populations of European ancestry:  Dutch, English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish ancestry.
Asians, especially those of Chinese, Indian descent, and Javanese Indonesians, form a significant minority in parts of the region.
Indians form a plurality of the population in Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, and Suriname.
Most of their ancestors arrived in the 19th century as indentured laborers.
The Spanish-speaking Caribbean populations are primarily of European, African, or racially mixed origins.
Puerto Rico has a European majority with a mixture of European-African-Native American (tri-racial), and a large Mulatto (European-West African) and West African minority.
Cuba also has a European majority, along with a significant population of African ancestry.
The Dominican Republic has the largest mixed-race population, primarily descended from Europeans, West Africans, and Amerindians.
Carnival in Trinidad and Tobago
Jamaica has a large African majority, in addition to a significant population of mixed racial background, and has minorities of Chinese, Europeans, Indians, Latinos, Jews, and Arabs.
This is a result of years of importation of slaves and indentured laborers, and migration.
Most multi-racial Jamaicans refer to themselves as either mixed race or brown.
Similar populations can be found in the Caricom states of Belize, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.
Trinidad and Tobago has a multi-racial cosmopolitan society due to the arrivals of Africans, Indians, Chinese, Arabs, Jews, Latinos, and Europeans along with the native indigenous Amerindians population.
This multi-racial mix of the Caribbean has created sub-ethnicities that often straddle the boundaries of major ethnicities and include Mulatto-Creole, Mestizo, Pardo, Zambo, Dougla, Chindian, Afro-Asians,  Eurasian, Cocoa panyols, and Asian Latinos.
Language
Main article: Languages of the Caribbean
Spanish (64%),  French (25%), English (14%), Dutch, Haitian Creole, and Papiamento are the predominant official languages of various countries in the region, although a handful of unique creole languages or dialects can also be found in virtually every Caribbean country.
Other languages such as Caribbean Hindustani, Chinese, Javanese, Arabic, Hmong, Amerindian languages, other African languages, other European languages, and other Indian languages can also be found.
Religion
See also: Religion in the Caribbean
Havana Cathedral (Catholic) in Cuba completed in 1777
Holy Trinity Cathedral, an Anglican Christian cathedral in Trinidad and Tobago
Temple in the Sea, a Hindu mandir in Trinidad and Tobago
Muhammad Ali Jinnah Memorial Masjid, a Muslim masjid in Trinidad and Tobago
A Jewish synagogue in Suriname
A Haitian Vodou alter
Christianity is the predominant religion in the Caribbean (84.7%). Other religions in the region are Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Rastafarianism, Buddhism, Chinese folk religion (incl.
Taoism and Confucianism), Bahá'í, Jainism, Sikhism, Kebatinan, Traditional African religions, Yoruba (incl.
Trinidad Orisha), Afro-American religions,  (incl.
Santería, Palo, Umbanda, Brujería, Hoodoo, Candomblé, Quimbanda, Orisha, Xangô de Recife, Xangô do Nordeste, Comfa, Espiritismo, Santo Daime, Obeah, Candomblé, Abakuá, Kumina, Winti, Sanse, Cuban Vodú, Dominican Vudú, Louisiana Voodoo, Haitian Vodou, and Vodun).
Politics
Regionalism
Flag of the Caribbean Common Market and Community (CARICOM)
Caribbean societies are very different from other Western societies in terms of size, culture, and degree of mobility of their citizens.
The current economic and political problems the states face individually are common to all Caribbean states.
Regional development has contributed to attempts to subdue current problems and avoid projected problems.
From a political and economic perspective, regionalism serves to make Caribbean states active participants in current international affairs through collective coalitions.
In 1973, the first political regionalism in the Caribbean Basin was created by advances of the English-speaking Caribbean nations through the institution known as the Caribbean Common Market and Community (CARICOM) which is located in Guyana.
Certain scholars have argued both for and against generalizing the political structures of the Caribbean.
On the one hand the Caribbean states are politically diverse, ranging from communist systems such as Cuba toward more capitalist Westminster-style parliamentary systems as in the Commonwealth Caribbean.
Other scholars argue that these differences are superficial, and that they tend to undermine commonalities in the various Caribbean states.
Contemporary Caribbean systems seem to reflect a "blending of traditional and modern patterns, yielding hybrid systems that exhibit significant structural variations and divergent constitutional traditions yet ultimately appear to function in similar ways." The political systems of the Caribbean states share similar practices.
The influence of regionalism in the Caribbean is often marginalized.
Some scholars believe that regionalism cannot exist in the Caribbean because each small state is unique.
On the other hand, scholars also suggest that there are commonalities amongst the Caribbean nations that suggest regionalism exists.  "Proximity as well as historical ties among the Caribbean nations has led to cooperation as well as a desire for collective action." These attempts at regionalization reflect the nations' desires to compete in the international economic system.
Furthermore, a lack of interest from other major states promoted regionalism in the region.  In recent years the Caribbean has suffered from a lack of U.S. interest. "With the end of the Cold War, U.S. security and economic interests have been focused on other areas.
As a result there has been a significant reduction in U.S. aid and investment to the Caribbean."  The lack of international support for these small, relatively poor states, helped regionalism prosper.
Following the Cold War another issue of importance in the Caribbean has been the reduced economic growth of some Caribbean States due to the United States and European Union's allegations of special treatment toward the region by each other.[clarification needed]
United States-EU trade dispute
The United States under President Bill Clinton launched a challenge in the World Trade Organization against the EU over Europe's preferential program, known as the Lomé Convention, which allowed banana exports from the former colonies of the Group of African, Caribbean and Pacific states (ACP) to enter Europe cheaply.
The World Trade Organization sided in the United States' favour and the beneficial elements of the convention to African, Caribbean and Pacific states has been partially dismantled and replaced by the Cotonou Agreement.
During the US/EU dispute, the United States imposed large tariffs on European Union goods (up to 100%) to pressure Europe to change the agreement with the Caribbean nations in favour of the Cotonou Agreement.
Farmers in the Caribbean have complained of falling profits and rising costs as the Lomé Convention weakens.  Some farmers have faced increased pressure to turn towards the cultivation of illegal drugs, which has a higher profit margin and fills the sizable demand for these illegal drugs in North America and Europe.
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force and Association of Caribbean States
Caribbean nations have also started to more closely cooperate in the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force and other instruments to add oversight of the offshore industry.
One of the most important associations that deal with regionalism amongst the nations of the Caribbean Basin has been the Association of Caribbean States (ACS). Proposed by CARICOM in 1992, the ACS soon won the support of the other countries of the region.  It was founded in July 1994.  The ACS maintains regionalism within the Caribbean on issues unique to the Caribbean Basin.
Through coalition building, like the ACS and CARICOM, regionalism has become an undeniable part of the politics and economics of the Caribbean.  The successes of region-building initiatives are still debated by scholars, yet regionalism remains prevalent throughout the Caribbean.
Bolivarian Alliance
The President of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez launched an economic group called the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA), which several eastern Caribbean islands joined.  In 2012, the nation of Haiti, with 9 million people, became the largest CARICOM nation that sought to join the union.
Regional institutions
Here are some of the bodies that several islands share in collaboration:
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States
Association of Caribbean States (ACS), Trinidad and Tobago
Caribbean Association of Industry and Commerce (CAIC), Trinidad and Tobago
Caribbean Association of National Telecommunication Organizations (CANTO), Trinidad and Tobago
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Guyana
Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), Barbados
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDERA), Barbados
Caribbean Educators Network
Caribbean Electric Utility Services Corporation (CARILEC), Saint Lucia
Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), Barbados and Jamaica
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF), Trinidad and Tobago
Caribbean Food Crops Society, Puerto Rico
Caribbean Football Union (CFU), Jamaica
Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Association (CHTA), Florida and Puerto Rico
Caribbean Initiative (Initiative of the IUCN)
Caribbean Programme for Economic Competitiveness (CPEC), Saint Lucia
Caribbean Regional Environmental Programme (CREP), Barbados
Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism (CRFM), Belize
Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery (CRNM), Barbados and Dominican Republic
Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU), Trinidad and Tobago
Caribbean Tourism Organization (CTO), Barbados
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC)
Foundation for the Development of Caribbean Children, Barbados
Latin America and Caribbean Network Information Centre (LACNIC), Brazil and Uruguay
Latin American and the Caribbean Economic System, Venezuela
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), Saint Lucia
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Chile and Trinidad and Tobago
University of the West Indies, Jamaica, Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago.  In addition, the fourth campus, the Open Campus was formed in June 2008 as a result of an amalgamation of the Board for Non-Campus Countries and Distance Education, Schools of Continuing Studies, the UWI Distance Education Centres and Tertiary Level Units.  The Open Campus has 42 physical sites in 16 Anglophone caribbean countries.
West Indies Cricket Board, Antigua and Barbuda
Cuisine
Main article: Caribbean cuisine
Favourite or national dishes
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Doubles, one of the national dishes of Trinidad and Tobago
Arroz con gandules, one of the national dishes of Puerto Rico
Anguilla – rice, peas and fish
Antigua and Barbuda – fungee and pepperpot
Bahamas – Guava duff, Conch Salad, Peas n' Rice, and Conch Fritters
Barbados – cou-cou and flying fish
Belize – rice and beans, stew chicken with potato salad ; white rice, stew beans and fry fish with cole slaw
British Virgin Islands – fish and fungee
Cayman Islands – turtle stew, turtle steak, grouper
Colombian Caribbean – rice with coconut milk, arroz con pollo, sancocho, Arab cuisine (due to the large Arab population)
Cuba – platillo Moros y Cristianos, ropa vieja, lechon, maduros, ajiaco
Dominica – mountain chicken, rice and peas, dumplings, saltfish, dashin, bakes (fried dumplings), coconut confiture, curry goat, cassava farine, oxtail
Dominican Republic – arroz con pollo with stewed red kidney beans, pan fried or braised beef, salad/ ensalada de coditos, empanadas, mangú, sancocho
Grenada – oil down, Roti and rice & chicken
Guyana – roti and curry, pepperpot, cookup rice, methem, pholourie
Haiti – griot (fried pork) served with du riz a pois or diri ak pwa (rice and beans)
Jamaica – ackee and saltfish, callaloo, jerk chicken, curry chicken
Montserrat – Goat water
Puerto Rico – yellow rice with green pigeon peas, saltfish stew, roasted pork shoulder, chicken fricassée, mofongo, tripe soup, alcapurria, coconut custard, rice pudding, guava turnovers, Mallorca bread
Saint Kitts and Nevis – goat water, coconut dumplings, spicy plantain, saltfish, breadfruit
Saint Lucia – callaloo, dal roti, dried and salted cod, green bananas, rice and beans
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines – roasted breadfruit and fried jackfish
Suriname – brown beans and rice, roti and curry, peanut soup, battered fried plantain with peanut sauce, nasi goreng, moksie alesi, bara, pom
Trinidad and Tobago – doubles, curry with roti or dal bhat, aloo pie, phulourie, callaloo, bake and shark, curry crab and dumpling
United States Virgin Islands – stewed goat, oxtail or beef, seafood, callaloo, fungee
See also
Caribbean portal
Geography portal
Islands portal
North America portal
African diaspora
Anchor coinage
British African-Caribbean people
British Indo-Caribbean people
Caribbean people
Climate change in the Caribbean
CONCACAF
Council on Hemispheric Affairs
Culture of the Caribbean
Economy of the Caribbean
Indian diaspora
Indo-Caribbean
Indo-Caribbean American
List of Caribbean music genres
List of sovereign states and dependent territories in the Caribbean
NECOBELAC Project
Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin
Piracy in the Caribbean
Politics of the Caribbean
Tourism in the Caribbean
Geography:
Americas (terminology)
List of archipelagos by number of islands
List of Caribbean islands
List of indigenous names of Eastern Caribbean islands
List of mountain peaks of the Caribbean
List of Ultras of the Caribbean
Middle America (Americas)
Latin America and the Caribbean (region)
Notes
a b c d e f Sometimes included.
The Lucayan Archipelago is sometimes excluded from the definition of the "Caribbean" and instead classified as a part of North Atlantic; this is primarily a geological rather than cultural or political distinction.
The Lucayan Archipelago is excluded from some definitions of "Caribbean" and instead classified as Atlantic; this is primarily a geological rather than cultural or environmental distinction.
References
a b ""World Population Prospects 2022"". population.un.org.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved July 17, 2022.
a b "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX). population.un.org ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved July 17, 2022.
McWhorter, John H. (2005). Defining Creole.
Oxford University Press US. p. 379. ISBN 978-0-19-516670-5.
"Cancun Riviera Maya, Hotels and All Inclusive Resorts, Mexican Caribbean Travel".
a b Allsopp, Richard; Allsopp, Jeannette (2003). Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage.
University of the West Indies Press. p. 136–. ISBN 978-976-640-145-0.
Engerman, Stanley L. (2000). "A Population History of the Caribbean".  In Haines, Michael R.; Steckel, Richard Hall (eds.). A Population History of North America.
Cambridge University Press. pp. 483–528. ISBN 978-0-521-49666-7. OCLC 41118518.
Hillman, Richard S.; D'Agostino, Thomas J., eds. (2003). Understanding the contemporary Caribbean.
London, UK: Lynne Rienner.
ISBN 978-1588266637. OCLC 300280211.
Asann, Ridvan (2007). A Brief History of the Caribbean (Revised ed.). New York: Facts on File, Inc. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8160-3811-4.
Higman, B. W. (2011). A ConciseHistory of the Caribbean.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. xi.
ISBN 978-0521043489.
"North America". Britannica Concise Encyclopedia; "... associated with the continent is Greenland, the largest island in the world, and such offshore groups as the Arctic Archipelago, the Bahamas, the Greater and Lesser Antilles, the Queen Charlotte Islands, and the Aleutian Islands," but also "North America is bounded ... on the south by the Caribbean Sea," and "according to some authorities, North America begins not at the Isthmus of Panama but at the narrows of Tehuantepec."
The World: Geographic Overview, The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency; "North America is commonly understood to include the island of Greenland, the isles of the Caribbean, and to extend south all the way to the Isthmus of Panama."
The Netherlands Antilles: The joy of six, The Economist Magazine, April 29, 2010
"Carib". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 2008-04-30. Retrieved 2008-02-20. inhabited the Lesser Antilles and parts of the neighbouring South American coast at the time of the Spanish conquest.
Elster, Charles Harrington. "Caribbean", from The Big Book of Beastly Mispronunciations. p.78. (2d ed. 2005)
In the early 20th century, only the pronunciation with the primary stress on the third syllable was considered correct, according to Frank Horace Vizetelly, A Desk-Book of Twenty-five Thousand Words Frequently Mispronounced (Funk and Wagnalls, 1917), p. 233.
Ladefoged, Peter; Johnson, Keith (2011). A Course in Phonetics.
Cengage Learning. pp. 86–. ISBN 978-1-4282-3126-9.
Random House Dictionary
American Heritage Dictionary
Merriam Webster
See, e.g., Elster, supra.
a b Oxford Online Dictionaries
"Background of the business forum of the Greater Caribbean of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)". Archived from the original on 2010-03-27. Retrieved 2009-05-05.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). acs-aec.org
"SPP Background". CommerceConnect.gov.
Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.
Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2010.
"Ecoregions of North America". United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Retrieved 30 May 2011.
"What's the difference between North, Latin, Central, Middle, South, Spanish and Anglo America?". About.com.
Unless otherwise noted, land area figures are taken from "Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF). Demographic Yearbook.
United Nations Statistics Division. 2008. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
Since the Lucayan Archipelago is located in the Atlantic Ocean rather than Caribbean Sea, the Bahamas are part of the West Indies but are not technically part of the Caribbean, although the United Nations groups them with the Caribbean.
a b c Population estimates are taken from the Central Bureau of Statistics Netherlands Antilles. "Statistical information: Population". Government of the Netherlands Antilles.
Archived from the original on 1 May 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
Because of ongoing activity of the Soufriere Hills volcano beginning in July 1995, much of Plymouth was destroyed and government offices were relocated to Brades.
Plymouth remains the de jure capital.
Since the Lucayan Archipelago is located in the Atlantic Ocean rather than Caribbean Sea, the Turks and Caicos Islands are part of the West Indies but are not technically part of the Caribbean, although the United Nations groups them with the Caribbean.
Lawler, Andrew (December 23, 2020). "Invaders nearly wiped out Caribbean's first people long before Spanish came, DNA reveals". National Geographic.
Parameters: Journal of the US Army War College. U.S. Army War College. 1977. p. 13.
"Foreign Intervention by Cuba" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 22, 2017.
Dosal, Paul. "THE CARIBBEAN WAR. The United States in the Caribbean, 1898–1998" (PDF). University of South Florida.
ten Brink, Uri. "Puerto Rico Trench 2003: Cruise Summary Results". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Retrieved 2008-02-21.
"Summary Climatological Normals 1981–2010" (PDF). Departamento Meteorologico Aruba.
Retrieved 15 October 2012.
"Climate Data Aruba". Departamento Meteorologico Aruba.
Retrieved 15 October 2012.
"Average Weather for Mayaguez, PR – Temperature and Precipitation". Weather.com.
Retrieved 2012-06-07.
"World Weather Information Service – Havana". Cuban Institute of Meteorology.
June 2011. Retrieved 2010-06-26.
"Casa Blanca, Habana, Cuba: Climate, Global Warming, and Daylight Charts and Data". Archived from the original on 2011-06-23. Retrieved 2010-06-26.
Mark Spalding; Corinna Ravilious; Edmund Peter Green (10 September 2001). World Atlas of Coral Reefs.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-23255-6. Retrieved 25 June 2012.
Littler, D. and Littler, M. (2000) Caribbean Reef Plants.
OffShore Graphics, Inc., ISBN 0967890101.
Minter, D.W., Rodríguez Hernández, M. and Mena Portales, J. (2001) Fungi of the Caribbean.
An annotated checklist.
PDMS Publishing, ISBN 0-9540169-0-4.
Kirk, P. M.; Ainsworth, Geoffrey Clough (2008). Ainsworth & Bisby's Dictionary of the Fungi.
CABI. ISBN 978-0-85199-826-8.
"Fungi of Cuba – potential endemics". cybertruffle.org.uk.
Retrieved 2011-07-09.
"Fungi of Puerto Rico – potential endemics". cybertruffle.org.uk.
Retrieved 2011-07-09.
"Fungi of the Dominican Republic – potential endemics". cybertruffle.org.uk.
Retrieved 2011-07-09.
"Fungi of Trinidad & Tobago – potential endemics". cybertruffle.org.uk.
Retrieved 2011-07-09.
"North American Extinctions v.
World". Thegreatstory.org.
Retrieved 2010-08-23.
"Caribbean Coral Reefs". coral-reef-info.com. 9 November 2020.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O.; Mumby, P. J.; Hooten, A. J.; Steneck, R. S.; Greenfield, P.; Gomez, E.; Harvell, C. D.; Sale, P. F.;  et al. (2007). "Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change and Ocean Acidification". Science. 318 (5857): 1737–42. Bibcode:2007Sci...318.1737H. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.702.1733. doi:10.1126/science.1152509. PMID 18079392. S2CID 12607336.
"Caribbean coral reefs may disappear within 20 years: Report". IANS. news.biharprabha.com.
Retrieved 3 July 2014.
Rogoziński, Jan (2000). A Brief History of the Caribbean.
Penguin. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-452-28193-6.
Rogoziński, Jan (2000). A Brief History of the Caribbean.
Penguin. p. 356. ISBN 978-0-452-28193-6.
Byrne, Joseph Patrick (2008). Encyclopedia of Pestilence, Pandemics, and Plagues: A-M. ABC-CLIO. p. 413. ISBN 978-0-313-34102-1.
Engerman, p. 486
The Sugar Revolutions and Slavery, U.S. Library of Congress
Engerman, pp. 488–492
Engerman, Figure 11.1
Engerman, pp. 501–502
Engerman, pp. 504, 511
Table A.2, Database documentation, Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Population Database, version 3, International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2005.  Accessed on line February 20, 2008.
Christianity in its Global Context Archived 2013-08-15 at the Wayback Machine
Gowricharn, Ruben.
Caribbean Transnationalism: Migration, Pluralization, and Social Cohesion, Lanham: Lexington Books, 2006. p. 5 ISBN 0-7391-1167-1
Hillman, p. 150
Hillman, p. 165
a b Serbin, Andres (1994). "Towards an Association of Caribbean States: Raising Some Awkward Questions". Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs. 36 (4): 61–90. doi:10.2307/166319. JSTOR 166319. S2CID 158660832.
Hillman, p. 123
"The U.S.-EU Banana Agreement". Archived from the original on 2009-05-06. Retrieved 2008-11-23.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) See also: "Dominica: Poverty and Potential". BBC. 2008-05-16. Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"WTO rules against EU banana import practices". Archived from the original on 2009-04-16. Retrieved 2008-11-23.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). eubusiness.com (2007-11-29)
"No truce in banana war". BBC News. 1999-03-08. Retrieved 2010-08-23.
"World: Americas St Vincent hit by banana war". BBC News. 1999-03-13. Retrieved 2010-08-23.
"Concern for Caribbean farmers". Bbc.co.uk. 2005-01-07. Retrieved 2010-08-23.
Edmonds, Kevin (2012-03-06). "ALBA Expands its Allies in the Caribbean". Venezuela Analysis.
Retrieved March 9, 2012.
"CANTO Caribbean portal". Canto.org.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"Caribbean Educators Network". CEN. Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"Carilec". Carilec.com.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"About Us". Caribbean Hotel & Tourism Association.
Archived from the original on 2 April 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014.
"Caribbean Regional Environmental Programme". Crepnet.net.
Archived from the original on 2008-06-11. Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism". Caricom-fisheries.com.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"Official website of the RNM". Crnm.org.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"University of the West Indies". Uwi.edu.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
"West Indies Cricket Board WICB Official Website". Windiescricket.com.
Retrieved 2008-12-06.
Bibliography
Engerman, Stanley L. "A Population History of the Caribbean", pp. 483–528 in A Population History of North America Michael R. Haines and Richard Hall Steckel (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-49666-7.
Hillman, Richard S., and Thomas J. D'agostino, eds.
Understanding the Contemporary Caribbean, London: Lynne Rienner, 2003 ISBN 1-58826-663-X.
Further reading
Develtere, Patrick R. 1994. "Co-operation and development: With special reference to the experience of the Commonwealth Caribbean" ACCO, ISBN 90-334-3181-5
Gowricharn, Ruben.
Caribbean Transnationalism: Migration, Pluralization, and Social Cohesion.
Lanham: Lexington Books, 2006.
Henke, Holger, and Fred Reno, eds.
Modern Political Culture in the Caribbean.
Kingston: University of West Indies Press, 2003.
Heuman, Gad.
The Caribbean: Brief Histories.
London: A Hodder Arnold Publication, 2006.
de Kadt, Emanuel, (editor). Patterns of foreign influence in the Caribbean, Oxford University Press, 1972.
Knight, Franklin W. The Modern Caribbean (University of North Carolina Press, 1989).
Kurlansky, Mark. 1992. A Continent of Islands: Searching for the Caribbean Destiny.
Addison-Wesley Publishing.
ISBN 0-201-52396-5
Langley, Lester D. The United States and the Caribbean in the Twentieth Century.
London: University of Georgia Press, 1989.
Maingot, Anthony P. The United States and the Caribbean: Challenges of an Asymmetrical Relationship.
Westview Press, 1994.
Palmie, Stephan, and Francisco A. Scarano, eds.
The Caribbean: A History of the Region and Its Peoples (University of Chicago Press; 2011); 660 pp.; writings on the region since the pre-Columbia era.
Ramnarine, Tina K. Beautiful Cosmos: Performance and Belonging in the Caribbean Diaspora.
London, Pluto Press, 2007.
Rowntree, Lester/Martin Lewis/Marie Price/William Wyckoff.
Diversity Amid Globalization: World Regions, Environment, Development, 4th edition, 2008.
External links
Caribbean  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity
Caribbean at Curlie
Digital Library of the Caribbean
Manioc, open access digital Library, books, images, conferences, articles about the Caribbean 
Federal Research Division of the U.S. Library of Congress: Caribbean Islands (1987)
LANIC Caribbean country pages
Media related to Caribbean at Wikimedia Commons
CaribbeanWestIndiesAntillesGreaterAntilles
Cayman Islands
Cuba
Jamaica
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Hispaniola
Dominican Republic
Haiti
LesserAntillesLeewardIslands
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Guadeloupe
La Désirade
Les Saintes
Marie-Galante
Montserrat
Saba*
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Sint Eustatius*
Saint MartinIsland
Saint Martin
Sint Maarten
Virgin Islands
British Virgin Islands
Spanish Virgin Islands
U.S. Virgin Islands
SouthernCaribbeanLeewardAntilles
Insular Venezuela
Federal Dependencies
Nueva Esparta
ABC islands
Aruba
Bonaire*
Curaçao
WindwardIslands
Dominica
Grenada
Carriacou and Petite Martinique
Martinique
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Barbados†
Trinidad and Tobago†LucayanArchipelago
Bahamas
Turks and Caicos Islands
CaribbeanSeaScatteredislands
Aves Island
San Andrés and Providencia
Bajo Nuevo Bank~
Serranilla Bank~
Caribbeancontinentalcoast
Quintana Roo
Cozumel
Central America
Belize
Honduras
Bay Islands
Izabal
Limón
Corn Islands
North Caribbean Coast
South Caribbean Coast
Panama
South America
Colombian Caribbean
Venezuelan Caribbean
Widergroupingsmay include:
Bermuda#
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Nicaragua
Yucatán Peninsula
Campeche
Petén
Yucatán
The Guianas 
Amapá
French Guiana
Venezuelan Guayana
Guyana
Guayana Esequibaǂ
Tigri Areaǂ
Suriname
N.B.: Territories in italics are parts of transregional sovereign states or non-sovereign dependencies.
These three form the SSS islands that with the ABC islands comprise the Dutch Caribbean, of which *the BES islands are not direct Kingdom constituents but subsumed with the country of the Netherlands.
†Physiographically, these continental islands are not part of the volcanic Windward Islands arc, although sometimes grouped with them culturally and politically.
ǂDisputed territories administered by Guyana. ~Disputed territories administered by Colombia.
#Bermuda is an isolated North Atlantic oceanic island, physiographically not part of the Lucayan Archipelago, Antilles, Caribbean Sea nor North American continental nor South American continental islands.
It is grouped with the Northern American region, but occasionally also with the Caribbean region culturally.
Caribbean articlesHistoryTimeline
Spanish Caribbean (1492–1898)
Piracy (1500s–1830)
Dutch Caribbean (1554–1863)
British Caribbean (1586–1834)
French Caribbean (1625–1817)
Baltic-German Caribbean (1654-1689)
Danish Caribbean (1672–1917)
German Caribbean (1685-1693)
Swedish Caribbean (1784–1878)
By topic
Afro-Caribbean
Caribbean Court of Justice
Indigenous people
Taíno
Arawak
Influx of diseases, Malaria
Territorial evolution
GeographyRegions
Antilles
Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Leeward Antilles
Windward Islands
Caribbean Basin
Caribbean Lowlands
Caribbean Plate
Caribbean Sea
Caribbean South America
Latin America and the Caribbean
Southern Caribbean
Western Caribbean zone
By topic
Bioregion
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands (by area)
Mammals
Cetaceans
Metropolitan areas
Mountains
Populated places
Rivers
Trees
Ultras
Sovereign states
Dependent territories
World Heritage Sites
Politics
Afro-Caribbean leftism
Association of Caribbean States
Caribbean Community
CARIFORUM
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Economy
Airlines
Airports
Caribbean Basin Trade and Partnership Act
Caribbean Development Bank
Central banks and currencies
Citrus
Companies
Fishing
Hotels
Stock exchanges
Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange
Sugar
in Cuba
in the Danish West Indies
Tourism
Culture
Art
Beer
Caribbean people
Carnivals
Cuisine
Literature
Music
Poetry
Radio stations
Sport
Central American and Caribbean Games
Stadiums
Television stations
Demographics
Languages
Pre-Arawakan
Population
Religions
Outline
Category
Portal
Earth's primary regions and subregionsRegions of AfricaCentral
Guinea region
Gulf of Guinea
Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland
Mbaise
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Cameroonian Highlands forests
East Sudanian savanna
Congolian rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau
East
African Great Lakes
Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Virunga Mountains
Kavirondo
Zanj
East African montane forests
Eastern Arc Mountains
Serengeti
Horn of Africa
Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbaria
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Dahlak Archipelago
Hanish Islands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura
Red Sea
Indian Ocean islands
Comoro Islands
Lamu Archipelago
Madagascar
Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands
Zanzibar Archipelago
Swahili coast
North
Eastern Desert
Maghreb
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains
Barbary Coast
Gibraltar Arc
Ifriqiya
Nile Valley
Nile Delta
Bashmur
Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt
Tibesti Mountains
Western Sahara
South
Rhodesia
North
South
Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Maputaland
Highveld
Fynbos
Indian Ocean coastal belt
Albany thickets
Cape Floristic Region
Skeleton Coast
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
Cape Peninsula
False Bay
West
Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Upper Guinean forests
Lower Guinean forests
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic
Guinea Highlands
Gulf of Guinea
Dahomey Gap
Niger Basin
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta
West Sudanian savanna
Yorubaland
Macro-regions
Aethiopia
Afromontane
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Greater Middle East
Guineo-Congolian region
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Miombo woodlands
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Southeast Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian savanna
Tropical Africa
Zambezian region
Regions of AsiaCentral(The 'stans)
Roof of the World
Greater  Middle  East
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee
Tartary
Transoxiana
Turan
Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Arachosia
Khwarazm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Kazakh Steppe
Betpak-Dala
Eurasian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Siachen Glacier
Tibetan Plateau
East(Northeast)
Orient
Japanese Archipelago
Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc
Korea
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria
Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
North China Plain
Yan Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
High-mountain Asia
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau
Karakoram
Kunlun Mountains
Qilian Mountains
Hengduan Mountains
Tarim Basin
Qinling Mountains
Sichuan Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop
Loess Plateau
Shaanbei
Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze
Yangtze Delta
Yellow River
Pearl River Delta
Yenisey Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
North(Siberia)
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Inner Asia
Northeast
Ural
Ural Mountains
Far East
Russian Far East
Okhotsk–Manchurian taiga
Beringia
Chukchi Peninsula
Kamchatka Peninsula
Extreme North
Tartary
Siberia
Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Baraba steppe
Khatanga Gulf
Transbaikal
West
Amur Basin
Yenisey Gulf
Yenisey Basin
Sikhote-Alin
Kolyma
Bering Strait
Ring of Fire
Outer Manchuria
Asia-Pacific
Southeast(East Indies)
Orient
Sundaland
Mainland/Indochina
Northern Triangle temperate forests
Maritime/Malay Archipelago
Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands
Indonesian Archipelago/Nusantara
Wallacea
Timor
Philippine Archipelago
Luzon
Mindanao
Visayas
Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
South(IndianSubcontinent)
Orient
Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Kangchenjunga
Nanda Devi
Hindu Kush
Bactria
Carnatic region
Tamilakam
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Guzgan
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Gedrosia
Makran
Marathwada
Kashmir
Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range
Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern Coastal Plains
Kalinga
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
Lower Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan
Baltistan
Shigar Valley
High-mountain Asia
Karakoram
Saltoro Mountains
Siachen Glacier
Bengal
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Halar
Gulf of Mannar
Palk Strait
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Laccadive Islands
Aminidivi
Paropamisadae
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands
Maldives
Alpide belt
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Tibetan Plateau
West(Middle East)
Greater Middle East
MENA
Middle East
Red Sea
Hanish Islands
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Elam
Persian Gulf
Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs
Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula
Najd
Al-Yamama
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia
Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert
Al-Sharat
Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia
Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh Plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Eber-Nari
Kurdistan
Levant (Syria region)
Palestine region
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley
Philistia
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Galilee
Canaan
Gilead
Syrian Desert
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Aram
Aram-Naharaim
Negev
Phoenicia
Retjenu
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Bekaa valley
Levantine Sea
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Hauran
Iranian Plateau
Dasht-e Kavir
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus
Caucasus Mountains
Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus
North Caucasus
South Caucasus
Shirvan
Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula
Kartli
Anatolia
Taurus Mountains
Aeolis
Paphlagonia
Phasiane
Isauria
Ionia
Bithynia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Caria
Corduene
Chaldia
Doris
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Galatia
Pisidia
Pontus
Mysia
Arzawa
Speri 
Sophene
Biga Peninsula
Troad
Tuwana
Alpide belt
Regions of EuropeNorth
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Jutland
Gotland
Sápmi
Ingria
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Livonia
Curonian Spit
Nemunas Delta
Cap of the North
East
Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Wallachia
Transylvania
Moldavia
Bukovina
Bessarabia
Livonia
Ruthenia
Carpathian Ruthenia
Donbas
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula
Amber Coast
Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia
East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus
Lokhaniemi
Southeastern
Balkans
Crimea
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Taman Peninsula
Southern Russia
Kola Peninsula
East European Plain
Ryn Desert
Cap of the North
Central
North European Plain
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Rhineland
Eastphalia
Westphalia
Prussia
Lusatia
Bohemia
Moravia
Silesia
Czech Silesia
Pomerania
Pomerelia
Kashubia
Bukovina
Istria
Transdanubia
Polesia
Germania
Germania Slavica
West
Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Doggerland
Upper Rhine Plain
Upper Rhine
Gaul
Gascony
Normandy
Brittany
Septimania
Batavia
Gulf of Lion
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Pyrenees
Alpide belt
South
Italy
Po Valley (Padania)
Italian Peninsula
Tuscan Archipelago
Insular Italy
Aegadian Islands
Occitania
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Epirus
Rumelia
Balkans
Aegean Sea
Aegean Islands
Attica
Boeotia
Opuntian Locris
Phocis
Megaris
Peloponnese
Chalkidiki
Aetolia
Gulf of Chania
Istria
Mediterranean
Alpide belt
Germanic
Romance
Celtic
Slavic countries
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin
Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland
Regions of North AmericaUpper Northern(i.e.
Canada and Alaska (US))Eastern
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
Central Canada
Great Lakes
Northern (Canada and Alaska)
North American Arctic
Arctic Circle
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Alaska
Aleutian Arc
Aleutian Islands
Aleutian Range
Alaska Peninsula
Bering Strait
Gulf of Alaska
Greenland
Western
Pacific Northwest
Cascadia
Prairie Pothole Region
Acadia
Acadian Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula
Bay de Verde Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Brodeur Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Canadian Prairies
Canadian Shield
Cook Peninsula
Cypress Hills
English Canada
French Canada
Gaspé Peninsula
Georgian Bay
Gulf Islands
Gulf of Boothia
Hudson Bay
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
James Bay
Kodiak Island
Labrador Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Newfoundland Island
Palliser's Triangle
Peace River Country
Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Strait of Georgia
The Maritimes
Vancouver Island
Lower Northern(i.e.
United States)Central
Midwest
Upper Midwest
Old Southwest
Tallgrass prairie
Eastern
Appalachia
East Coast
Northeast
Atlantic Northeast
Mid-Atlantic
New England
Southeast
Thirteen Colonies
Northern
East North Central states
Great Lakes
Southern
Deep South
Old South
South Central
Gulf Coast
Upland South
Southwestern
Four Corners
Great Basin
Llano Estacado
West Texas
Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Southern Rocky Mountains
Western
Basin and Range Province
Northwest
Cascadia
Inland Northwest
Pacific Northwest
West Coast
Pacific Coast Ranges
Oregon Trail
Mormon corridor
Calumet Region
Llano Estacado
Third Coast
Backcountry
Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Basin
Great Basin Desert
Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mountain states
Intermountain West
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area
San Francisco Bay
North Bay
East Bay
Silicon Valley
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
"Belt" regions
Bible Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt
MexicoCentral
Bajío
Huasteca
Islas Marías
La Mixteca
Mezquital Valley
Revillagigedo Islands
Sierra Gorda
Tierra Caliente
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine–oak forests
Valley of Mexico
Northern
Baja California peninsula
Basin and Range Province
Comarca Lagunera
Gulf of California
Colorado River Delta
Isla Llave
Lerdo Landing
Pimería Alta
Salton Trough
Sierra de San Francisco
Southern
Chiapas Highlands
Isthmus of Tehuantepec
Ku-Maloob-Zaap
Petén Basin
Puuc
Sierra Madre de Chiapas
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Sierra Madre del Sur
Soconusco
Triangle of the Sun
Yucatán Peninsula
Gulf of Mexico
Sierra Madre Occidental
Sierra Madre Oriental
Central
Darién Gap
Isthmus of Panama
Lake Nicaragua
Panama Canal
Western Caribbean zone
West Indies
Caribbean
Antilles
Greater Antilles
Hispaniola
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Saint Martin Island
Virgin Islands
Southern Caribbean
Leeward Antilles
ABC islands
Windward Islands
Bajo Nuevo Bank
San Andrés and Providencia
Serranilla Bank
Lucayan Archipelago
American Cordillera
Anglo
Aridoamerica
Latin America
French
Hispanic
Latin America and the Caribbean
Mesoamerica
Middle America
Oasisamerica
Ring of Fire
North America portal
Regions of Oceania
Australia-New Guinea
Near Oceania
Pacific Islands
Pacific Plate
Remote Oceania
Zealandia
AustralasiaAustraliaAustralian Capital Territory
Canberra
Jervis Bay Territory
Jervis Bay Village
Wreck Bay Village
New South Wales
Central Coast
Central Tablelands
Central West
Far West
Greater Blue Mountains Area
Hunter
Illawarra
Mid North Coast
Monaro
New England
North West Slopes
Northern Rivers
Northern Tablelands
Orana
Riverina
South Coast
South West Slopes
Southern Highlands
Southern Tablelands
Northern Territory
Arnhem Land
Barkly Tableland
Central Australia
Darwin
Katherine
Top End
Queensland
Central West
Central
Darling Downs
Far North
Gulf Country
North
South East
South West
Wide Bay–Burnett
South Australia
Adelaide Hills
Barossa Light and Lower North
Eastern Adelaide
Eyre Western
Far North
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island
Limestone Coast
Murray and Mallee
Northern Adelaide
Southern Adelaide
Western Adelaide
Yorke and Mid North
Tasmania
Central Highlands
East Coast
Midlands
North East
North West
Northern
South West
Southern
West Coast
Victoria
Barwon South West
Gippsland
Grampians
Greater Melbourne
Hume
Loddon Mallee
Western Australia
Gascoyne
Goldfields–Esperance
Great Southern
Greater Perth
Perth Metropolitan Area
Kimberley
Mid West
Peel
Pilbara
South West
Wheatbelt
Australian External Territories
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Norfolk Island
Australian Indian Ocean Territories
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
New ZealandNorth Island
Northland
Auckland
Waikato
Bay of Plenty
Gisborne
Hawke's Bay
Taranaki
Manawatū-Whanganui
Wellington
South Island
Tasman
Nelson
Marlborough
West Coast
Canterbury
Otago
Southland
Stewart Island
NZ Outlying Islands
Chatham Islands
Kermadec Islands
Solander Islands
Three Kings Islands
NZ Subantarctic Islands
Antipodes Islands
Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Campbell Islands
Snares Islands
MelanesiaIsland Melanesia
Fiji
New Caledonia
East Melanesian Islands
Bismarck Archipelago
Gazelle Peninsula
Santa Cruz Islands
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands Archipelago
Bougainville
Bonis Peninsula
Solomon Islands
New Guinea
Aru Islands
Papua New Guinea
Highlands Region
Momase Region
Huon Gulf
Huon Peninsula
Southern Region
Western New Guinea
Papua
West Papua
Bird's Head Peninsula
Micronesia
Caroline Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Palau
Kiribati
Banaba
Gilbert Islands
Mariana Islands
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Wake Island
PolynesiaPolynesian Triangle
Easter Island
Salas and Gómez Island
Cook Islands
French Polynesia
Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Mangareva Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu Islands
Johnston Atoll
Line Islands
Jarvis Island
Kingman Reef
Kiritimati
Palmyra Atoll
Tabuaeran
Teraina
Niue
Pitcairn Islands
Pitcairn Island
Henderson Island
Ducie Island
Oeno Island
Samoan Islands
American Samoa
Independent State of Samoa
Southeastern Hawaiian Islands
Tokelau Islands
Atafu
Fakaofo
Nukunonu
Swains Island
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna
Hoorn Islands
Wallis Islands
Phoenix Islands
Canton Island
Howland and Baker Islands
Baker Island
Howland Island
Polynesian Outliers
Clipperton Island
Desventuradas Islands
Galápagos Islands
Juan Fernández Islands
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
Midway Atoll
Asia-Pacific
Indo-Australian Plate
Indo-Pacific
Islands Region
Papuan Peninsula
Ring of Fire
Regions of South AmericaEast
Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado
North
Caribbean South America
West Indies
Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin
Amazon rainforest
Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta
South
Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula
Triple Frontier
Río de la Plata
Río de la Plata Basin
West
Andes
Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range
Altiplano
Atacama Desert
Middle
Latin
Hispanic
Bolivarian
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC
Earth's polar regionsAntarctic
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands
Arctic
Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic
Earth's oceans and seasArctic Ocean
Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean
Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean
Arafura Sea
Bali Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Java Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seram Sea
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea
Southern Ocean
Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea
Endorheic basins
Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea
Others
Ocean
Sea
Superocean
Oceans portal
Category
Hemispheres of Earth
Northern
Southern
Eastern
Western
Land
Water
Portal:Geography
Commons:Maps of Earth's hemispheres
World portal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat (via VIAF)
National libraries
Spain
Germany
Israel
United States
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 20:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
