Cereal - Wikipedia
Cereal
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Grass that has edible grain or fruit
For other uses, see Breakfast cereal, Grain, and Cereal (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with serial.
Various dried cereal grains, ears and flour in glass jars
A cereal is any grass cultivated for the edible components of its grain (botanically, a type of fruit called a caryopsis), composed of the endosperm, germ, and bran.
Cereal grain crops are grown in greater quantities and provide more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop and are therefore staple crops.
Edible grains from other plant families, such as buckwheat, quinoa and chia, are referred to as pseudocereals.
In their unprocessed whole grain form, cereals are a rich source of vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, oils, and protein.
When processed by the removal of the bran and germ the remaining endosperm is mostly carbohydrate.
In some developing countries, grain in the form of rice, wheat, millet, or maize constitutes a majority of daily sustenance.
In developed countries, cereal consumption is moderate and varied but still substantial, primarily in the form of refined and processed grains.
Because of this dietary importance, the cereal trade is often at the heart of food trade -- with many cereals sold as commodities.
Contents
History
Prehistory
Further information: Neolithic RevolutionAgriculture allowed for the support of an increased population, leading to larger societies and eventually the development of cities.
It also created the need for greater organization of political power (and the creation of social stratification), as decisions had to be made regarding labor and harvest allocation and access rights to water and land.
Agriculture bred immobility, as populations settled down for long periods of time, which led to the accumulation of material goods.
Early Neolithic villages show evidence of the development of processing grain.
The Levant is the ancient home of the ancestors of wheat, barley and peas, in which many of these villages were based.
There is evidence of the cultivation of cereals in Syria approximately 9,000 years ago.
Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oats and Flaxseeds were all domesticated in the Fertile Crescent during the early Neolithic.
During the same period, farmers in China began to farm rice and millet, using human-made floods and fires as part of their cultivation regimen.
Fiber crops were domesticated as early as food crops, with China domesticating hemp, cotton being developed independently in Africa and South America, and Western Asia domesticating flax.
The use of soil amendments, including manure, fish, compost and ashes, appears to have begun early, and developed independently in several areas of the world, including Mesopotamia, the Nile Valley and Eastern Asia.
The first cereal grains were domesticated by early primitive humans.
About 8,000 years ago, they were domesticated by ancient farming communities in the Fertile Crescent region.
Emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, and barley were three of the so-called Neolithic founder crops in the development of agriculture.
Around the same time, millets and kinds of rice were starting to become domesticated in East Asia.
Sorghum and millets were also being domesticated in sub-Saharan West Africa, which were both used primarily as feed for livestock.
Ancient history and the Middle Ages
This section relies largely or entirely on a single source.
Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page.
Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources.Find sources: "Cereal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022)
Roman harvesting machine Threshing of grain in ancient Egypt
Cereals were the foundation of human civilization.
Cereal frontiers coincided with civilizational frontiers.
The term Fertile Crescent implies the spatial dependence of civilization on cereals.
The Great Wall of China and the Roman limes demarcated the same northern limit of cereal cultivation.
The Silk Road stretched along the cereal belt of Eurasia.
Numerous Chinese imperial edicts stated: “Agriculture is the foundation of this empire,”: 86  while the foundation of agriculture were the Five Grains.[citation needed] The word “cereal” is derived from Ceres, the Roman goddess of harvest and agriculture.
Cereals determined how large and for how long an army could be mobilized.
For this reason, Shang Yang called agriculture and war “the One.”: 62  Guan Zhong, Chanakya (the author of Arthashastra): 63–64  and Hannibal: 85  expressed similar concepts.
At the dawn of history, the Sumerians believed that if the agriculture of a state declines, Inanna, the goddess of war, leaves this state.: 68  Several gods of antiquity combined the functions of what Shang Yang called “the One” – agriculture and war: the Hittite Sun goddess of Arinna, the Canaanite Lahmu and the Roman Janus.
These were highly important gods in their time leaving their legacy until today.
We still begin the year with the month of Janus (January). The Jews believe that Messiah's family will originate in the town of Lahmu (Bethlehem); in Hebrew, beit lehem literally means "house of bread". Christians believe that Jesus Christ, who is said to have been born in Bethlehem, is the messiah.
In Hebrew, bread (lehem) and warfare (milhama) are of the same root.
In fact, most persistent and flourishing empires throughout history in both hemispheres were centered in regions fertile for cereals.
Early modern period
This section relies largely or entirely on a single source.
Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page.
Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources.Find sources: "Cereal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022)
This historic pattern did not change, not even in the Industrial Age.: 111–126  All modern great powers have traditionally remained first and foremost great cereal powers.
The “finest hour” of the Axis powers “ended precisely the moment they threw themselves against the two largest cereal lebensraums” (the United States and the USSR).: 159  The outcome of the Cold War followed the Soviet grave and long-lasting cereal crisis, exacerbated by the cereal embargo imposed on the USSR in 1980.: 172  And, called “the grain basket of the world,” the most productive “cereal lebensraum” dominates the world ever since.: 206 
Having analyzed the mechanism at work behind this pattern, Ostrovsky outlined that the cereal power determines the percentage of manpower available to non-agricultural sectors including the heavy industry vital for military power.
He emphasized that chronologically the Industrial Revolution follows the modern Agricultural Revolution and spatially the world's industrial regions are bound to cereal regions.
Taken from space, map of the global illumination is said to indicate by its brightest parts the industrial regions.[unreliable source?] These regions coincide with cereal regions.
Ostrovsky formulized a universal indicator of national power valid for all periods: total cereal tonnage produced by one percent of nation's manpower.
For the present, this indicator demonstrates a unipolar international hierarchy.: 119 
Green Revolution
Main article: Green Revolution
During the second half of the 20th century there was a significant increase in the production of high-yield cereal crops worldwide, especially wheat and rice, due to an initiative known as the Green Revolution.
The strategies developed by the Green Revolution focused on fending off starvation and increasing yield-per-plant, and were very successful in raising overall yields of cereal grains, but did not give sufficient relevance to nutritional quality.
These modern high-yield cereal crops tend to have low quality proteins, with essential amino acid deficiencies, are high in carbohydrates, and lack balanced essential fatty acids, vitamins, minerals and other quality factors.
So-called ancient grains and heirloom varieties have seen an increase in popularity with the "organic" movements of the early 21st century, but there is a tradeoff in yield-per-plant, putting pressure on resource-poor areas as food crops are replaced with cash crops.
Common features
Botanical
From left to right and from top to bottom: pearl millet, rice, barley; sorghum, maize, oats; millet, wheat, rye, triticale.
Cereals belong to the family Poaceae, commonly known as grass.: 5  Grasses have stems that are hollow except at the nodes and narrow alternate leaves borne in two ranks.
The lower part of each leaf encloses the stem, forming a leaf-sheath.
The leaf grows from the base of the blade, an adaptation allowing it to cope with frequent grazing.
The flowers are usually hermaphroditic—maize being an important exception—and mainly anemophilous or wind-pollinated, although insects occasionally play a role.
Some of the most-well known cereals are maize, rice, wheat, barley, sorghum, millet, oat, rye and triticale.: 2–3  Some pseudocereals are colloquially called cereal, even though botanically they do not belong to the Poaceae family; these include buckwheat, quinoa, and amaranth.: 68–69 
Nutritional
Some grains are deficient in the essential amino acid, lysine.
That is why many vegetarian cultures, in order to get a balanced diet, combine their diet of grains with legumes.
Many legumes, however, are deficient in the essential amino acid methionine, which grains contain.
Thus, a combination of legumes with grains forms a well-balanced diet for vegetarians.
Common examples of such combinations are dal (lentils) with rice by South Indians and Bengalis, dal with wheat in Pakistan and North India, beans with corn tortillas, tofu with rice, and peanut butter with wheat bread (as sandwiches) in several other cultures, including the Americas.
The amount of crude protein measured in grains is expressed as grain crude protein concentration.
Cereals contain exogenous opioid food peptides called exorphins such as gluten exorphin.
They mimic the actions of endorphines because they bind to the same opioid receptors in the brain.
Cultivation
While each individual species has its own peculiarities, the cultivation of all cereal crops is similar.
Most are annual plants; consequently one planting yields one harvest.
Cereals that are adapted to grow in temperate climate are called warm-season cereals, and those grow in tropical climate are called cold-season cereals.: 3–4  Wheat, rye, triticale, oats, barley, and spelt are the "cool-season" cereals.
These are hardy plants that grow well in moderate weather and cease to grow in hot weather (approximately 30 °C or 85 °F, but this varies by species and variety). The "warm-season" cereals are tender and prefer hot weather.
Barley and rye are the hardiest cereals, able to overwinter in the subarctic and Siberia.
Many cool-season cereals are grown in the tropics.
However, some are only grown in cooler highlands, where it ' "may" ' be possible to grow multiple crops per year.
For the past few decades, there has also been increasing interest in perennial grain plants.
This interest developed due to advantages in erosion control, reduced need for fertilizer, and potentially lowered costs to the farmer.
Though research is still in early stages, The Land Institute in Salina, Kansas has been able to create a few cultivars that produce a fairly good crop yield.
Planting
Planting of rice on a paddy field
The warm-season cereals are grown in tropical lowlands year-round and in temperate climates during the frost-free season.
Rice is commonly grown in flooded fields, though some strains are grown on dry land.
Other warm climate cereals, such as sorghum, are adapted to arid conditions.
Cool-season cereals are well-adapted to temperate climates.
Most varieties of a particular species are either winter or spring types.
Winter varieties are sown in the autumn, germinate and grow vegetatively, then become dormant during winter.
They resume growing in the springtime and mature in late spring or early summer.
This cultivation system makes optimal use of water and frees the land for another crop early in the growing season.
Winter varieties do not flower until springtime because they require vernalization: exposure to low temperatures for a genetically determined length of time.
Where winters are too warm for vernalization or exceed the hardiness of the crop (which varies by species and variety), farmers grow spring varieties.
Spring cereals are planted in early springtime and mature later that same summer, without vernalization.
Spring cereals typically require more irrigation and yield less than winter cereals.: 4 
Harvesting
Once the cereal plants have grown their seeds, they have completed their life cycle.
The plants die, become brown, and dry.
As soon as the parent plants and their seed kernels are reasonably dry, harvest can begin.
In developed countries, cereal crops are universally machine-harvested, typically using a combine harvester, which cuts, threshes, and winnows the grain during a single pass across the field.
In developing countries, a variety of harvesting methods are in use, depending on the cost of labor, from combines to hand tools such as the scythe or grain cradle.
Preprocessing and storage
A Zambian woman and her kids peeling corns
If a crop is harvested during humid weather, the grain may not dry adequately in the field to prevent spoilage during its storage.
In this case, the grain is sent to a dehydrating facility, where artificial heat dries it.
In North America, farmers commonly deliver their newly harvested grain to a grain elevator, a large storage facility that consolidates the crops of many farmers.
The farmer may sell the grain at the time of delivery or maintain ownership of a share of grain in the pool for later sale.
Storage facilities should be protected from small grain pests, rodents and birds.
Uses
Direct consumption
An example of a cereal that require little preparation before human consumption is rice.
For example, to make plain cooked rice, raw milled rice simply needs to be washed and submerged in a simmering water for 10–12 minutes.
Flour-based foods
Main article: Flour
Various cereals and their products
Cereals can be grinded to make flour.
Cereal flour, particularly wheat flour, is the main ingredient of bread, which is a staple food for many cultures.
Corn flour has been important in Mesoamerican cuisine since ancient times and remains a staple in the Americas.
Rye flour is a constituent of bread in central and northern Europe, while rice flour is common in Asia.
Cereal flour consists either of the endosperm, germ, and bran together (whole-grain flour) or of the endosperm alone (refined flour). Meal is either differentiable from flour as having slightly coarser particle size (degree of comminution) or is synonymous with flour; the word is used both ways.
For example, the word cornmeal often connotes a grittier texture whereas corn flour connotes fine powder, although there is no codified dividing line.
Alcohol
Because of cereals' high starch content, they are often used to make Industrial alcohol and alcoholic drinks via fermentation.
For instance, beer is produced by the brewing and fermentation of starches, mainly derived from cereal grains—most commonly from malted barley, though wheat, maize (corn), rice, and oats are also used.
During the brewing process, fermentation of the starch sugars in the wort produces ethanol and carbonation in the resulting beer.
Production statistics
See also: List of countries by cereal production
Worldwide rice production
A map of worldwide wheat production.
The following table shows the annual production of cereals in 1961, 1980, 2000, 2010, and 2019/2020.[a]
Grain
Worldwide production
(millions of metric tons)
Notes
Maize (corn)
1,148
A staple food of people in the Americas, Africa, and of livestock worldwide; often called corn in North America, Australia, and New Zealand.
A large portion of maize crops are grown for purposes other than human consumption.
Rice[b] Production is in milled terms.
The primary cereal of tropical and some temperate regions.
Staple food in most of Brazil (both maize and manioc/cassava were once more important and their presence is still stronger in some areas), other parts of Latin America and some other Portuguese-descended cultures, parts of Africa (even more before the Columbian exchange), most of South Asia and the Far East.
Largely overridden by breadfruit (a dicot tree) during the South Pacific's part of the Austronesian expansion.
Wheat
The primary cereal of temperate regions.
It has a worldwide consumption but it is a staple food of North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, Brazil and much of the Greater Middle East.
Wheat gluten-based meat substitutes are important in the Far East (albeit less than tofu) and said to resemble meat texture more than others.
Barley
Grown for malting and livestock on land too poor or too cold for wheat.
Sorghum
Important staple food in Asia and Africa and popular worldwide for livestock.
Millet
A group of similar but distinct cereals that form an important staple food in Asia and Africa.
Oats
Popular worldwide as a breakfast food and livestock feed.
In human consumption, oats can be served as porridge as oatmeal, although oats could be eaten in various different forms other than rolled oats, including unprocessed oats.
Triticale
----
Hybrid of wheat and rye, grown similarly to rye.
Rye
Important in cold climates.
Rye grain is used for flour, bread, beer, crispbread, some whiskeys, some vodkas, and animal fodder.
Fonio
----
Several varieties are grown as food crops in Africa.
Maize, wheat, and rice together accounted for 89% of all cereal production worldwide in 2012, and 43% of the global supply of food energy in 2009, while the production of oats and rye have drastically fallen from their 1960s levels.
Other cereals not included in FAO statistics, include:
Teff, an ancient grain that is a staple in Ethiopia and grown in sub-Saharan Africa as a grass primarily for feeding horses.
It is high in fiber and protein.
Its flour is often used to make injera.
It can also be eaten as a warm breakfast cereal similar to farina with a chocolate or nutty flavor.
Wild rice, grown in small amounts in North America.
See also
Food portal
Chillcuring, grain ventilating process
Food price crisis
Food quality
Food safety
Lists of foods
Nutrition
Post-harvest losses
Pseudocereal
Pulse
Push–pull technology
Zadoks scale
Notes
1961 is the earliest year for which FAO statistics are available.
The weight given is for paddy rice
References
"IDRC - International Development Research Centre". Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
Mundell, E.J. (9 July 2019). "More Americans Are Eating Whole Grains, But Intake Still Too Low". HealthDay.
Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2021.
DK Jordan (24 November 2012). "Living the Revolution". The Neolithic.
University of California – San Diego.
Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2013.
"The Development of Agriculture". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2013.
Hancock, James F. (2012). Plant evolution and the origin of crop species (3rd ed.). CABI. p. 119. ISBN 978-1-84593-801-7. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2021.
UN Industrial Development Organization, International Fertilizer Development Center (1998). The Fertilizer Manual (3rd ed.). Springer. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-7923-5032-3. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2021.
Serna-Saldivar, Sergio (2010). Cereal Grains: Properties, Processing, and Nutritional Attributes. p. 535. ISBN 978-1-4398-8209-2. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2015.
Henry, R.J.; Kettlewell, P.S. (1996). Cereal Grain Quality.
Chapman & Hall. p. 155. ISBN 9789400915138.
a b c d e f g h i j Ostrovsky, Max (21 December 2006). Y=Arctg X: The Hyperbola of the World Order.
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.
ISBN 978-0761834991. OCLC 81144918.
Spaeth, Barbette Stanley (1996). The Roman goddess Ceres (1st ed.). University of Texas Press.
ISBN 0292776934.
"JHOM - Bread - Hebrew". 
"| Shutterstock". 22 June 2017. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 6 March 2020.
"Lessons from the green revolution: towards a new green revolution". FAO. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. The green revolution was a technology package comprising material components of improved high-yielding varieties (HYVs) of two staple cereals (rice or "wheat"), irrigation or controlled "water" supply and improved moisture utilization, fertilizers and pesticides and associated management skills.
a b Sands DC, Morris CE, Dratz EA, Pilgeram A (2009). "Elevating optimal human nutrition to a central goal of plant breeding and production of plant-based foods". Plant Sci (Review). 177 (5): 377–89. doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2009.07.011. PMC 2866137. PMID 20467463.
"Did Quinoa Get Too Popular for Its Own Good?". HowStuffWorks. 5 November 2018. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2019.
a b c d e Rosentrater, Kurt August; Evers, Anthony D. (2018). Kent's Technology of Cereals: An Introduction for Students of Food Science and Agriculture (5th ed.). Duxford, United Kingdom.
ISBN 978-0-08-100532-3. OCLC 1004672994.
a b c Clayton, W.D.; Renvoise, S.A. (1986). Genera Graminum: Grasses of the world.
London: Royal Botanic Garden, Kew.
ISBN 9781900347754.
Cope, T.; Gray, A. (2009). Grasses of the British Isles.
London, U.K.: Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland.
ISBN 9780901158420.
"Insect Pollination of Grasses". Australian Journal of Entomology. 3: 74. 1964. doi:10.1111/j.1440-6055.1964.tb00625.x.
Prime Mover: A Natural History of Muscle. W.W. Norton & Company. 17 August 2003. p. 301. ISBN 9780393247312..
Edwards, J.S.; Bartley, E.E.; Dayton, A.D. (1980). "Effects of Dietary Protein Concentration on Lactating Cows". Journal of Dairy Science. 63 (2): 243. doi:10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(80)82920-1.
"Best Crops for Grazing". Successful Farming. 22 February 2018. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2020.
a b c d Barr, Skylar; Sutton, Mason (2019). Technology of Cereals, Pulses and Oilseeds.
EDTECH. p. 54. ISBN 9781839472619. Archived from the original on 30 August 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
Kunzig, Robert (April 2011) The Big Idea: Perennial Grains Archived 5 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
National Geographic.
Constable, George; Somerville, Bob (2003). A Century of Innovation: Twenty Engineering Achievements That Transformed Our Lives, Chapter 7, Agricultural Mechanization.
Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press.
ISBN 0-309-08908-5. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
"How to cook perfect rice". BBC Food.
Archived from the original on 27 August 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"The history of flour - The FlourWorld Museum Wittenburg – Flour Sacks of the World". flour-art-museum.de.
Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
Peña, R. J. "Wheat for bread and other foods". Food and Agriculture Organization.
Archived from the original on 27 January 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2022. Wheat, in the form of bread, provides more nutrients to the world population than any other single food source.
a b Finley, John Huston; Peterson, William; Parrott, Sir Edward, eds. (1917). "History of flour". Nelson's Perpetual Loose-leaf Encyclopædia: An International Work of Reference, Complete in Twelve Volumes, with 7000 Illustrations, Colored Plates, Manikins, Models, Maps and Engravings. T. Nelson and Sons Publishing Company. pp. 83–85.
Eben Norton Horsford (1875). "Chapter II: The Art of Milling". Report on Vienna bread.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
Jacobs, Paul Burke (1938). Information on Industrial Alcohol. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Chemistry and Soils. pp. 3–4. Archived from the original on 30 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022.
Barth, Roger.
The Chemistry of Beer: The Science in the Suds, Wiley 2013: ISBN 978-1-118-67497-0.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. "FAOSTAT". 
a b Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (17 October 2013). "Crop Yields". Our World in Data.
Archived from the original on 27 July 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
a b c d e f g h i j k Wrigley, Colin W.; Corke, Harold; Seetharaman, Koushik; Faubion, Jonathan, eds. (2016). Encyclopedia of food grains (2nd ed.). Kidlington, Oxford, UK: Academic Press.
ISBN 978-0-12-394786-4. OCLC 939553708. Archived from the original on 30 August 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
a b "Oats". The World's Healthiest Foods.
Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015.
"Types of Oats". Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015.
"ProdSTAT". FAOSTAT. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2020.
Cereal at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsPortal: Agriculture
Cereals and pseudocerealsCereals
Barley
Fonio
Job's tears
Maize (Corn)
Millets
Oats
Rice
Rye
Sorghum
Teff
Triticale
Wild rice
Wheat (Triticum)
Bread
Durum
Khorasan
Red Fife
Norin 10
Winter
Farro
Einkorn
Emmer
Spelt
PseudocerealsPolygonaceae
Buckwheat
Tartary buckwheat
AmaranthaceaeAmaranth
A. caudatus
A. cruentus
A. hypochondriacus
Celosia
Quinoa
Pitseed goosefoot
Cañihua
Djulis
Lamiaceae
Chia
Emerging Grain Crops
Canary grass
Drinn
Indian ricegrass
Intermediate wheatgrass
Kangaroo grass
Nipa grass
Porteresia
See also
Triticeae
Neolithic founder crops
Neolithic Revolution
History of agriculture
Natufian culture
Fertile Crescent
Tell Abu Hureyra
Tell Aswad
Domestication
Green Revolution
Genetic engineering
Selective breeding
Crop wild relative
Lists of countries by agricultural output rankingsCereals
Barley
Buckwheat
Maize
Millet
Oat
Rice
Rye
Sorghum
Triticale
Wheat
exports
Fruit
Apple
Apricot
Avocado
Banana
Cherry
Citrus
Orange
Coconut
Cucumber
Eggplant
Grape
Lemon
Lime
Mango
Papaya
Pear
Pineapple
Plum
Raspberry
Tomato
Vegetables
Artichoke
Carrot
Garlic
Onion
Potato
Rapeseed
Soybean
Turnip
Other
Cacao
Cassava
Coffee
Cotton
Fish
Milk
Palm oil
Sugar beet
Sugar cane
Sunflower seed
Tea
Tobacco
Wine
Related
Irrigated land
Land use
Organic farmland
List of international rankings
Lists by country
Veganism and vegetarianismPerspectivesVeganism
Animal-free agriculture
Black veganism
Fruitarianism
History
Raw veganism
Straight edge
Hardline
Nutrition
Vegan organic agriculture
Vegan school meal
Vegan studies
Vegetarianism
Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Orthopathy
Lacto vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country
Lists
Vegetarians
Vegans
Fictional characters
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants
List of vegan media
EthicsSecular
Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Replaceability argument
Sentientism
Speciesism
Tirukkuṟaḷ
Religious
Buddhism
Christianity (Seventh-day Adventist Church)
Hinduism
Sattvic
Ahimsa
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagoreanism
Rastafari
Sikhism
Foodand drink
Agave nectar
Chicken fillet roll
Coconut burger
Coconut milk
Fruits
Grains
cereals
legumes
Gelatin substitutes
Agar
Carrageenan
Gulaman
Konjac jelly
Microbial cellulose
Jambon
Meat analogue
List of meat substitutes
Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Vegepet
Vegetables
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Sausage roll
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger
Groupsand eventsVegan
American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme
Our Hen House
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganmania
Veganuary
Veganz
World Vegan Day
Vegetarian
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
French Vegetarian Society
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Meat-free days
Meatless Monday
Friday Fast
North American Vegetarian Society
Order of the Golden Age
ProVeg Deutschland
ProVeg International
ProVeg Nederland
Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Federal Union
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day
Companies
List of vegetarian and vegan companies
Books,reports, journals
An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802)
Vegetable Cookery (1812)
A Vindication of Natural Diet (1813)
Reasons for not Eating Animal Food (1814)
Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824)
Nature's Own Book (1835)
Fruits and Farinacea (1845)
The Pleasure Boat (1845)
The Ethics of Diet (1883)
What is Vegetarianism? (1886)
Shelley's Vegetarianism (1891)
Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses (1892)
Why I Am a Vegetarian (1895)
Figs or Pigs? (1896)
Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Meat Fetish (1904)
The New Ethics (1907)
A Fleshless Diet (1910)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Ten Talents (1968)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
Moosewood Restaurant and Cookbooks (1973)
The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook (1975)
Laurel's Kitchen (1976)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The Sexual Politics of Meat (1990)
Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone (1997)
The China Study (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
The Bloodless Revolution (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
Animal (De)liberation (2016)
The End of Animal Farming (2018)
Vegetable Kingdom (2020)
Meat Atlas (annual)
Films
The Animals Film (1981)
A Cow at My Table (1998)
Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)
Dominion (2018)
Eating You Alive (2018)
The Game Changers (2018)
Magazines
Naked Food
Satya
Vegetarian Times
VegNews
The Animals' Agenda
Academics, authors, physiciansContemporary
Elisa Aaltola
Carol J. Adams
Martin Balluch
Neal D. Barnard
David Benatar
Steven Best
Yves Bonnardel
Will Bonsall
Will Bulsiewicz
T. Colin Campbell
Garth Davis
Jan Deckers
Alan Desmond
Daniel Dombrowski
Sue Donaldson
Mylan Engel
Gidon Eshel
Caldwell Esselstyn
Henry Firth
Michael Allen Fox
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Kristi Funk
Greta Gaard
Valéry Giroux
Michael Greger
A. Breeze Harper
Oscar Horta
Michael Huemer
Melanie Joy
Joel Kahn
Michael Klaper
Aph Ko
Renan Larue
Thomas Lepeltier
Andrew Linzey
Clair Linzey
Howard Lyman
Reed Mangels
John A. McDougall
James E. McWilliams
Vesanto Melina
Gemma Newman
David Nibert
Jack Norris
David Olivier
Dean Ornish
David Pearce
Tom Regan
Richard H. Schwartz
Jérôme Segal
Peter Singer
William O. Stephens
David Sztybel
Ian Theasby
Kim A. Williams
Corey Lee Wrenn
Laura Wright
Tzachi Zamir
Historical
William Alcott
Bertrand P. Allinson
Thomas Allinson
William Axon
Eduard Baltzer
Horace A. Barrows
Sidney H. Beard
George Bedborough
Ernest Bell
Robert Bell
Ragnar Berg
Rynn Berry
Maximilian Bircher-Benner
George Black
Ernest Bonnejoy
Lucius Duncan Bulkley
J. L. Buttner
Paul Carton
Job Caudwell
George Cheyne
Henry S. Clubb
Antonio Cocchi
Empedocles
Charles W. Forward
Mahatma Gandhi
Narasinh Narayan Godbole
Lewis Gompertz
Jeremiah Hacker
John Haddon
Walter Hadwen
Alexander Haig
Edward Hare
Philippe Hecquet
Martin Luther Holbrook
Isaac Jennings
John Harvey Kellogg
Norman Kerr
Daniel H. Kress
William Lambe
W. R. C. Latson
Elmer Lee
Al-Ma'arri
Elmer McCollum
Eli Peck Miller
Harry Willis Miller
J. Howard Moore
Reuben D. Mussey
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Francis William Newman
Josiah Oldfield
Cyril V. Pink
Rod Preece
James Rachels
Rollo Russell
Henry Stephens Salt
Russell Thacher Trall
Ellen G. White
Severin Wielobycki
Howard Williams
Frank Wokes
Jon Wynne-Tyson
Related
Vegetarian and vegan symbolism
Vegetarian characters in fiction
List of vegan media
Juice fasting
Vegetarian and vegan dog diet
Vegaphobia
Plant-based diet
Sustainable diet
Low-carbon
Planetary health
Semi-vegetarianism
Pescetarianism
Pollotarianism
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 16:07 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
