Charlemagne - Wikipedia
Charlemagne
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 9 October 2022.
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
King of Franks, first Holy Roman Emperor
For other uses, see Charlemagne (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Charlemagne" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
CharlemagneEmperor of the RomansA denarius of Charlemagne dated c. 812–814 with the inscription KAROLVS IMP AVG (Karolus Imperator Augustus) (in Latin)King of the FranksReign9 October 768 – 28 January 814Coronation9 October 768NoyonPredecessorPepin the ShortSuccessorLouis the PiousKing of the LombardsReign10 July 774 – 28 January 814Coronation10 July 774PaviaPredecessorDesideriusSuccessorBernardEmperor of the Carolingian EmpireReign25 December 800 – 28 January 814Coronation25 December 800Old St.
Peter's Basilica, RomeSuccessorLouis the PiousBorn2 April 747Liège (Herstal) or AachenDied28 January 814(aged 66)Aachen, FranciaBurialAachen CathedralSpouses
Desiderata(m. c. 770; annulled 771)
Hildegard of Vinzgouw(m. 771; d. 783)
Fastrada(m. c. 783; d. 794)
Luitgard(m. c. 794; d. 800)
IssueAmong others
Pepin the Hunchback
Charles the Younger
Pepin of Italy
Louis the Pious
DynastyCarolingianFatherPepin the ShortMotherBertrada of LaonReligionRoman CatholicismSignum manus
Carolingian dynasty
Pippinids
Pippin the Elder (c. 580–640)
Grimoald (616–656)
Childebert the Adopted (d. 662)
Arnulfings
Arnulf of Metz (582–640)
Ansegisel (d. 662 or 679)
Chlodulf of Metz (d. 696 or 697)
Pepin of Herstal (635–714)
Grimoald II (d. 714)
Drogo of Champagne (670–708)
Theudoald (d. 741)
Carolingians
Charles Martel (686–741)
Carloman (d. 754)
Pepin the Short (714–768)
Carloman I (751–771)
Charlemagne (742–814)
Pepin the Hunchback (768–811)
Charles the Younger (772–811)
Pepin of Italy (773–810)
Louis the Pious (778–840)
Pepin I of Aquitaine (797–838)
After the Treaty of Verdun (843)
Lothair I, Holy Roman Emperor(795–855; Middle Francia)
Charles the Bald (823–877)(West Francia)
Louis the German (804–876)(East Francia)
Charlemagne (/ˈʃɑːrləmeɪn, ˌʃɑːrləˈmeɪn/ SHAR-lə-mayn, -⁠MAYN, French: [ʃaʁləmaɲ]) or Charles the Great (Latin: Carolus Magnus; 2 April 747[a] – 28 January 814), a member of the Carolingian dynasty, was King of the Franks from 768, King of the Lombards from 774, and the first Emperor of the Romans from 800. Charlemagne succeeded in uniting the majority of western and central Europe and was the first recognized emperor to rule from western Europe after the fall of the Western Roman Empire around three centuries earlier.
The expanded Frankish state that Charlemagne founded was the Carolingian Empire.
He was canonized by Antipope Paschal III—an act later treated as invalid—and he is now regarded by some as beatified (which is a step on the path to sainthood) in the Catholic Church.
Charlemagne was the eldest son of Pepin the Short and Bertrada of Laon.
He was born before their canonical marriage.
He became king of the Franks in 768 following his father's death, and was initially co-ruler with his brother Carloman I until the latter's death in 771. As sole ruler, he continued his father's policy towards protection of the papacy and became its sole defender, removing the Lombards from power in northern Italy and leading an incursion into Muslim Spain.
He also campaigned against the Saxons to his east, Christianizing them (upon penalty of death) which led to events such as the Massacre of Verden.
He reached the height of his power in 800 when he was crowned Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo III on Christmas Day at Old St.
Peter's Basilica in Rome.
Charlemagne has been called the "Father of Europe" (Pater Europae), as he united most of Western Europe for the first time since the classical era of the Roman Empire, as well as uniting parts of Europe that had never been under Frankish or Roman rule.
His reign spurred the Carolingian Renaissance, a period of energetic cultural and intellectual activity within the Western Church.
The Eastern Orthodox Church viewed Charlemagne less favourably, due to his support of the filioque and the Pope's preference of him as emperor over the Byzantine Empire's first female monarch, Irene of Athens.
These and other disputes led to the eventual split of Rome and Constantinople in the Great Schism of 1054.[b]
Charlemagne died in 814 after contracting an infectious lung disease.
He was laid to rest in the Aachen Cathedral, in his imperial capital city of Aachen.
He married at least four times, and had three legitimate sons who lived to adulthood.
Only the youngest of them, Louis the Pious, survived to succeed him.
Charlemagne and his predecessors are the direct ancestors of many of Europe's royal houses, including the Capetian dynasty,[c] the Ottonian dynasty,[d] the House of Luxembourg,[e] the House of Ivrea[f] and the House of Habsburg.[g]
Contents
Names and nicknames
The Bust of Charlemagne, an idealised portrayal and reliquary said to contain Charlemagne's skull cap, is located at Aachen Cathedral Treasury, and can be regarded as the most famous depiction of the ruler.The name Charlemagne (English: /ˈʃɑːrləmeɪn, ˌʃɑːrləˈmeɪn/ SHAR-lə-mayn, -⁠MAYN), by which the emperor is normally known in English, comes from the French Charles-le-magne, meaning "Charles the Great".[h] In modern German, Karl der Große has the same meaning.
His given name was simply Charles (Latin Carolus, Old High German Karlus, Romance Karlo). He was named after his grandfather, Charles Martel, a choice which intentionally marked him as Martel's true heir.
The nickname magnus (great) may have been associated with him already in his lifetime, but this is not certain.
The contemporary Latin Royal Frankish Annals routinely call him Carolus magnus rex, "Charles the great king". As a nickname, it is only certainly attested in the works of the Poeta Saxo around 900 and it only became standard in all the lands of his former empire around 1000.
Charles' achievements gave a new meaning to his name.
In many languages of Europe, the very word for "king" derives from his name; e.g., Polish: król, Ukrainian: король (korol'), Czech: král, Slovak: kráľ, Hungarian: király, Lithuanian: karalius, Latvian: karalis, Russian: король, Macedonian: крал, Bulgarian: крал, Serbo-Croatian Cyrillic: краљ/kralj, Turkish: kral.
This development parallels that of the name of the Caesars in the original Roman Empire, which became kaiser and tsar (or czar), among others.
Political background
Francia, early 8th century
By the 6th century, the western Germanic tribe of the Franks had been Christianised, due in considerable measure to the Catholic conversion of Clovis I. Francia, ruled by the Merovingians, was the most powerful of the kingdoms that succeeded the Western Roman Empire.
Following the Battle of Tertry, the Merovingians declined into powerlessness, for which they have been dubbed the rois fainéants ("do-nothing kings"). Almost all government powers were exercised by their chief officer, the mayor of the palace.[i]
In 687, Pepin of Herstal, mayor of the palace of Austrasia, ended the strife between various kings and their mayors with his victory at Tertry.
He became the sole governor of the entire Frankish kingdom.
Pepin was the grandson of two important figures of the Austrasian Kingdom: Saint Arnulf of Metz and Pepin of Landen.
Pepin of Herstal was eventually succeeded by his son Charles, later known as Charles Martel (Charles the Hammer).
After 737, Charles governed the Franks in lieu of a king and declined to call himself king.
Charles was succeeded in 741 by his sons Carloman and Pepin the Short, the father of Charlemagne.
In 743, the brothers placed Childeric III on the throne to curb separatism in the periphery.
He was the last Merovingian king.
Carloman resigned office in 746, preferring to enter the church as a monk.
Pepin brought the question of the kingship before Pope Zachary, asking whether it was logical for a king to have no royal power.
The pope handed down his decision in 749, decreeing that it was better for Pepin to be called king, as he had the powers of high office as Mayor, so as not to confuse the hierarchy.
He, therefore, ordered him to become the true king.
In 750, Pepin was elected by an assembly of the Franks, anointed by the archbishop, and then raised to the office of king.
The Pope branded Childeric III as "the false king" and ordered him into a monastery.
The Merovingian dynasty was thereby replaced by the Carolingian dynasty, named after Charles Martel.
In 753, Pope Stephen II fled from Italy to Francia, appealing to Pepin for assistance for the rights of St.
Peter.
He was supported in this appeal by Carloman, Charles' brother.
In return, the pope could provide only legitimacy.
He did this by again anointing and confirming Pepin, this time adding his young sons Carolus (Charlemagne) and Carloman to the royal patrimony.
They thereby became heirs to the realm that already covered most of western Europe.
In 754, Pepin accepted the Pope's invitation to visit Italy on behalf of St.
Peter's rights, dealing successfully with the Lombards.
Under the Carolingians, the Frankish kingdom spread to encompass an area including most of Western Europe; the later east–west division of the kingdom formed the basis for modern France and Germany.
Orman portrays the Treaty of Verdun (843) between the warring grandsons of Charlemagne as the foundation event of an independent France under its first king Charles the Bald; an independent Germany under its first king Louis the German; and an independent intermediate state stretching from the Low Countries along the borderlands to south of Rome under Lothair I, who retained the title of emperor and the capitals Aachen and Rome without the jurisdiction.
The middle kingdom had broken up by 890 and partly absorbed into the Western kingdom (later France) and the Eastern kingdom (Germany) and the rest developing into smaller "buffer" states that exist between France and Germany to this day, namely Benelux and Switzerland.
Rise to power
Early life
Roman road connecting Tongeren to the Herstal region.
Jupille and Herstal, near Liege, are located in the lower right corner
The most likely date of Charlemagne's birth is reconstructed from several sources.
The date of 742—calculated from Einhard's date of death of January 814 at age 72—predates the marriage of his parents in 744. The year given in the Annales Petaviani, 747, would be more likely, except that it contradicts Einhard and a few other sources in making Charlemagne sixty-seven years old at his death.
The month and day of 2 April are based on a calendar from Lorsch Abbey.
In 747, Easter fell on 2 April, a coincidence that likely would have been remarked upon by chroniclers but was not.
If Easter was being used as the beginning of the calendar year, then 2 April 747 could have been, by modern reckoning, April 748 (not on Easter). The date favoured by the preponderance of evidence is 2 April 742, based on Charlemagne's age at the time of his death.
This date supports the concept that Charlemagne was technically an illegitimate child, although that is not mentioned by Einhard in either since he was born out of wedlock; Pepin and Bertrada were bound by a private contract or Friedelehe at the time of his birth, but did not marry until 744.
Charlemagne's exact birthplace is unknown, although historians have suggested Aachen in modern-day Germany, and Liège (Herstal) in present-day Belgium as possible locations.
Aachen and Liège are close to the region whence the Merovingian and Carolingian families originated.
Other cities have been suggested, including Düren, Gauting, Mürlenbach, Quierzy, and Prüm.
No definitive evidence resolves the question.
Ancestry
External video The Early Middle Ages, 284–1000: Charlemagne, 46:14, YaleCourses on YouTube, Yale University Charlemagne: An Introduction, Smarthistory, 7:49, Khan Academy
Charlemagne was the eldest child of Pepin the Short (714 – 24 September 768, reigned from 751) and his wife Bertrada of Laon (720 – 12 July 783), daughter of Caribert of Laon.
Many historians consider Charlemagne (Charles) to have been illegitimate, although some state that this is arguable, because Pepin did not marry Bertrada until 744, which was after Charles' birth; this status did not exclude him from the succession.
Records name only Carloman, Gisela, and three short-lived children named Pepin, Chrothais and Adelais as his younger siblings.
It would be folly, I think, to write a word concerning Charles' birth and infancy, or even his boyhood, for nothing has ever been written on the subject, and there is no one alive now who can give information on it.— Einhard
Ambiguous high office
Further information: Mayor of the palace
The most powerful officers of the Frankish people, the Mayor of the Palace (Maior Domus) and one or more kings (rex, reges), were appointed by the election of the people.
Elections were not periodic, but were held as required to elect officers ad quos summa imperii pertinebat, "to whom the highest matters of state pertained". Evidently, interim decisions could be made by the Pope, which ultimately needed to be ratified using an assembly of the people that met annually.
Before he was elected king in 751, Pepin was initially a mayor, a high office he held "as though hereditary" (velut hereditario fungebatur). Einhard explains that "the honour" was usually "given by the people" to the distinguished, but Pepin the Great and his brother Carloman the Wise received it as though hereditary, as had their father, Charles Martel.
There was, however, a certain ambiguity about quasi-inheritance.
The office was treated as joint property: one Mayorship held by two brothers jointly.
Each, however, had his own geographic jurisdiction.
When Carloman decided to resign, becoming ultimately a Benedictine at Monte Cassino, the question of the disposition of his quasi-share was settled by the pope.
He converted the mayorship into a kingship and awarded the joint property to Pepin, who gained the right to pass it on by inheritance.
This decision was not accepted by all family members.
Carloman had consented to the temporary tenancy of his own share, which he intended to pass on to his son, Drogo, when the inheritance should be settled at someone's death.
By the Pope's decision, in which Pepin had a hand, Drogo was to be disqualified as an heir in favour of his cousin Charles.
He took up arms in opposition to the decision and was joined by Grifo, a half-brother of Pepin and Carloman, who had been given a share by Charles Martel, but was stripped of it and held under loose arrest by his half-brothers after an attempt to seize their shares by military action.
Grifo perished in combat in the Battle of Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne while Drogo was hunted down and taken into custody.
According to the Life, Pepin died in Paris on 24 September 768, whereupon the kingship passed jointly to his sons, "with divine assent" (divino nutu).  The Franks "in general assembly" (generali conventu) gave them both the rank of a king (reges) but "partitioned the whole body of the kingdom equally" (totum regni corpus ex aequo partirentur). The annals tell a slightly different version, with the king dying at St-Denis, near Paris.
The two "lords" (domni) were "elevated to kingship" (elevati sunt in regnum), Charles on 9 October in Noyon, Carloman on an unspecified date in Soissons.
If born in 742, Charles was 26 years old, but he had been campaigning at his father's right hand for several years, which may help to account for his military skill.
Carloman was 17.
The language, in either case, suggests that there were not two inheritances, which would have created distinct kings ruling over distinct kingdoms, but a single joint inheritance and a joint kingship tenanted by two equal kings, Charles and his brother Carloman.
As before, distinct jurisdictions were awarded.
Charles received Pepin's original share as Mayor: the outer parts of the kingdom bordering on the sea, namely Neustria, western Aquitaine, and the northern parts of Austrasia; while Carloman was awarded his uncle's former share, the inner parts: southern Austrasia, Septimania, eastern Aquitaine, Burgundy, Provence, and Swabia, lands bordering Italy.
The question of whether these jurisdictions were joint shares reverting to the other brother if one brother died or were inherited property passed on to the descendants of the brother who died was never definitely settled.
It came up repeatedly over the succeeding decades until the grandsons of Charlemagne created distinct sovereign kingdoms.
Aquitainian rebellion
Formation of a new Aquitaine
Main article: Aquitaine
In southern Gaul, Aquitaine had been Romanised and people spoke a Romance language.
Similarly, Hispania had been populated by peoples who spoke various languages, including Celtic, but these had now been mostly replaced by Romance languages.
Between Aquitaine and Hispania were the Euskaldunak, Latinised to Vascones, or Basques, whose country, Vasconia, extended, according to the distributions of place names attributable to the Basques, mainly in the western Pyrenees but also as far south as the upper river Ebro in Spain and as far north as the river Garonne in France.
The French name Gascony derives from Vasconia.
The Romans were never able to subjugate the whole of Vasconia.
The soldiers they recruited for the Roman legions from those parts they did submit and where they founded the region's first cities were valued for their fighting abilities.
The border with Aquitaine was at Toulouse.
In about 660, the Duchy of Vasconia united with the Duchy of Aquitaine to form a single realm under Felix of Aquitaine, ruling from Toulouse.
This was a joint kingship with a Basque Duke, Lupus I. Lupus is the Latin translation of Basque Otsoa, "wolf". At Felix's death in 670 the joint property of the kingship reverted entirely to Lupus.
As the Basques had no law of joint inheritance but relied on primogeniture, Lupus in effect founded a hereditary dynasty of Basque rulers of an expanded Aquitaine.
Acquisition of Aquitaine by the Carolingians
Further information: Umayyad conquest of Hispania
Moorish Hispania in 732
The Latin chronicles of the end of Visigothic Hispania omit many details, such as identification of characters, filling in the gaps and reconciliation of numerous contradictions.
Muslim sources, however, present a more coherent view, such as in the Ta'rikh iftitah al-Andalus ("History of the Conquest of al-Andalus") by Ibn al-Qūṭiyya ("the son of the Gothic woman", referring to the granddaughter of Wittiza, the last Visigothic king of a united Hispania, who married a Moor). Ibn al-Qūṭiyya, who had another, much longer name, must have been relying to some degree on family oral tradition.
According to Ibn al-Qūṭiyya Wittiza, the last Visigothic king of a united Hispania, died before his three sons, Almund, Romulo, and Ardabast reached maturity.
Their mother was queen regent at Toledo, but Roderic, army chief of staff, staged a rebellion, capturing Córdoba.
He chose to impose a joint rule over distinct jurisdictions on the true heirs.
Evidence of a division of some sort can be found in the distribution of coins imprinted with the name of each king and in the king lists.
Wittiza was succeeded by Roderic, who reigned for seven and a half years, followed by Achila (Aquila), who reigned three and a half years.
If the reigns of both terminated with the incursion of the Saracens, then Roderic appears to have reigned a few years before the majority of Achila.
The latter's kingdom was securely placed to the northeast, while Roderic seems to have taken the rest, notably modern Portugal.
The Saracens crossed the mountains to claim Ardo's Septimania, only to encounter the Basque dynasty of Aquitaine, always the allies of the Goths.
Odo the Great of Aquitaine was at first victorious at the Battle of Toulouse in 721. Saracen troops gradually massed in Septimania and, in 732, an army under Emir Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi advanced into Vasconia, and Odo was defeated at the Battle of the River Garonne.
They took Bordeaux and were advancing towards Tours when Odo, powerless to stop them, appealed to his arch-enemy, Charles Martel, mayor of the Franks.
In one of the first of the lightning marches for which the Carolingian kings became famous, Charles and his army appeared in the path of the Saracens between Tours and Poitiers, and in the Battle of Tours decisively defeated and killed al-Ghafiqi.
The Moors returned twice more, each time suffering defeat at Charles' hands—at the River Berre near Narbonne in 737 and in the Dauphiné in 740. Odo's price for salvation from the Saracens was incorporation into the Frankish kingdom, a decision that was repugnant to him and also to his heirs.
Loss and recovery of Aquitaine
After the death of his father, Hunald I allied himself with free Lombardy.
However, Odo had ambiguously left the kingdom jointly to his two sons, Hunald and Hatto.
The latter, loyal to Francia, now went to war with his brother over full possession.
Victorious, Hunald blinded and imprisoned his brother, only to be so stricken by conscience that he resigned and entered the church as a monk to do penance.
The story is told in Annales Mettenses priores.
His son Waifer took an early inheritance, becoming duke of Aquitaine and ratifying the alliance with Lombardy.
Waifer, deciding to honour it, repeated his father's decision, which he justified by arguing that any agreements with Charles Martel became invalid on Martel's death.
Since Aquitaine was now Pepin's inheritance because of the earlier assistance given by Charles Martel, according to some, the latter and his son, the young Charles, hunted down Waifer, who could only conduct a guerrilla war, and executed him.
Among the contingents of the Frankish army were Bavarians under Tassilo III, Duke of Bavaria, an Agilofing, the hereditary Bavarian ducal family.
Grifo had installed himself as Duke of Bavaria, but Pepin replaced him with a member of the ducal family yet a child, Tassilo, whose protector he had become after the death of his father.
The loyalty of the Agilolfings was perpetually in question, but Pepin exacted numerous oaths of loyalty from Tassilo.
However, the latter had married Liutperga, a daughter of Desiderius, king of Lombardy.
At a critical point in the campaign, Tassilo left the field with all his Bavarians.
Out of reach of Pepin, he repudiated all loyalty to Francia.
Pepin had no chance to respond as he grew ill and died within a few weeks after Waifer's execution.
The first event of the brothers' reign was the uprising of the Aquitainians and Gascons in 769, in that territory split between the two kings.
One year earlier, Pepin had finally defeated Waifer, Duke of Aquitaine, after waging a destructive, ten-year war against Aquitaine.
Now, Hunald II led the Aquitainians as far north as Angoulême.
Charles met Carloman, but Carloman refused to participate and returned to Burgundy.
Charles went to war, leading an army to Bordeaux, where he built a fortified camp on the mound at Fronsac.
Hunald was forced to flee to the court of Duke Lupus II of Gascony.
Lupus, fearing Charles, turned Hunald over in exchange for peace, and Hunald was put in a monastery.
Gascon lords also surrendered, and Aquitaine and Gascony were finally fully subdued by the Franks.
Marriage to Desiderata
The brothers maintained lukewarm relations with the assistance of their mother Bertrada, but in 770 Charles signed a treaty with Duke Tassilo III of Bavaria and married a Lombard Princess (commonly known today as Desiderata), the daughter of King Desiderius, to surround Carloman with his own allies.
Though Pope Stephen III first opposed the marriage with the Lombard princess, he found little to fear from a Frankish-Lombard alliance.
Less than a year after his marriage, Charlemagne repudiated Desiderata and married a 13-year-old Swabian named Hildegard.
The repudiated Desiderata returned to her father's court at Pavia.
Her father's wrath was now aroused, and he would have gladly allied with Carloman to defeat Charles.
Before any open hostilities could be declared, however, Carloman died on 5 December 771, apparently of natural causes.
Carloman's widow Gerberga fled to Desiderius' court with her sons for protection.
Wives, concubines, and children
Further information: Carolingian dynasty
Charlemagne had eighteen children with seven of his ten known wives or concubines.
Nonetheless, he had only four legitimate grandsons, the four sons of his fourth son, Louis.
In addition, he had a grandson (Bernard of Italy, the only son of his third son, Pepin of Italy), who was illegitimate but included in the line of inheritance.
Among his descendants are several royal dynasties, including the Habsburg, and Capetian dynasties.
By consequence, most if not all established European noble families ever since can genealogically trace some of their background to Charlemagne.
Start date
Wives and their children
Concubines and their children
c. 768
His first relationship was with Himiltrude.
The nature of this relationship is variously described as concubinage, a legal marriage, or a Friedelehe.[j] (Charlemagne put her aside when he married Desiderata.) The union with Himiltrude produced a son:
Pepin the Hunchback (c. 769–811)
c. 770
After her, his first wife was Desiderata, daughter of Desiderius, king of the Lombards; married in 770, annulled in 771.
c. 771
His second wife was Hildegard of the Vinzgau (757/758–783), married 771, died 783. By her he had nine children:
Charles the Younger (c. 772–811), Duke of Maine
Carloman, renamed Pepin (773–810), King of Italy
Adalhaid (774), who was born whilst her parents were on campaign in Italy.
She was sent back to Francia, but died before reaching Lyons
Rotrude (or Hruodrud) (775–810)
Louis (778–840), twin of Lothair, King of Aquitaine since 781, crowned King of the Franks/co-emperor in 813, senior Emperor from 814
Lothair (778–779/780), twin of Louis, he died in infancy
Bertha (779–826)
Gisela (781–808)
Hildegarde (782–783)
c. 773
His first known concubine was Gersuinda.
By her he had:
Adaltrude (b. 774)
c. 774
His second known concubine was Madelgard.
By her he had:
Ruodhaid (775–), abbess of Faremoutiers
c. 784
His third wife was Fastrada, married 784, died 794. By her he had:
Theodrada (b. 784), abbess of Argenteuil
Hiltrude (b. 787)
c.  794
His fourth wife was Luitgard, married 794, died childless.
c. 800
His fourth known concubine was Regina.
By her he had:
Drogo (801–855), Bishop of Metz from 823 and abbot of Luxeuil Abbey
Hugh (802–844), archchancellor of the Empire
c. 804
His fifth known concubine was Ethelind.
By her he had:
Richbod (805–844), Abbot of Saint-Riquier
Theodoric (b. 807)
Children
Charlemagne (left) and Pepin the Hunchback (10th-century copy of 9th-century original)
During the first peace of any substantial length (780–782), Charles began to appoint his sons to positions of authority.
In 781, during a visit to Rome, he made his two youngest sons kings, crowned by the Pope.[k][l] The elder of these two, Carloman, was made the king of Italy, taking the Iron Crown that his father had first worn in 774, and in the same ceremony was renamed "Pepin" (not to be confused with Charlemagne's eldest, possibly illegitimate son, Pepin the Hunchback). The younger of the two, Louis, became King of Aquitaine.
Charlemagne ordered Pepin and Louis to be raised in the customs of their kingdoms, and he gave their regents some control of their subkingdoms, but kept the real power, though he intended his sons to inherit their realms.
He did not tolerate insubordination in his sons: in 792, he banished Pepin the Hunchback to Prüm Abbey because the young man had joined a rebellion against him.
Charles was determined to have his children educated, including his daughters, as his parents had instilled the importance of learning in him at an early age.
His children were also taught skills in accord with their aristocratic status, which included training in riding and weaponry for his sons, and embroidery, spinning and weaving for his daughters.
The sons fought many wars on behalf of their father.
Charles was mostly preoccupied with the Bretons, whose border he shared and who insurrected on at least two occasions and were easily put down.
He also fought the Saxons on multiple occasions.
In 805 and 806, he was sent into the Böhmerwald (modern Bohemia) to deal with the Slavs living there (Bohemian tribes, ancestors of the modern Czechs). He subjected them to Frankish authority and devastated the valley of the Elbe, forcing tribute from them.
Pippin had to hold the Avar and Beneventan borders and fought the Slavs to his north.
He was uniquely poised to fight the Byzantine Empire when that conflict arose after Charlemagne's imperial coronation and a Venetian rebellion.
Finally, Louis was in charge of the Spanish March and fought the Duke of Benevento in southern Italy on at least one occasion.
He took Barcelona in a great siege in 797.
Charlemagne instructing his son Louis the Pious
Charlemagne kept his daughters at home with him and refused to allow them to contract sacramental marriages (though he originally condoned an engagement between his eldest daughter Rotrude and Constantine VI of Byzantium, this engagement was annulled when Rotrude was 11). Charlemagne's opposition to his daughters' marriages may possibly have intended to prevent the creation of cadet branches of the family to challenge the main line, as had been the case with Tassilo of Bavaria.
However, he tolerated their extramarital relationships, even rewarding their common-law husbands and treasuring the illegitimate grandchildren they produced for him.
He also refused to believe stories of their wild behaviour.
After his death the surviving daughters were banished from the court by their brother, the pious Louis, to take up residence in the convents they had been bequeathed by their father.
At least one of them, Bertha, had a recognised relationship, if not a marriage, with Angilbert, a member of Charlemagne's court circle.
Italian campaigns
Conquest of the Lombard kingdom
The Frankish king Charlemagne was a devout Catholic and maintained a close relationship with the papacy throughout his life.
In 772, when Pope Adrian I was threatened by invaders, the king rushed to Rome to provide assistance.
Shown here, the pope asks Charlemagne for help at a meeting near Rome.
At his succession in 772, Pope Adrian I demanded the return of certain cities in the former exarchate of Ravenna in accordance with a promise at the succession of Desiderius.
Instead, Desiderius took over certain papal cities and invaded the Pentapolis, heading for Rome.
Adrian sent ambassadors to Charlemagne in autumn requesting he enforce the policies of his father, Pepin.
Desiderius sent his own ambassadors denying the pope's charges.
The ambassadors met at Thionville, and Charlemagne upheld the pope's side.
Charlemagne demanded what the pope had requested, but Desiderius swore never to comply.
Charlemagne and his uncle Bernard crossed the Alps in 773 and chased the Lombards back to Pavia, which they then besieged.
Charlemagne temporarily left the siege to deal with Adelchis, son of Desiderius, who was raising an army at Verona.
The young prince was chased to the Adriatic littoral and fled to Constantinople to plead for assistance from Constantine V, who was waging war with Bulgaria.
The siege lasted until the spring of 774 when Charlemagne visited the pope in Rome.
There he confirmed his father's grants of land, with some later chronicles falsely claiming that he also expanded them, granting Tuscany, Emilia, Venice and Corsica.
The pope granted him the title patrician.
He then returned to Pavia, where the Lombards were on the verge of surrendering.
In return for their lives, the Lombards surrendered and opened the gates in early summer.
Desiderius was sent to the abbey of Corbie, and his son Adelchis died in Constantinople, a patrician.
Charles, unusually, had himself crowned with the Iron Crown and made the magnates of Lombardy pay homage to him at Pavia.
Only Duke Arechis II of Benevento refused to submit and proclaimed independence.
Charlemagne was then master of Italy as king of the Lombards.
He left Italy with a garrison in Pavia and a few Frankish counts in place the same year.
Instability continued in Italy.
In 776, Dukes Hrodgaud of Friuli and Hildeprand of Spoleto rebelled.
Charlemagne rushed back from Saxony and defeated the Duke of Friuli in battle; the Duke was slain.
The Duke of Spoleto signed a treaty.
Their co-conspirator, Arechis, was not subdued, and Adelchis, their candidate in Byzantium, never left that city.
Northern Italy was now faithfully his.
Southern Italy
In 787, Charlemagne directed his attention towards the Duchy of Benevento, where Arechis II was reigning independently with the self-given title of Princeps.
Charlemagne's siege of Salerno forced Arechis into submission.
However, after Arechis II's death in 787, his son Grimoald III proclaimed the Duchy of Benevento newly independent.
Grimoald was attacked many times by Charles' or his sons' armies, without achieving a definitive victory.
Charlemagne lost interest and never again returned to Southern Italy where Grimoald was able to keep the Duchy free from Frankish suzerainty.
Carolingian expansion to the south
Vasconia and the Pyrenees
The destructive war led by Pepin in Aquitaine, although brought to a satisfactory conclusion for the Franks, proved the Frankish power structure south of the Loire was feeble and unreliable.
After the defeat and death of Waiofar in 768, while Aquitaine submitted again to the Carolingian dynasty, a new rebellion broke out in 769 led by Hunald II, a possible son of Waifer.
He took refuge with the ally Duke Lupus II of Gascony, but probably out of fear of Charlemagne's reprisal, Lupus handed him over to the new King of the Franks to whom he pledged loyalty, which seemed to confirm the peace in the Basque area south of the Garonne.
In the campaign of 769, Charlemagne seems to have followed a policy of "overwhelming force" and avoided a major pitched battle
Wary of new Basque uprisings, Charlemagne seems to have tried to contain Duke Lupus's power by appointing Seguin as the Count of Bordeaux (778) and other counts of Frankish background in bordering areas (Toulouse, County of Fézensac). The Basque Duke, in turn, seems to have contributed decisively or schemed the Battle of Roncevaux Pass (referred to as "Basque treachery"). The defeat of Charlemagne's army in Roncevaux (778) confirmed his determination to rule directly by establishing the Kingdom of Aquitaine (ruled by Louis the Pious) based on a power base of Frankish officials, distributing lands among colonisers and allocating lands to the Church, which he took as an ally.
A Christianisation programme was put in place across the high Pyrenees (778).
The new political arrangement for Vasconia did not sit well with local lords.
As of 788 Adalric was fighting and capturing Chorson, Carolingian Count of Toulouse.
He was eventually released, but Charlemagne, enraged at the compromise, decided to depose him and appointed his trustee William of Gellone.
William, in turn, fought the Basques and defeated them after banishing Adalric (790).
From 781 (Pallars, Ribagorça) to 806 (Pamplona under Frankish influence), taking the County of Toulouse for a power base, Charlemagne asserted Frankish authority over the Pyrenees by subduing the south-western marches of Toulouse (790) and establishing vassal counties on the southern Pyrenees that were to make up the Marca Hispanica.
As of 794, a Frankish vassal, the Basque lord Belasko (al-Galashki, 'the Gaul') ruled Álava, but Pamplona remained under Cordovan and local control up to 806. Belasko and the counties in the Marca Hispánica provided the necessary base to attack the Andalusians (an expedition led by William Count of Toulouse and Louis the Pious to capture Barcelona in 801). Events in the Duchy of Vasconia (rebellion in Pamplona, count overthrown in Aragon, Duke Seguin of Bordeaux deposed, uprising of the Basque lords, etc.) were to prove it ephemeral upon Charlemagne's death.
Roncesvalles campaign
See also: Abbasid-Carolingian Alliance
According to the Muslim historian Ibn al-Athir, the Diet of Paderborn had received the representatives of the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza, Girona, Barcelona and Huesca.
Their masters had been cornered in the Iberian peninsula by Abd ar-Rahman I, the Umayyad emir of Cordova.
These "Saracen" (Moorish and Muwallad) rulers offered their homage to the king of the Franks in return for military support.
Seeing an opportunity to extend Christendom and his own power, and believing the Saxons to be a fully conquered nation, Charlemagne agreed to go to Spain.
In 778, he led the Neustrian army across the Western Pyrenees, while the Austrasians, Lombards, and Burgundians passed over the Eastern Pyrenees.
The armies met at Saragossa and Charlemagne received the homage of the Muslim rulers, Sulayman al-Arabi and Kasmin ibn Yusuf, but the city did not fall for him.
Indeed, Charlemagne faced the toughest battle of his career.
The Muslims forced him to retreat, so he decided to go home, as he could not trust the Basques, whom he had subdued by conquering Pamplona.
He turned to leave Iberia, but as his army was crossing back through the Pass of Roncesvalles, one of the most famous events of his reign occurred: the Basques attacked and destroyed his rearguard and baggage train.
The Battle of Roncevaux Pass, though less a battle than a skirmish, left many famous dead, including the seneschal Eggihard, the count of the palace Anselm, and the warden of the Breton March, Roland, inspiring the subsequent creation of The Song of Roland (La Chanson de Roland), regarded as the first major work in the French language.
Contact with the Saracens
Harun al-Rashid receiving a delegation of Charlemagne in Baghdad, by Julius Köckert (1864)
The conquest of Italy brought Charlemagne in contact with the Saracens who, at the time, controlled the Mediterranean.
Charlemagne's eldest son, Pepin the Hunchback, was much occupied with Saracens in Italy.
Charlemagne conquered Corsica and Sardinia at an unknown date and in 799 the Balearic Islands.
The islands were often attacked by Saracen pirates, but the counts of Genoa and Tuscany (Boniface) controlled them with large fleets until the end of Charlemagne's reign.
Charlemagne even had contact with the caliphal court in Baghdad.
In 797 (or possibly 801), the caliph of Baghdad, Harun al-Rashid, presented Charlemagne with an Asian elephant named Abul-Abbas and a clock.
Wars with the Moors
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In Hispania, the struggle against the Moors continued unabated throughout the latter half of his reign.
Louis was in charge of the Spanish border.
In 785, his men captured Girona permanently and extended Frankish control into the Catalan littoral for the duration of Charlemagne's reign (the area remained nominally Frankish until the Treaty of Corbeil in 1258). The Muslim chiefs in the northeast of Islamic Spain were constantly rebelling against Cordovan authority, and they often turned to the Franks for help.
The Frankish border was slowly extended until 795, when Girona, Cardona, Ausona and Urgell were united into the new Spanish March, within the old duchy of Septimania.
In 797, Barcelona, the greatest city of the region, fell to the Franks when Zeid, its governor, rebelled against Cordova and, failing, handed it to them.
The Umayyad authority recaptured it in 799. However, Louis of Aquitaine marched the entire army of his kingdom over the Pyrenees and besieged it for two years, wintering there from 800 to 801, when it capitulated.
The Franks continued to press forward against the emir.
They probably took Tarragona and forced the submission of Tortosa in 809. The last conquest brought them to the mouth of the Ebro and gave them raiding access to Valencia, prompting the Emir al-Hakam I to recognise their conquests in 813.
Eastern campaigns
Saxon Wars
Further information: Saxon Wars
Charlemagne's additions to the Frankish Kingdom
Charlemagne was engaged in almost constant warfare throughout his reign, often at the head of his elite scara bodyguard squadrons.
In the Saxon Wars, spanning thirty years and eighteen battles, he conquered Saxonia and proceeded to convert it to Christianity.
The Germanic Saxons were divided into four subgroups in four regions.
Nearest to Austrasia was Westphalia and farthest away was Eastphalia.
Between them was Engria and north of these three, at the base of the Jutland peninsula, was Nordalbingia.
In his first campaign, in 773, Charlemagne forced the Engrians to submit and cut down an Irminsul pillar near Paderborn.
The campaign was cut short by his first expedition to Italy.
He returned in 775, marching through Westphalia and conquering the Saxon fort at Sigiburg.
He then crossed Engria, where he defeated the Saxons again.
Finally, in Eastphalia, he defeated a Saxon force, and its leader Hessi converted to Christianity.
Charlemagne returned through Westphalia, leaving encampments at Sigiburg and Eresburg, which had been important Saxon bastions.
He then controlled Saxony with the exception of Nordalbingia, but Saxon resistance had not ended.
Following his subjugation of the Dukes of Friuli and Spoleto, Charlemagne returned rapidly to Saxony in 776, where a rebellion had destroyed his fortress at Eresburg.
The Saxons were once again defeated, but their main leader, Widukind, escaped to Denmark, his wife's home.
Charlemagne built a new camp at Karlstadt.
In 777, he called a national diet at Paderborn to integrate Saxony fully into the Frankish kingdom.
Many Saxons were baptised as Christians.
In the summer of 779, he again invaded Saxony and reconquered Eastphalia, Engria and Westphalia.
At a diet near Lippe, he divided the land into missionary districts and himself assisted in several mass baptisms (780). He then returned to Italy and, for the first time, the Saxons did not immediately revolt.
Saxony was peaceful from 780 to 782.
Charlemagne receiving the submission of Widukind at Paderborn in 785, painted c. 1840 by Ary Scheffer
He returned to Saxony in 782 and instituted a code of law and appointed counts, both Saxon and Frank.
The laws were draconian on religious issues; for example, the Capitulatio de partibus Saxoniae prescribed death to Saxon pagans who refused to convert to Christianity.
This led to renewed conflict.
That year, in autumn, Widukind returned and led a new revolt.
In response, at Verden in Lower Saxony, Charlemagne is recorded as having ordered the execution of 4,500 Saxon prisoners by beheading, known as the Massacre of Verden ("Verdener Blutgericht"). The killings triggered three years of renewed bloody warfare.
During this war, the East Frisians between the Lauwers and the Weser joined the Saxons in revolt and were finally subdued.
The war ended with Widukind accepting baptism.
The Frisians afterwards asked for missionaries to be sent to them and a bishop of their own nation, Ludger, was sent.
Charlemagne also promulgated a law code, the Lex Frisonum, as he did for most subject peoples.
Thereafter, the Saxons maintained the peace for seven years, but in 792 Westphalia again rebelled.
The Eastphalians and Nordalbingians joined them in 793, but the insurrection was unpopular and was put down by 794. An Engrian rebellion followed in 796, but the presence of Charlemagne, Christian Saxons and Slavs quickly crushed it.
The last insurrection occurred in 804, more than thirty years after Charlemagne's first campaign against them, but also failed.
According to Einhard:
The war that had lasted so many years was at length ended by their acceding to the terms offered by the King; which were renunciation of their national religious customs and the worship of devils, acceptance of the sacraments of the Christian faith and religion, and union with the Franks to form one people.
Submission of Bavaria
Equestrian statue of Charlemagne by Agostino Cornacchini (1725), St.
Peter's Basilica, Vatican City.
By 774, Charlemagne had invaded the Kingdom of Lombardy, and he later annexed the Lombardian territories and assumed its crown, placing the Papal States under Frankish protection.
The Duchy of Spoleto south of Rome was acquired in 774, while in the central western parts of Europe, the Duchy of Bavaria was absorbed and the Bavarian policy continued of establishing tributary marches, (borders protected in return for tribute or taxes) among the Slavic Serbs and Czechs.
The remaining power confronting the Franks in the east were the Avars.
However, Charlemagne acquired other Slavic areas, including Bohemia, Moravia, Austria and Croatia.
In 789, Charlemagne turned to Bavaria.
He claimed that Tassilo III, Duke of Bavaria was an unfit ruler, due to his oath-breaking.
The charges were exaggerated, but Tassilo was deposed anyway and put in the monastery of Jumièges.
In 794, Tassilo was made to renounce any claim to Bavaria for himself and his family (the Agilolfings) at the synod of Frankfurt; he formally handed over to the king all of the rights he had held.
Bavaria was subdivided into Frankish counties, as had been done with Saxony.
Avar campaigns
In 788, the Avars, an Asian nomadic group that had settled down in what is today Hungary (Einhard called them Huns), invaded Friuli and Bavaria.
Charlemagne was preoccupied with other matters until 790 when he marched down the Danube and ravaged Avar territory to the Győr.
A Lombard army under Pippin then marched into the Drava valley and ravaged Pannonia.
The campaigns ended when the Saxons revolted again in 792.
For the next two years, Charlemagne was occupied, along with the Slavs, against the Saxons.
Pippin and Duke Eric of Friuli continued, however, to assault the Avars' ring-shaped strongholds.
The great Ring of the Avars, their capital fortress, was taken twice.
The booty was sent to Charlemagne at his capital, Aachen, and redistributed to his followers and to foreign rulers, including King Offa of Mercia.
Soon the Avar tuduns had lost the will to fight and travelled to Aachen to become vassals to Charlemagne and to become Christians.
Charlemagne accepted their surrender and sent one native chief, baptised Abraham, back to Avaria with the ancient title of khagan.
Abraham kept his people in line, but in 800, the Bulgarians under Khan Krum attacked the remains of the Avar state.
In 803, Charlemagne sent a Bavarian army into Pannonia, defeating and bringing an end to the Avar confederation.
In November of the same year, Charlemagne went to Regensburg where the Avar leaders acknowledged him as their ruler.
In 805, the Avar khagan, who had already been baptised, went to Aachen to ask permission to settle with his people south-eastward from Vienna.
The Transdanubian territories became integral parts of the Frankish realm, which was abolished by the Magyars in 899–900.
Northeast Slav expeditions
In 789, in recognition of his new pagan neighbours, the Slavs, Charlemagne marched an Austrasian-Saxon army across the Elbe into Obotrite territory.
The Slavs ultimately submitted, led by their leader Witzin.
Charlemagne then accepted the surrender of the Veleti under Dragovit and demanded many hostages.
He also demanded permission to send missionaries into this pagan region unmolested.
The army marched to the Baltic before turning around and marching to the Rhine, winning much booty with no harassment.
The tributary Slavs became loyal allies.
In 795, when the Saxons broke the peace, the Abotrites and Veleti rebelled with their new ruler against the Saxons.
Witzin died in battle and Charlemagne avenged him by harrying the Eastphalians on the Elbe.
Thrasuco, his successor, led his men to conquest over the Nordalbingians and handed their leaders over to Charlemagne, who honoured him.
The Abotrites remained loyal until Charles' death and fought later against the Danes.
Southeast Slav expeditions
When Charlemagne incorporated much of Central Europe, he brought the Frankish state face to face with the Avars and Slavs in the southeast.
The most southeast Frankish neighbours were Croats, who settled in Lower Pannonia and Duchy of Croatia.
While fighting the Avars, the Franks had called for their support.
During the 790s, he won a major victory over them in 796. Duke Vojnomir of Lower Pannonia aided Charlemagne, and the Franks made themselves overlords over the Croats of northern Dalmatia, Slavonia and Pannonia.
The Frankish commander Eric of Friuli wanted to extend his dominion by conquering the Littoral Croat Duchy.
During that time, Dalmatian Croatia was ruled by Duke Višeslav of Croatia.
In the Battle of Trsat, the forces of Eric fled their positions and were routed by the forces of Višeslav.
Eric was among those killed which was a great blow for the Carolingian Empire.
Charlemagne also directed his attention to the Slavs to the west of the Avar khaganate: the Carantanians and Carniolans.
These people were subdued by the Lombards and Bavarii and made tributaries, but were never fully incorporated into the Frankish state.
Imperium
Coronation
Imperial Coronation of Charlemagne, by Friedrich Kaulbach, 1861
In 799, Pope Leo III had been assaulted by some of the Romans, who tried to put out his eyes and tear out his tongue.
Leo escaped and fled to Charlemagne at Paderborn.
Charlemagne, advised by scholar Alcuin, travelled to Rome, in November 800 and held a synod.
On 23 December, Leo swore an oath of innocence to Charlemagne.
His position having thereby been weakened, the Pope sought to restore his status.
Two days later, at Mass, on Christmas Day (25 December), when Charlemagne knelt at the altar to pray, the Pope crowned him Imperator Romanorum ("Emperor of the Romans") in Saint Peter's Basilica.
In so doing, the Pope rejected the legitimacy of Empress Irene of Constantinople:
Pope Leo III, crowning Charlemagne from Chroniques de France ou de Saint Denis, vol. 1; France, second quarter of 14th century.
When Odoacer compelled the abdication of Romulus Augustulus, he did not abolish the Western Empire as a separate power, but caused it to be reunited with or sink into the Eastern, so that from that time there was a single undivided Roman Empire ... [Pope Leo III and Charlemagne], like their predecessors, held the Roman Empire to be one and indivisible, and proposed by the coronation of [Charlemagne] not to proclaim a severance of the East and West ... they were not revolting against a reigning sovereign, but legitimately filling up the place of the deposed Constantine VI ... [Charlemagne] was held to be the legitimate successor, not of Romulus Augustulus, but of Constantine VI ...Charlemagne's coronation as Emperor, though intended to represent the continuation of the unbroken line of Emperors from Augustus to Constantine VI, had the effect of setting up two separate (and often opposing) Empires and two separate claims to imperial authority.
It led to war in 802, and for centuries to come, the Emperors of both West and East would make competing claims of sovereignty over the whole.
Einhard says that Charlemagne was ignorant of the Pope's intent and did not want any such coronation:
[H]e at first had such an aversion that he declared that he would not have set foot in the Church the day that they [the imperial titles] were conferred, although it was a great feast-day, if he could have foreseen the design of the Pope.
A number of modern scholars, however, suggest that Charlemagne was indeed aware of the coronation; certainly, he cannot have missed the bejewelled crown waiting on the altar when he came to pray—something even contemporary sources support.
Debate
The Throne of Charlemagne and the subsequent German Kings in Aachen Cathedral, Germany
Historians have debated for centuries whether Charlemagne was aware before the coronation of the Pope's intention to crown him Emperor (Charlemagne declared that he would not have entered Saint Peter's had he known, according to chapter twenty-eight of Einhard's Vita Karoli Magni), but that debate obscured the more significant question of why the Pope granted the title and why Charlemagne accepted it.
Collins points out "[t]hat the motivation behind the acceptance of the imperial title was a romantic and antiquarian interest in reviving the Roman Empire is highly unlikely." For one thing, such romance would not have appealed either to Franks or Roman Catholics at the turn of the ninth century, both of whom viewed the Classical heritage of the Roman Empire with distrust.
The Franks took pride in having "fought against and thrown from their shoulders the heavy yoke of the Romans" and "from the knowledge gained in baptism, clothed in gold and precious stones the bodies of the holy martyrs whom the Romans had killed by fire, by the sword and by wild animals", as Pepin III described it in a law of 763 or 764.
Furthermore, the new title—carrying with it the risk that the new emperor would "make drastic changes to the traditional styles and procedures of government" or "concentrate his attentions on Italy or on Mediterranean concerns more generally"—risked alienating the Frankish leadership.
For both the Pope and Charlemagne, the Roman Empire remained a significant power in European politics at this time.
The Byzantine Empire, based in Constantinople, continued to hold a substantial portion of Italy, with borders not far south of Rome.
Charles' sitting in judgment of the Pope could be seen as usurping the prerogatives of the Emperor in Constantinople:
By whom, however, could he [the Pope] be tried? Who, in other words, was qualified to pass judgement on the Vicar of Christ? In normal circumstances the only conceivable answer to that question would have been the Emperor at Constantinople; but the imperial throne was at this moment occupied by Irene.
That the Empress was notorious for having blinded and murdered her own son was, in the minds of both Leo and Charles, almost immaterial: it was enough that she was a woman.
The female sex was known to be incapable of governing, and by the old Salic tradition was debarred from doing so.
As far as Western Europe was concerned, the Throne of the Emperors was vacant: Irene's claim to it was merely an additional proof, if any were needed, of the degradation into which the so-called Roman Empire had fallen.— John Julius Norwich
Coronation of Charlemagne, drawing by Julius Schnorr von Karolsfeld
For the Pope, then, there was "no living Emperor at that time" though Henri Pirenne disputes this saying that the coronation "was not in any sense explained by the fact that at this moment a woman was reigning in Constantinople". Nonetheless, the Pope took the extraordinary step of creating one.
The papacy had since 727 been in conflict with Irene's predecessors in Constantinople over a number of issues, chiefly the continued Byzantine adherence to the doctrine of iconoclasm, the destruction of Christian images; while from 750, the secular power of the Byzantine Empire in central Italy had been nullified.
Coronation of an idealised king, depicted in the Sacramentary of Charles the Bald (about 870)
By bestowing the Imperial crown upon Charlemagne, the Pope arrogated to himself "the right to appoint ... the Emperor of the Romans, ... establishing the imperial crown as his own personal gift but simultaneously granting himself implicit superiority over the Emperor whom he had created." And "because the Byzantines had proved so unsatisfactory from every point of view—political, military and doctrinal—he would select a westerner: the one man who by his wisdom and statesmanship and the vastness of his dominions ... stood out head and shoulders above his contemporaries."
With Charlemagne's coronation, therefore, "the Roman Empire remained, so far as either of them [Charlemagne and Leo] were concerned, one and indivisible, with Charles as its Emperor", though there can have been "little doubt that the coronation, with all that it implied, would be furiously contested in Constantinople".
Alcuin writes hopefully in his letters of an Imperium Christianum ("Christian Empire"), wherein, "just as the inhabitants of the [Roman Empire] had been united by a common Roman citizenship", presumably this new empire would be united by a common Christian faith.
This is the view of Pirenne when he says "Charles was the Emperor of the ecclesia as the Pope conceived it, of the Roman Church, regarded as the universal Church". The Imperium Christianum was further supported at a number of synods all across Europe by Paulinus of Aquileia.
What is known, from the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes, is that Charlemagne's reaction to his coronation was to take the initial steps towards securing the Constantinopolitan throne by sending envoys of marriage to Irene, and that Irene reacted somewhat favourably to them.
The Coronation of Charlemagne, by assistants of Raphael, c. 1516–1517
It is important to distinguish between the universalist and localist conceptions of the empire, which remain controversial among historians.
According to the former, the empire was a universal monarchy, a "commonwealth of the whole world, whose sublime unity transcended every minor distinction"; and the emperor "was entitled to the obedience of Christendom". According to the latter, the emperor had no ambition for universal dominion; his realm was limited in the same way as that of every other ruler, and when he made more far-reaching claims his object was normally to ward off the attacks either of the Pope or of the Byzantine emperor.
According to this view, also, the origin of the empire is to be explained by specific local circumstances rather than by overarching theories.
According to Ohnsorge, for a long time, it had been the custom of Byzantium to designate the German princes as spiritual "sons" of the Romans.
What might have been acceptable in the fifth century had become provoking and insulting to the Franks in the eighth century.
Charles came to believe that the Roman emperor, who claimed to head the world hierarchy of states, was, in reality, no greater than Charles himself, a king as other kings, since beginning in 629 he had entitled himself "Basileus" (translated literally as "king"). Ohnsorge finds it significant that the chief wax seal of Charles, which bore only the inscription: "Christe, protege Carolum regem Francorum [Christ, protect Charles, king of the Franks], was used from 772 to 813, even during the imperial period and was not replaced by a special imperial seal; indicating that Charles felt himself to be just the king of the Franks.
Finally, Ohnsorge points out that in the spring of 813 at Aachen Charles crowned his only surviving son, Louis, as the emperor without recourse to Rome with only the acclamation of his Franks.
The form in which this acclamation was offered was Frankish-Christian rather than Roman.
This implies both independence from Rome and a Frankish (non-Roman) understanding of empire.
May-Harting argues that the Imperial title was Charlemagne's face-saving offer to incorporate the recently conquered Saxons.
Since the Saxons did not have an institution of kingship for their own ethnicity, claiming the right to rule them as King of the Saxons was not possible.
Hence, it is argued, Charlemagne used the supra-ethnic Imperial title to incorporate the Saxons, which helped to cement the diverse peoples under his rule.
Imperial title
Charlemagne used these circumstances to claim that he was the "renewer of the Roman Empire", which had declined under the Byzantines.
In his official charters, Charles preferred the style Karolus serenissimus Augustus a Deo coronatus magnus pacificus imperator Romanum gubernans imperium ("Charles, most serene Augustus crowned by God, the great, peaceful emperor ruling the Roman empire") to the more direct Imperator Romanorum ("Emperor of the Romans").
The title of Emperor remained in the Carolingian family for years to come, but divisions of territory and in-fighting over supremacy of the Frankish state weakened its significance.
The papacy itself never forgot the title nor abandoned the right to bestow it.
When the family of Charles ceased to produce worthy heirs, the Pope gladly crowned whichever Italian magnate could best protect him from his local enemies.
The empire would remain in continuous existence for over a millennium, as the Holy Roman Empire, a true imperial successor to Charles.
Imperial diplomacy
Europe at the death of the Charlemagne 814.
The iconoclasm of the Byzantine Isaurian Dynasty was endorsed by the Franks.
The Second Council of Nicaea reintroduced the veneration of icons under Empress Irene.
The council was not recognised by Charlemagne since no Frankish emissaries had been invited, even though Charlemagne ruled more than three provinces of the classical Roman empire and was considered equal in rank to the Byzantine emperor.
And while the Pope supported the reintroduction of the iconic veneration, he politically digressed from Byzantium.
He certainly desired to increase the influence of the papacy, to honour his saviour Charlemagne, and to solve the constitutional issues then most troubling to European jurists in an era when Rome was not in the hands of an emperor.
Thus, Charlemagne's assumption of the imperial title was not a usurpation in the eyes of the Franks or Italians.
It was, however, seen as such in Byzantium, where it was protested by Irene and her successor Nikephoros I—neither of whom had any great effect in enforcing their protests.
The East Romans, however, still held several territories in Italy: Venice (what was left of the Exarchate of Ravenna), Reggio (in Calabria), Otranto (in Apulia), and Naples (the Ducatus Neapolitanus). These regions remained outside of Frankish hands until 804, when the Venetians, torn by infighting, transferred their allegiance to the Iron Crown of Pippin, Charles' son.
The Pax Nicephori ended.
Nicephorus ravaged the coasts with a fleet, initiating the only instance of war between the Byzantines and the Franks.
The conflict lasted until 810 when the pro-Byzantine party in Venice gave their city back to the Byzantine Emperor, and the two emperors of Europe made peace: Charlemagne received the Istrian peninsula and in 812 the emperor Michael I Rangabe recognised his status as Emperor, although not necessarily as "Emperor of the Romans".
Danish attacks
After the conquest of Nordalbingia, the Frankish frontier was brought into contact with Scandinavia.
The pagan Danes, "a race almost unknown to his ancestors, but destined to be only too well known to his sons" as Charles Oman described them, inhabiting the Jutland peninsula, had heard many stories from Widukind and his allies who had taken refuge with them about the dangers of the Franks and the fury which their Christian king could direct against pagan neighbours.
In 808, the king of the Danes, Godfred, expanded the vast Danevirke across the isthmus of Schleswig.
This defence, last employed in the Danish-Prussian War of 1864, was at its beginning a 30 km (19 mi) long earthenwork rampart.
The Danevirke protected Danish land and gave Godfred the opportunity to harass Frisia and Flanders with pirate raids.
He also subdued the Frank-allied Veleti and fought the Abotrites.
Godfred invaded Frisia, joked of visiting Aachen, but was murdered before he could do any more, either by a Frankish assassin or by one of his own men.
Godfred was succeeded by his nephew Hemming, who concluded the Treaty of Heiligen with Charlemagne in late 811.
Death
See also: Testament of Charlemagne
Proserpina sarcophagus of Charlemagne in the Aachen Cathedral Treasury
A portion of the 814 death shroud of Charlemagne.
It represents a quadriga and was manufactured in Constantinople.
Musée de Cluny, Paris.
In 813, Charlemagne called Louis the Pious, king of Aquitaine, his only surviving legitimate son, to his court.
There Charlemagne crowned his son as co-emperor and sent him back to Aquitaine.
He then spent the autumn hunting before returning to Aachen on 1 November.
In January, he fell ill with pleurisy.
In deep depression (mostly because many of his plans were not yet realised), he took to his bed on 21 January and as Einhard tells it:
He died January twenty-eighth, the seventh day from the time that he took to his bed, at nine o'clock in the morning, after partaking of the Holy Communion, in the seventy-second year of his age and the forty-seventh of his reign.
Frederick II's gold and silver casket for Charlemagne, the Karlsschrein
He was buried that same day, in Aachen Cathedral.
The earliest surviving planctus, the Planctus de obitu Karoli, was composed by a monk of Bobbio, which he had patronised.
A later story, told by Otho of Lomello, Count of the Palace at Aachen in the time of Emperor Otto III, would claim that he and Otto had discovered Charlemagne's tomb: Charlemagne, they claimed, was seated upon a throne, wearing a crown and holding a sceptre, his flesh almost entirely incorrupt.
In 1165, Emperor Frederick I re-opened the tomb again and placed the emperor in a sarcophagus beneath the floor of the cathedral.
In 1215 Emperor Frederick II re-interred him in a casket made of gold and silver known as the Karlsschrein.
Charlemagne's death emotionally affected many of his subjects, particularly those of the literary clique who had surrounded him at Aachen.
An anonymous monk of Bobbio lamented:
From the lands where the sun rises to western shores, people are crying and wailing ... the Franks, the Romans, all Christians, are stung with mourning and great worry ... the young and old, glorious nobles, all lament the loss of their Caesar ... the world laments the death of Charles ... O Christ, you who govern the heavenly host, grant a peaceful place to Charles in your kingdom.
Alas for miserable me.
Louis succeeded him as Charles had intended.
He left a testament allocating his assets in 811 that was not updated prior to his death.
He left most of his wealth to the Church, to be used for charity.
His empire lasted only another generation in its entirety; its division, according to custom, between Louis's own sons after their father's death laid the foundation for the modern states of Germany and France.
Administration
Further information: Carolingian Empire § Government
Organisation
The Carolingian king exercised the bannum, the right to rule and command.
Under the Franks, it was a royal prerogative but could be delegated.
He had supreme jurisdiction in judicial matters, made legislation, led the army, and protected both the Church and the poor.[citation needed] His administration was an attempt to organise the kingdom, church and nobility around him.
As an administrator, Charlemagne stands out for his many reforms: monetary, governmental, military, cultural and ecclesiastical.
He is the main protagonist of the "Carolingian Renaissance".
Military
Charlemagne's success rested primarily on novel siege technologies and excellent logistics rather than the long-claimed "cavalry revolution" led by Charles Martel in 730s.
However, the stirrup, which made the "shock cavalry" lance charge possible, was not introduced to the Frankish kingdom until the late eighth century.
Horses were used extensively by the Frankish military because they provided a quick, long-distance method of transporting troops, which was critical to building and maintaining the large empire.
Economic and monetary reforms
Monogram of Charlemagne, including signum manus, from the subscription of a royal diploma: Signum (monogr.: KAROLVS) Karoli gloriosissimi regis
Charlemagne had an important role in determining Europe's immediate economic future.
Pursuing his father's reforms, Charlemagne abolished the monetary system based on the gold sou.
Instead, he and the Anglo-Saxon King Offa of Mercia took up Pippin's system for pragmatic reasons, notably a shortage of the metal.
The gold shortage was a direct consequence of the conclusion of peace with Byzantium, which resulted in ceding Venice and Sicily to the East and losing their trade routes to Africa.
The resulting standardisation economically harmonised and unified the complex array of currencies that had been in use at the commencement of his reign, thus simplifying trade and commerce.
Denier from the era of Charlemagne, Tours, 793–812
Charlemagne established a new standard, the livre carolinienne (from the Latin libra, the modern pound), which was based upon a pound of silver—a unit of both money and weight—worth 20 sous (from the Latin solidus [which was primarily an accounting device and never actually minted], the modern shilling) or 240 deniers (from the Latin denarius, the modern penny). During this period, the livre and the sou were counting units; only the denier was a coin of the realm.
Charlemagne instituted principles for accounting practice by means of the Capitulare de villis of 802, which laid down strict rules for the way in which incomes and expenses were to be recorded.
Charlemagne applied this system to much of the European continent, and Offa's standard was voluntarily adopted by much of England.
After Charlemagne's death, continental coinage degraded, and most of Europe resorted to using the continued high-quality English coin until about 1100.
Jews in Charlemagne's realm
Early in Charlemagne's rule he tacitly allowed Jews to monopolise money lending.
The lending of money in return for interest was proscribed in 814 because it violated Church law.
Charlemagne introduced the Capitulary for the Jews, a prohibition on Jews engaging in money-lending due to the religious convictions of the majority of his constituents.
Effectively banning money lending was a reversal of his earlier recorded general policy.
Charlemagne also performed a significant number of microeconomic reforms, such as direct control of prices and feudal levies.[citation needed] He invited Italian Jews to immigrate, as royal clients independent of the feudal landowners, and form trading communities in the agricultural regions of Provence and the Rhineland.
Their trading activities augmented the otherwise almost exclusively agricultural economies of these regions.
Charlemagne's Capitulary for the Jews was not representative of his overall economic relationship or attitude towards the Frankish Jews; this relationship evolved throughout his reign.
His personal physician, for example, was Jewish, and he employed one Jew, Isaac, who was his personal representative to the Muslim caliphate of Baghdad.
Education reforms
Charlemagne in a contemporary sketch
Part of Charlemagne's success as a warrior, an administrator and ruler can be traced to his admiration for learning and education.
His reign is often referred to as the Carolingian Renaissance because of the flowering of scholarship, literature, art and architecture that characterise it.
Charlemagne came into contact with the culture and learning of other countries (especially Moorish Spain, Anglo-Saxon England, and Lombard Italy) due to his vast conquests.
He greatly increased the provision of monastic schools and scriptoria (centres for book-copying) in Francia.
Charlemagne was a lover of books, sometimes having them read to him during meals.
He was thought to enjoy the works of Augustine of Hippo.
His court played a key role in producing books that taught elementary Latin and different aspects of the church.
It also played a part in creating a royal library that contained in-depth works on language and Christian faith.
Charlemagne encouraged clerics to translate Christian creeds and prayers into their respective vernaculars as well to teach grammar and music.
Due to the increased interest of intellectual pursuits and the urging of their king, the monks accomplished so much copying that almost every manuscript from that time was preserved.
At the same time, at the urging of their king, scholars were producing more secular books on many subjects, including history, poetry, art, music, law, theology, etc.
Due to the increased number of titles, private libraries flourished.
These were mainly supported by aristocrats and churchmen who could afford to sustain them.
At Charlemagne's court, a library was founded and a number of copies of books were produced, to be distributed by Charlemagne.
Book production was completed slowly by hand and took place mainly in large monastic libraries.
Books were so in demand during Charlemagne's time that these libraries lent out some books, but only if that borrower offered valuable collateral in return.
The privileges of Charlemagne at the Modena Cathedral (containing the monogram of Charlemagne), dated 782
Most of the surviving works of classical Latin were copied and preserved by Carolingian scholars.
Indeed, the earliest manuscripts available for many ancient texts are Carolingian.
It is almost certain that a text which survived to the Carolingian age survives still.
The pan-European nature of Charlemagne's influence is indicated by the origins of many of the men who worked for him: Alcuin, an Anglo-Saxon from York; Theodulf, a Visigoth, probably from Septimania; Paul the Deacon, Lombard; Italians Peter of Pisa and Paulinus of Aquileia; and Franks Angilbert, Angilram, Einhard and Waldo of Reichenau.
Charlemagne promoted the liberal arts at court, ordering that his children and grandchildren be well-educated, and even studying himself (in a time when even leaders who promoted education did not take time to learn themselves) under the tutelage of Peter of Pisa, from whom he learned grammar; Alcuin, with whom he studied rhetoric, dialectic (logic), and astronomy (he was particularly interested in the movements of the stars); and Einhard, who tutored him in arithmetic.
His great scholarly failure, as Einhard relates, was his inability to write: when in his old age he attempted to learn—practising the formation of letters in his bed during his free time on books and wax tablets he hid under his pillow—"his effort came too late in life and achieved little success", and his ability to read—which Einhard is silent about, and which no contemporary source supports—has also been called into question.
In 800, Charlemagne enlarged the hostel at the Muristan in Jerusalem and added a library to it.
He certainly had not been personally in Jerusalem.
Church reforms
See also: Charlemagne and church music
Charlemagne's chapel at Aachen Cathedral
Charlemagne expanded the reform Church's programme unlike his father, Pippin, and uncle, Carloman.
The deepening of the spiritual life was later to be seen as central to public policy and royal governance.
His reform focused on strengthening the church's power structure, improving clergy's skill and moral quality, standardising liturgical practices, improvements on the basic tenets of the faith and the rooting out of paganism.
His authority extended over church and state.
He could discipline clerics, control ecclesiastical property and define orthodox doctrine.
Despite the harsh legislation and sudden change, he had developed support from clergy who approved his desire to deepen the piety and morals of his subjects.
In 809–810, Charlemagne called a church council in Aachen, which confirmed the unanimous belief in the West that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son (ex Patre Filioque) and sanctioned inclusion in the Nicene Creed of the phrase Filioque (and the Son). For this Charlemagne sought the approval of Pope Leo III. The Pope, while affirming the doctrine and approving its use in teaching, opposed its inclusion in the text of the Creed as adopted in the 381 First Council of Constantinople.
This spoke of the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father, without adding phrases such as "and the Son", "through the Son", or "alone". Stressing his opposition, the Pope had the original text inscribed in Greek and Latin on two heavy shields that were displayed in Saint Peter's Basilica.
Writing reforms
Page from the Lorsch Gospels of Charlemagne's reign
During Charles' reign, the Roman half uncial script and its cursive version, which had given rise to various continental minuscule scripts, were combined with features from the insular scripts in use in Irish and English monasteries.
Carolingian minuscule was created partly under the patronage of Charlemagne.
Alcuin, who ran the palace school and scriptorium at Aachen, was probably a chief influence.
The revolutionary character of the Carolingian reform, however, can be overemphasised; efforts at taming Merovingian and Germanic influence had been underway before Alcuin arrived at Aachen.
The new minuscule was disseminated first from Aachen and later from the influential scriptorium at Tours, where Alcuin retired as an abbot.
Political reforms
Charlemagne engaged in many reforms of Frankish governance while continuing many traditional practices, such as the division of the kingdom among sons.
Divisio regnorum
In 806, Charlemagne first made provision for the traditional division of the empire on his death.
For Charles the Younger he designated Austrasia and Neustria, Saxony, Burgundy and Thuringia.
To Pippin, he gave Italy, Bavaria, and Swabia.
Louis received Aquitaine, the Spanish March and Provence.
The imperial title was not mentioned, which led to the suggestion that, at that particular time, Charlemagne regarded the title as an honorary achievement that held no hereditary significance.
Pepin died in 810 and Charles in 811. Charlemagne then reconsidered the matter, and in 813, crowned his youngest son, Louis, co-emperor and co-King of the Franks, granting him a half-share of the empire and the rest upon Charlemagne's own death.
The only part of the Empire that Louis was not promised was Italy, which Charlemagne specifically bestowed upon Pippin's illegitimate son Bernard.
Appearance
Manner
13th-century stained glass depiction of Charlemagne, Strasbourg Cathedral
Einhard tells in his twenty-fourth chapter: Charles was temperate in eating, and particularly so in drinking, for he abominated drunkenness in anybody, much more in himself and those of his household; but he could not easily abstain from food, and often complained that fasts injured his health.
He very rarely gave entertainments, only on great feast-days, and then to large numbers of people.
His meals ordinarily consisted of four courses, not counting the roast, which his huntsmen used to bring in on the spit; he was more fond of this than of any other dish.
While at table, he listened to reading or music.
The subjects of the readings were the stories and deeds of olden time: he was fond, too, of St.
Augustine's books, and especially of the one titled "The City of God".Charlemagne threw grand banquets and feasts for special occasions such as religious holidays and four of his weddings.
When he was not working, he loved Christian books, horseback riding, swimming, bathing in natural hot springs with his friends and family, and hunting.
Franks were well known for horsemanship and hunting skills.
Charles was a light sleeper and would stay in his bed chambers for entire days at a time due to restless nights.
During these days, he would not get out of bed when a quarrel occurred in his kingdom, instead summoning all members of the situation into his bedroom to be given orders.
Einhard tells again in the twenty-fourth chapter: "In summer after the midday meal, he would eat some fruit, drain a single cup, put off his clothes and shoes, just as he did for the night, and rest for two or three hours.
He was in the habit of awaking and rising from bed four or five times during the night."
Language
Main article: Theodiscus
Charlemagne probably spoke a Rhenish Franconian dialect.
He also spoke Latin and had at least some understanding of Greek, according to Einhard (Grecam vero melius intellegere quam pronuntiare poterat, "he could understand Greek better than he could speak it").
The largely fictional account of Charlemagne's Iberian campaigns by Pseudo-Turpin, written some three centuries after his death, gave rise to the legend that the king also spoke Arabic.
Physical appearance
The Carolingian-era equestrian statuette thought to represent Charlemagne (from Metz Cathedral, now in the Louvre)
Charlemagne's personal appearance is known from a good description by Einhard after his death in the biography Vita Karoli Magni.
Einhard states:
He was heavily built, sturdy, and of considerable stature, although not exceptionally so, since his height was seven times the length of his own foot.
He had a round head, large and lively eyes, a slightly larger nose than usual, white but still attractive hair, a bright and cheerful expression, a short and fat neck, and he enjoyed good health, except for the fevers that affected him in the last few years of his life.
Towards the end, he dragged one leg.
Even then, he stubbornly did what he wanted and refused to listen to doctors, indeed he detested them, because they wanted to persuade him to stop eating roast meat, as was his wont, and to be content with boiled meat.
The physical portrait provided by Einhard is confirmed by contemporary depictions such as coins and his 8-inch (20 cm) bronze statuette kept in the Louvre.
In 1861, Charlemagne's tomb was opened by scientists who reconstructed his skeleton and estimated it to be measured 1.95 metres (6 ft 5 in). A 2010 estimate of his height from an X-ray and CT scan of his tibia was 1.84 metres (6 ft 0 in). This puts him in the 99th percentile of height for his period, given that average male height of his time was 1.69 metres (5 ft 7 in). The width of the bone suggested he was gracile in body build.
Dress
Later depiction of Charlemagne in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France
Charlemagne wore the traditional costume of the Frankish people, described by Einhard thus:
He used to wear the national, that is to say, the Frank, dress—next his skin a linen shirt and linen breeches, and above these a tunic fringed with silk; while hose fastened by bands covered his lower limbs, and shoes his feet, and he protected his shoulders and chest in winter by a close-fitting coat of otter or marten skins.
He wore a blue cloak and always carried a sword typically of a golden or silver hilt.
He wore intricately jeweled swords to banquets or ambassadorial receptions.
Nevertheless:
He despised foreign costumes, however handsome, and never allowed himself to be robed in them, except twice in Rome, when he donned the Roman tunic, chlamys, and shoes; the first time at the request of Pope Hadrian, the second to gratify Leo, Hadrian's successor.
On great feast days, he wore embroidery and jewels on his clothing and shoes.
He had a golden buckle for his cloak on such occasions and would appear with his great diadem, but he despised such apparel according to Einhard, and usually dressed like the common people.
Homes
Charlemagne had residences across his kingdom, including numerous private estates that were governed in accordance with the Capitulare de villis.
A 9th-century document detailing the inventory of an estate at Asnapium listed amounts of livestock, plants and vegetables and kitchenware including cauldrons, drinking cups, brass kettles and firewood.
The manor contained seventeen houses built inside the courtyard for nobles and family members and was separated from its supporting villas.
Beatification
Charlemagne was revered as a saint in the Holy Roman Empire and some other locations after the twelfth century.
The Apostolic See did not recognise his invalid canonisation by Antipope Paschal III, done to gain the favour of Frederick Barbarossa in 1165. The Apostolic See annulled all of Paschal's ordinances at the Third Lateran Council in 1179. He is not enumerated among the 28 saints named "Charles" in the Roman Martyrology.
His beatification has been acknowledged as cultus confirmed and is celebrated on 28 January.
Cultural impact
See also: Iconography of Charlemagne
Middle Ages
The author of the Visio Karoli Magni written around 865 uses facts gathered apparently from Einhard and his own observations on the decline of Charlemagne's family after the dissensions war (840–43) as the basis for a visionary tale of Charles' meeting with a prophetic spectre in a dream.
One of a chain of Middle Welsh legends about Charlemagne: Ystorya de Carolo Magno from the Red Book of Hergest (Jesus College, Oxford, MS 111), 14th century
Charlemagne was a model knight as one of the Nine Worthies who enjoyed an important legacy in European culture.
One of the great medieval literary cycles, the Charlemagne cycle or the Matter of France, centres on his deeds—the Emperor with the Flowing Beard of Roland fame—and his historical commander of the border with Brittany, Roland, and the 12 paladins.
These are analogous to, and inspired the myth of, the Knights of the Round Table of King Arthur's court.
Their tales constitute the first chansons de geste.
In the 12th century, Geoffrey of Monmouth based his stories of Arthur largely on stories of Charlemagne.
During the Hundred Years' War in the 14th century, there was considerable cultural conflict in England, where the Norman rulers were aware of their French roots and identified with Charlemagne, Anglo-Saxon natives felt more affinity for Arthur, whose own legends were relatively primitive.
Therefore, storytellers in England adapted legends of Charlemagne and his 12 Peers to the Arthurian tales.
In the Divine Comedy, the spirit of Charlemagne appears to Dante in the Heaven of Mars, among the other "warriors of the faith".
Emperor Charlemagne, by Albrecht Dürer, 1511–1513, Germanisches Nationalmuseum
Charlemagne's capitularies were quoted by Pope Benedict XIV in his apostolic constitution 'Providas' against freemasonry: "For in no way are we able to understand how they can be faithful to us, who have shown themselves unfaithful to God and disobedient to their Priests".
Charlemagne appears in Adelchi, the second tragedy by Italian writer Alessandro Manzoni, first published in 1822.
In 1867, an equestrian statue of Charlemagne was made by Louis Jehotte and was inaugurated in 1868 on the Boulevard d'Avroy in Liège.
In the niches of the neo-roman pedestal are six statues of Charlemagne's ancestors (Sainte Begge, Pépin de Herstal, Charles Martel, Bertrude, Pépin de Landen and Pépin le Bref).
The North Wall Frieze in the courtroom of the Supreme Court of the United States depicts Charlemagne as a legal reformer.
The city of Aachen has, since 1949, awarded an international prize (called the Karlspreis der Stadt Aachen) in honour of Charlemagne.
It is awarded annually to "personages of merit who have promoted the idea of Western unity by their political, economic and literary endeavours." Winners of the prize include Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, the founder of the pan-European movement, Alcide De Gasperi, and Winston Churchill.
In its national anthem, "El Gran Carlemany", the microstate of Andorra credits Charlemagne with its independence.
In 1964, young French singer France Gall released the hit song "Sacré Charlemagne" in which the lyrics blame the great king for imposing the burden of compulsory education on French children.
Charlemagne is quoted by Dr Henry Jones, Sr. in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade.
After using his umbrella to induce a flock of seagulls to smash through the glass cockpit of a pursuing German fighter plane, Henry Jones remarks, "I suddenly remembered my Charlemagne: 'Let my armies be the rocks and the trees and the birds in the sky.'" Despite the quote's popularity since the movie, there is no evidence that Charlemagne actually said this.
A 2010 episode of QI discussed the mathematics completed by Mark Humphrys that calculated that all modern Europeans are highly likely to share Charlemagne as a common ancestor (see most recent common ancestor).
The Economist featured a weekly column entitled "Charlemagne", focusing generally on European affairs and, more usually and specifically, on the European Union and its politics.
Actor and singer Christopher Lee's symphonic metal concept album Charlemagne: By the Sword and the Cross and its heavy metal follow-up Charlemagne: The Omens of Death feature the events of Charlemagne's life.
In April 2014, on the occasion of the 1200th anniversary of Charlemagne's death, public art Mein Karl by Ottmar Hörl at Katschhof place was installed between city hall and the Aachen cathedral, displaying 500 Charlemagne statues.
Charlemagne features as a playable character in the 2014 Charlemagne expansion for the grand strategy video game Crusader Kings 2.
Charlemagne is a playable character in the Mobile/PC Game Rise of Kingdoms.
In the 2018 video game Fate/Extella Link, Charlemagne appears as a Heroic Spirit separated into two Saint Graphs: the adventurous hero Charlemagne, who embodies the fantasy aspect as leader of the Twelve Paladins, and the villain Karl de Große, who embodies the historical aspect as Holy Roman Emperor.
In July 2022, Charlemagne featured as a character in an episode of The Family Histories Podcast, and it references his role as an ancestor of all modern Europeans.
He is portrayed here in later life, and is speaking Latin, which is translated by a device.
He is returned to 9th Century Aquitaine by the end of the episode after a DNA sample has been extracted.
Notes
Alternative birth years for Charlemagne include 742 and 748. There is scholarly debate over this topic, summarised in J. Nelson, Charlemagne (London, 2019), pp. 28-29. See further Karl Ferdinand Werner, Das Geburtsdatum Karls des Großen, in Francia 1, 1973, pp. 115–57 (online Archived 17 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine);Matthias Becher: Neue Überlegungen zum Geburtsdatum Karls des Großen, in: Francia 19/1, 1992, pp. 37–60 (online Archived 17 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine)
Also see: The Great Schism – St.
George Orthodox Cathedral or The Great Schism – Assumption Greek Orthodox Church
Through Beatrice of Vermandois, great-great granddaughter of Pepin of Italy and grandmother of Hugh Capet.
Through Hedwiga, great-great granddaughter of Louis the Pious and mother of Henry the Fowler.
Through Albert II, Count of Namur, great-grandson of Louis IV of France and great-great grandfather of Henry the Blind.
Berengar II of Italy was a great-great-great grandson of Louis the Pious.
Radbot of Klettgau, the founder of the House of Habsburg, married Ida of Lorraine, who descended from Charlemagne through both of her parents; from Cunigunda of France on her father's side and through the Capetians on her mother's side.
In Old Frankish: Keril, Karil or Karal, whence Karl in German and Karel in Dutch.
See:"France :: The hegemony of Neustria". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Britannica.com. 24 April 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2014. 
The nature of Himiltrude's relationship to Charlemagne is a matter of dispute.
Charlemagne's biographer Einhard calls her a "concubine" and Paulus Diaconus speaks of Pippin's birth "before legal marriage",[citation needed] A letter by Pope Stephen III seemingly referring to Charlemagne and his brother Carloman as being already married (to Himiltrude and Gerberga), and advising them not to dismiss their wives has led many historians to believe that Himiltrude and Charlemagne were legally married.[citation needed] However, the words employed by the pope could also simply mean that there had only been a promise of marriage.
The acts of Saint Adalard of Corbie supports this hypothesis, for the monastic vocation of that Saint is described as due to the scruple he had regarding Charlemagne's dismissal of Princess Desiderata of the Lombards which occurred before any consummation of the marriage and possibly before any religious ceremony. (It is unclear whether the marriage ever took place or if  Desiderata only received the homage of the nobility in accordance with her planned future position of Queen of the Franks.) If Saint Adalard was scandalised by this dismissal, it is highly unlikely he would have been unfazed about Himiltrude's dismissal, had she truly been married to Charlemagne.
Historians have interpreted the information in different ways.
Some, such as Pierre Riché, follow Einhard in describing Himiltrude as a concubine.
Others, Dieter Hägemann for example, consider Himiltrude a wife in the full sense.[citation needed] Still others subscribe to the idea that the relationship between the two was "something more than concubinage, less than marriage" and describe it as a Friedelehe, a supposed form of marriage unrecognized by the Church and easily dissolvable.
This form of relationship is often seen in a conflict between Christian marriage and more flexible Germanic concepts.[citation needed]
From 781 Adrian began dating papal documents by the years of Charlemagne's reign, instead of the reign of the Byzantine Emperor.
It was during this visit to Rome that Charlemagne met Alcuin of York and invited him to join his court.
References
Citations
McKitterick 2008, p. 72.
a b c d "Charlemagne – King of the Franks". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 12 April 2020.
Becher 2005, p. 96.
a b c Barbero 2004, pp. 12–.
Bradbury, Jim (2004). The Routledge Companion to Medieval Warfare.
Routledge. pp. 19–. ISBN 978-1-134-59847-2.
Papst Johannes Paul II (2004). "Ansprache von seiner Heiligkeit Papst Johannes Paul II" (in German). Internationaler Karlspreis zu Aachen.
Archived from the original on 17 January 2012.
Gregory 2005, pp. 251–52.
Schleifring, Joachim H.; Galassi, Francesco M.; Habicht, Michael E.; Rühli, Frank J. (2019). "Autopsing history: The mummy of Charlemagne (c. 747 – 814 AD), father of Europe". Economics & Human Biology. 32: 11–17. doi:10.1016/j.ehb.2018.11.002. PMID 30544097. S2CID 56484821.
a b Durant, Will. "King Charlemagne." Archived 24 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Story of Civilization, Vol III, The Age of Faith.
Online version in the Knighthood, Tournaments & Chivalry Resource Library, Ed.
Brian R. Price.
Detlev Schwennicke, Europäische Stammtafeln: Stammtafeln zur Geschichte der Europäischen Staaten, Neue Folge, Band II (Marburg, Germany: J. A. Stargardt, 1984), Tafeln 10, 11
Andrew W. Lewis, 'Dynastic Structures and Capetian Throne-Right: the Views of Giles of Paris', Traditio, Vol. 33 (1977), pp. 246-47 n.94
Donald C. Jackman (2010), Ius Hereditarium Encountered III: Ezzo's Chess Match.
Editions Enlaplage. pp. 9–12.
Tanner, Heather (2004). Families, Friends and Allies: Boulogne and Politics in Northern France and England.
Brill. pp. 263–265. ISBN 9789047402558.
Tanner, Heather J. (1992).  Chibnall, Marjorie (ed.). "The Expansion of the Power and Influence of the Counts of Boulogne under Eustace II". Anglo-Norman Studies - XIV.Proceeding of the Battle Conference 1991. The Boydell Press: 251–286.
Bouchard, Constance (2010). Those of My Blood: Creating Noble Families in Medieval Francia.
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 129–131. ISBN 9780812201406.
Wells, John (3 April 2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman.
ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0.
Nelson 2019, p. 2.
Becher 2003, pp. 42–43. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBecher2003 (help)
Barbero 2004, p. 413.
Fried 2016, p. 4.
a b c Anderson, Perry (2013). Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism.
Verso Books.
ISBN 978-1-78168-008-7.
Waldman & Mason 2006, pp. 270, 274–75.
Collins 1999, pp. 161–72.
Fouracre 2005, pp. 5–8.
Frassetto 2003, p. 292.
Frassetto 2003, p. 292–93.
Waldman & Mason 2006, p. 271.
a b "France :: Pippin III – Encyclopædia Britannica". Britannica.com. 24 April 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2014.
The background relies heavily on Einhard, putative & 741–829, Years 745–755 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFEinhard,_putative741–829 (help)
Oman 1914, pp. 409–10.
a b Baldwin, Stewart (2007–2009). "Charlemagne". The Henry Project.
Archived from the original on 10 December 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2009.
Matheson, Lister M. (2012). Icons of the Middle Ages: Rulers, Writers, Rebels, and Saints.
ABC-CLIO. pp. 145–. ISBN 978-0-313-34080-2.
Northen Magill, Frank; Aves, Alison (1998). Dictionary of World Biography: The Middle Ages.
Routledge. pp. 226–. ISBN 978-1-57958-041-4.
"Charlemagne". History.com.
Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Route Gottfried von Bouillon e.V. – deutsche Sektion Archived 2 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Route-gottfried-von-bouillon.de.
Retrieved on 7 September 2013.
Dictionary of World Biography: The Middle Ages, Volume 2. Routledge. 1998. p. 226. ISBN 978-1-579-58041-4.
Collins 1998, pp. 32–.
Matheson, Lister M. (2012). Icons of the Middle Ages: Rulers, Writers, Rebels, and Saints.
ABC-CLIO. pp. 152–. ISBN 978-0-313-34080-2.
Fichtenau, Heinrich (1957). The Carolingian Empire.
University of Toronto Press. pp. 39–. ISBN 978-0-8020-6367-0.
Einhard 1880, ch. 4. Plan of This Work.
Einhard 1880, ch. 1. The Merovingian Family.
The Annales uses maiores domus, a plural followed by a singular: one house, two chief officers.
Einhard, putative & 741–829, Year 742 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFEinhard,_putative741–829 (help)
Einhard, putative & 741–829, Years 745, 746. sfn error: no target: CITEREFEinhard,_putative741–829 (help)
a b c d Einhard 1880, ch. 6. Lombard War.
Collins 1998, pp. 32–33.
Einhard 1880, ch. 3. Charlemagne's Accession.
Einhard, putative & 741–829, Year 768. sfn error: no target: CITEREFEinhard,_putative741–829 (help)
Collins 1987, p. 32.
Collins 1987, p. 105.
Douglass & Bilbao 2005, pp. 36–37.
Collins 1987, p. 100.
Collins 2004, pp. 130–31, "The sequence of events...has not been assisted by the tendency of the historians to take all the information...from all the available sources and combine it to produce a single synthetic account...As a rule of thumb, reliability, and also brevity of narrative, are usually in direct proportion to chronological proximity."
James & Ibn al-Qūṭiyya 2009, p. 49.
Collins 2004, pp. 131–32.
Douglass & Bilbao 2005, p. 40.
Einhard 2007, p. 24. sfn error: no target: CITEREFEinhard2007 (help)
Lewis, David Levering (2009). God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe, 570–1215. W.W. Norton. p. 177. ISBN 978-0-393-33356-5.
Freeman, Edward Augustus (1904). Western Europe in the Eighth Century & Onward: An Aftermath.
Macmillan and Company, limited. p. 74.
Russell 1930, p. 88.
McKitterick 2008, pp. 118–25.
Einhard, Vita Karoli Magni, ch. 20
Joseph-Épiphane Darras, Histoire Générale de l'Église, Tome 17, p.434-441.
Pierre Riché, The Carolingians, p.86.
Thorpe, Lewis.
Two Lives of Charlemagne. p. 185. By [Hildigard] Charlemagne had four sons and four daughters, according to Paul the Deacon: one son, the twin of Lewis, called Lothar, died as a baby and is not mentioned by Einhard; two daughters, Hildigard and Adelhaid, died as babies, so that Einhard appears to err in one of his names, unless there were really five daughters.
Asimov, I. (1968). The Dark Ages.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 157.
Asimov 1968, p. 168.
a b Charlemagne, Encyclopædia Britannica
Gelfand, Dale Evva (2003). Charlemagne.
Infobase Publishing.
ISBN 978-1438117850.
Butt, John J. (2002). Daily Life in the Age of Charlemagne.
Greenwood Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-0313316685.
Runciman, Steven. "The Empress Irene the Athenian." Medieval Women.
Ed.
Derek Baker.
Oxford: Ecclesiastical History Society, 1978.
Becher 2005, p. 122.
McKitterick 2008, p. 91.
Kohn, George C. (2006). Dictionary of Wars.
Infobase Publishing. pp. 125–. ISBN 978-1-4381-2916-7.
Einhard (1912–1913). "Einhard: The Wars of Charlemagne, c. 770–814".  In William Stearns Davis (ed.). Readings in Ancient History: Illustrative Extracts from the Sources, 2 Vols.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon. pp. 373–375 – via Medieval Sourcebook, Fordham University.
Hodgkin 1889, p. 69.
Hodgkin 1889, pp. 85–86.
a b c Lewis, Archibald Ross (1965). The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society 718–1050. University of Texas Press.
Bachrach, Bernard (2013). Charlemagne's Early Campaigns (768–777): A Diplomatic and Military Analysis.
Leiden: Brill. 2013, p. 234
Lewis 1965, p. 40.
Heck, Gene W. (2007). When Worlds Collide: Exploring the Ideological and Political Foundations of the Clash of Civilizations.
Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 172–. ISBN 978-0-7425-5856-4.
France, John, "The Composition and Raising of the Armies of Charlemagne", in Journal of Medieval Military History, ed. B. Bachrach (2002), pp. 63–65
Revised annals of the kingdom of the Franks, ed. and trans.
King, Sources, p. 110
Oebele Vries, "Friesland", Medieval Germany: An Encyclopedia (Routledge, 2001), pp. 252–56.
Frassetto 2003, "Widukind" p. 368.
A. M. L. Fadda (2000), "The Vernacular and the Propagation of the Faith in Anglo-Saxon Missionary Activity", Studies in Church History.
Subsidia, 13, 1–15.
a b Historical Atlas of Knights and Castles, Cartographica, Dr Ian Barnes, 2007 pp. 30, 31
Goldberg, Eric Joseph (2006). Struggle for Empire: Kingship and Conflict Under Louis the German, 817–876. Cornell University Press. pp. 48–. ISBN 978-0-8014-3890-5.
Collins 1998, pp. 87–.
a b c Bachrach, Bernard S.; Clifford J. Rogers; Kelly DeVries (2002). Journal of Medieval Military History.
Boydell Press.
ISBN 978-0-85115-909-6.
a b Bruce Ross, James (April 1945). "Two Neglected Paladins of Charlemagne: Erich of Friuli and Gerold of Bavaria Speculum, Vol. 20, No. 2". Speculum. 20 (2): 212–35. doi:10.2307/2854596. JSTOR 2854596. S2CID 163300685.
Sinor, Denis (1990). The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia.
New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 219. ISBN 978-0-521-24304-9.
a b Fine, John Van Antwerp (1991). The early medieval Balkans: a critical survey from the sixth to the late twelfth century.
University of Michigan Press. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-472-08149-3.
a b Klaić, Vjekoslav (1988). Povijest Hrvata: od najstarijih vremena do svršetka XIX stoljeća.
Treće doba: vladanje kraljeva iz raznih porodica (1301–1526). Knj. 2 (in Croatian). Zagreb: Nakladni zavod Matice Hrvatske. pp. 63–64. ISBN 978-86-401-0051-9.
Einhard 1880,[full citation needed].
Einhard Life of Charles the Great.[full citation needed]
a b Shahan, Thomas; Macpherson, Ewan (1908). "Charlemagne". The Catholic Encyclopedia.
New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Retrieved 1 January 2013 – via New Advent.
James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce, The Holy Roman Empire, 1864, pp. 62–64
Einhard Vita Karoli Magni [Life of Charlemagne] ch. 28.
Tierney, Brian.
The Crisis of the Church and State 1050–1300. University of Toronto Press, 1964. p. 17.
Meek, Harry. "Charlemagne's Imperial Coronation: The Enigma of Sources and Use to Historians". 
Einhard Vita Karoli Magni [Life of Charlemagne] ch. 28. "[...] he said that he would have refused to enter the church that day, although it was a major festival, had he been aware of the Pope's plans".
Collins 1987, p. 147.
a b Collins 1987, p. 151.
Collins 1987, p. 149.
Norwich 1992b, p. 378.
Norwich 1992b, p. 379.
Pirenne 2012, p. 234n.
Norwich, John Julius (2011). The Popes: A History.
Random House. p. 55. ISBN 978-0701182908.
Norwich 1992a, p. 3.
Pirenne 2012, p. 233.
Butler, Alban; Hugh Farmer, David (1995). "St Paulinus of Aquileia, Bishop (c. 726–804)". Butler's Lives of the Saints: New Full Edition.
Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 74–75. ISBN 978-0-86012-250-0.
Collins 1987, p. 153.
"Holy Roman Empire". Britannica.com. 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Ohnsorge, Werner (1959). "Das Zweikaiserproblem im früheren Mittelalter.
Die Bedeutung des byzantinischen Reiches für die Entwicklung der Staatsidee in Europa".  In Richard E. Sullivan (ed.). The coronation of Charlemagne: what did it signify?. Boston: D.C. Heath and Company. pp. 15–31. LCCN 59014499.
Henry Mayr-Harting (1996). "Charlemagne, the Saxons, and the Imperial Coronation of 800". The English Historical Review. 111 (444 November): 1113–1133.
Cf.
Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Diplomata Karolinorum I, 77ff.; title used from 801 onward.
Cantor 2015, pp. 194–95, 212.
Davies1996, pp. 316–17.
a b Becher, Matthias (2011). "Die Außenpolitik Karls des Großen.
Zwischen Krieg und Diplomatie". Damals (in German) (2011 Special Volume): 33–46.
eum imperatorem et basileum appellantes, cf.
Royal Frankish Annals, a. 812.
Eichmann, Eduard (1942). Die Kaiserkrönung im Abendland: ein Beitrag zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des kirchlichen Rechte, der Liturgie und der Kirchenpolitik.
Echter-Verlag. p. 33.
Einhard Life of Charlemagne, p. 59.[full citation needed]
Godman, Peter (1985). Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance.
Duckworth. pp. 206–11. ISBN 978-0-7156-1768-7.
Chamberlin, Russell.
The Emperor, Charlemagne.
Dutton 2004.
von Hellfeld, Matthias. "Die Geburt zweier Staaten – Die Straßburger Eide vom 14. Februar 842". Deutsche Welle (in German). Retrieved 22 October 2011.
Theodore Evergates, "Ban, Banalité", in Joseph R. Strayer (ed.), Dictionary of the Middle Ages (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1983), vol. 2, p. 69.
Bowlus, Charles R. (2006). The Battle of Lechfeld and Its Aftermath, August 955: The End of the Age of Migrations in the Latin West.
Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 49–. ISBN 978-0-7546-5470-4.
a b Hooper, Nicholas; Bennett, Matthew (1996). The Cambridge Illustrated Atlas of Warfare: The Middle Ages, 768–1487. Cambridge University Press. pp. 12–. ISBN 978-0-521-44049-3.
"Charlemagne created a peaceful environment for Jews in his kingdom.
Charlemagne fostered a system where the Christian majority could procure credit through Jewish constituents.
Christians were forbidden to loan money at an interest rate, a restriction not shared by the Jews". Worldology.com. 25 April 2013. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Scheindlin, Raymond P., A Short History of the Jewish People, Oxford University Press, 1998, pp. 101–04
"Charlemagne". JewishEncyclopedia.com.
Retrieved 14 January 2014.
"Charlemagne". 
Charlemagne and Anglo-Saxon England, Joanna Story, Charlemagne: Empire and Society, ed.
Joanna Story, (Manchester University Press, 2005), 195.
Bullough, Donald A. (December 2003). "Charlemagne's court library revisited". Early Medieval Europe. 12 (4): 339–63. doi:10.1111/j.0963-9462.2004.00141.x.
S2CID 247668930.
"Charlemagne | Holy Roman emperor [747?–814]". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved 17 November 2015.
"Charlemagne's court library revisited". Early Medieval Europe. 12 (4): 339–63. 2003. doi:10.1111/j.0963-9462.2004.00141.x.
S2CID 247668930.
a b Dutton 2016.
Karl der Grosse und das Erbe der Kulturen, Band 1999, Franz-Reiner Erkens, Akademie Verlag, 2001.
Saint-Denis zwischen Adel und König, Rolf Große, Thorbecke, Stuttgart 2002.
"Charlemagne". Britannica.com. 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Sterk, Andrea (1 October 1988). "The Silver Shields of Pope Leo III: A Reassessment of the Evidence". Comitatus: A Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies. 19: 62–79.
"The Filioque: A Church-Dividing Issue?: An Agreed Statement of the North American Orthodox-Catholic Consultation". Usccb.org.
Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Adolf Harnack (1 June 2005). "2. The Controversy regarding the Filioque and Pictures". History of Dogma – Volume V. Retrieved 14 January 2014 – via CCEL.org.
Gerald Bray (1983). "The Filioque Clause in History and Theology" (PDF). Tyndale Bulletin. 34: 91–144 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2011.
Schulman, Jana K. (2002). The rise of the medieval world, 500–1300: a biographical dictionary.
Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. p. xx.
ISBN 978-0313011085.
Noble, Thomas F. X., Charlemagne and Louis the Pious, Penn State Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0271035734, p. 10
Einhard 1880, ch. 24. Habits.
a b c Bhote, Tehmina (2005). Charlemagne: The Life and Times of an Early Medieval Emperor.
The Rosen Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-1404201613.
Keller, R.E. (1964). "The Language of the Franks". Bulletin of the John Rylands Library. 47 (1): 101–22 . doi:10.7227/BJRL.47.1.6.
Chambers, William Walker; Wilkie, John Ritchie (2014). A Short History of the German Language (RLE Linguistics E: Indo-European Linguistics). London: Routledge. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-317-91852-3.
McKitterick 2008, p. 318.
Einhard 1880, ch. 25. Studies.
Van Herwaarden, J. (2003). Between Saint James and Erasmus: Studies in Late-Medieval Religious Life : Devotions and Pilgrimages in the Netherlands.
Brill. p. 475. ISBN 978-90-04-12984-9.
Barbero 2004, p. 116.
Barbero 2004, p. 118.
Ruhli, F.J.; Blumich, B.; Henneberg, M. (2010). "Charlemagne was very tall, but not robust". Economics and Human Biology. 8 (2): 289–90. doi:10.1016/j.ehb.2009.12.005. PMID 20153271.
a b c Einhard 1880, ch. 23. Dress.
"Internet History Sourcebooks Project". legacy.fordham.edu.
Retrieved 2 May 2016.
Shahan, Thomas; Macpherson, Ewan (1908). "Charlemagne". The Catholic Encyclopedia.
New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Retrieved 1 January 2013 – via New Advent.
In some parts of the empire popular affection placed him among the saints.
For political purposes and to please Frederick Barbarossa he was canonised (1165) by the antipope Paschal III, but this act was never ratified by insertion of his feast in the Roman Breviary or by the Universal Church; his cultus, however, was permitted at Aachen [Acta SS., 28 Jan., 3d ed., II, 303–07, 490–93, 769; his office is in Canisius, "Antiq.
Lect.", III (2)]
Martyrologium Romanum, Ad Formam Editionis Typicae Scholiis Historicis Instructum. 1940. p. 685.
Hoche, Dominique T (2012). "Charlemagne".  In Lister M. Matheson (ed.). Icons of the Middle Ages: Rulers, Writers, Rebels, and Saints.
Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood. pp. 143–74 . ISBN 978-0-313-34080-2. Retrieved 1 January 2013.
"Arthurian legend". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Fraley, Michael (1993). Arthur: King of Britain.
Caliber Comics.
ISBN 978-1626657984."To anyone familiar with the early Medieval Period of European history, Geoffrey's story begins to sound familiar here.
It should.
It seems to be based, in large part, on the historical adventures of Charlemagne, the Frankish King of the Ninth Century, who eventually became Emperor.
Looking at Charlemagne's life and personality, it becomes clear that he and Geoffrey's Arthur are practically twins."
Charlemagne, King Arthur and Contested National Identity in English Romances Modelling his narrative on earlier Middle English texts, the English AMA-poet, appropriates aspects of the historical reality of Charlemagne and refashions them to fit Arthur, creating a hero that the English can claim as their own.
Dorothy L. Sayers, Paradise, notes on Canto XVII.
Benedict XIV, Providas, 1751
Banham 1998, p. 678. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBanham1998 (help)
"US Supreme Court Courtroom Friezes" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2019.
Chamberlin, Russell, The Emperor Charlemagne, p. ???[page needed]
"Quid plura? | "Flying birds, excellent birds ..."". Quidplura.com. 5 August 2007. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2014.
Common ancestors of all humans.
Humphrysfamilytree.com.
Retrieved on 7 September 2013.
"Where do The Economist's unusual names come from?". The Economist. 5 September 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2017.
Michaels, Sean (5 January 2010). "Christopher Lee to release 'symphonic metal' album, The man who played Dracula and Saruman is to tell the story of Charlemagne, the first Holy Roman Emperor, through the universal language of metal". The Guardian.
Retrieved 1 January 2013. The man who played Dracula, Saruman and the Man with the Golden Gun is now to portray Charlemagne—through the medium of song.
Actor Christopher Lee is to release an album of 'symphonic metal', telling the story of his own direct ancestor, the first Holy Roman Emperor.
Farrell, John (28 May 2012). "Christopher Lee Celebrates 90th Birthday By Recording Heavy Metal". Forbes.
Retrieved 1 January 2013. 'Let Legend Mark Me As King;' and 'The Ultimate Sacrifice', arranged by Judas Priest lead guitarist Richie Falkner, are part of a new album, Charlemagne: The Omens of Death.
"Mein Karl". Euregio Aachen. 18 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2014.
"Crusader Kings II: Charlemagne | Paradox Interactive". 
"Rex Magnus: Servant". Retrieved 9 November 2021.
"Charlemagne: Servant". Retrieved 9 November 2021.
"S03EP08: The Great (Bonus)". familyhistoriespodcast.com.
The Family Histories Podcast.
Retrieved 19 July 2022.
Bibliography
Charlemagne, from Encyclopædia Britannica, full-article, latest edition.
Barbero, Alessandro (2004). Charlemagne: Father of a Continent.
Translated by Allan Cameron.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-23943-2.
Becher, Matthias (2005). Charlemagne.
Translated by Bachrach, David S. New Haven: Yale University Press.
ISBN 978-0-300-09796-2.
Cantor, Norman F. (2015). Civilization of the Middle Ages: Completely Revised and Expanded Edition, A. HarperCollins.
ISBN 978-0-06-244460-8.
Collins, Roger (1987) . The Basques.
New York: Basil Blackwell Inc.
Collins, Roger (1998). Charlemagne.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Collins, Roger (1999). Early Medieval Europe, 300–1000. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-0-33365-808-6.
Collins, Roger (2004). Visigothic Spain, 409–711. History of Spain.
Malden, MA; Oxford: Blackwell Pub.
Davies, Norman (1996). Europe: A History.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-820171-7.
Douglass, William A; Bilbao, Jon (2005). Amerikanuak: Basques in the New World.
The Basque series.
Reno & Las Vegas: University of Nevada Press.
ISBN 978-0874176254.
Dutton, P. (2016). Charlemagne's Mustache: And Other Cultural Clusters of a Dark Age.
Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-137-06228-4.
Dutton, Paul Edward (2004). Carolingian Civilization: A Reader.
Broadview Press.
ISBN 978-1-55111-492-7.
Einhard, putative (741–829). Annales Regni Francorum (Annales Laurissenses Maiores). Medieval Latin.
The Latin Library.
Einhard (1880) [n.d.]. Einhard: The Life of Charlemagne.
Translated by Samuel Epes Turner.
New York: Harper & Brothers – via Medieval Sourcebook, Fordham University.
Fouracre, Paul (2005). "The Long Shadow of the Merovingians".  In Joanna Story (ed.). Charlemagne: Empire and Society.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
ISBN 978-0-71907-089-1.
Frassetto, Michael (2003). Encyclopedia of Barbarian Europe: Society in Transformation.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-263-9.
Fried, Johannes (2016). Charlemagne. trans.
Peter Lewis.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0674737396.
Ganshof, F. L. (1971). The Carolingians and the Frankish Monarchy: Studies in Carolingian History. trans.
Janet Sondheimer.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8014-0635-5.
Gregory, Timothy E. (2005). A History of Byzantium.
Malden, MA; Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-63123-513-2.
Hodgkin, Thomas (1889). Italy and Her Invaders.
Vol. 8. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
James, David; Ibn al-Qūṭiyya, Muḥammad b ʻUmar (2009). Early Islamic Spain: The History of Ibn al-Qūṭiyya: a study of the unique Arabic manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris, with a translation, notes and comments.
London and New York: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-41547-552-5.
Lewers Langston, Aileen; Buck, J. Orton  Jr., eds. (1974). Pedigrees of Some of the Emperor Charlemagne's Descendants.
Baltimore: Genealogical Pub.
Co.
McKitterick, Rosamond (2008). Charlemagne: The Formation of a European Identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-1-139-47285-2.
Molina Figueras, Joan (2004). "Arnau de Montrodon y la catedral de San Carlomagno: sobre la imagen y el culto al emperador carolingio en Gerona". Anuario de Estudios Medievales (in Spanish). 34 (1): 417–54. doi:10.3989/aem.2004.v34.i1.190.
Nelson, Janet L. (2019). King and Emperor: A New Life of Charlemagne.
London.
Norwich, John Julius (1992a). Byzantium: The Apogee.
Knopf.
ISBN 978-0-394-53779-5.
Norwich, John Julius (1992b). Byzantium: The Early Centuries.
Penguin Books.
Oman, Charles (1914). The Dark Ages, 476–918 (6th ed.). London: Rivingtons.
Painter, Sidney (1953). A History of the Middle Ages, 284–1500. New York: Knopf.
Pirenne, Henri (2012) [1937 posthumous]. Mohammed and Charlemagne.
Mineola, NY: Dover.
ISBN 978-0-486-12225-0.
Riché, Pierre (1993). The Carolingians: A Family Who Forged Europe.
Middle Ages Series.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
ISBN 978-0-8122-1342-3.
Russell, Charles Edward (1930). Charlemagne, first of the moderns.
Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Santosuosso, Antonio (2004). Barbarians, Marauders, and Infidels: The Ways of Medieval Warfare.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
ISBN 978-0-8133-9153-3.
Sarti, Laury (2016). "Frankish Romanness and Charlemagne's Empire". Speculum. 91 (4): 1040–58. doi:10.1086/687993. S2CID 163283337.
Scholz, Bernhard Walter; Barbara Rogers (1970). Carolingian Chronicles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard's Histories.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
ISBN 978-0-472-08790-7. Comprises the Annales regni Francorum and The History of the Sons of Louis the Pious
Sypeck, Jeff (2006). Becoming Charlemagne: Europe, Baghdad, and The Empires of A.D. 800. New York: Ecco/HarperCollins.
ISBN 978-0-06-079706-5.
Tierney, Brian (1964). The Crisis of Church and State 1050–1300. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
ISBN 978-0-8020-6701-2.
Waldman, Carl; Mason, Catherine (2006). Encyclopedia of European Peoples.
New York: Facts on File.
ISBN 978-0816049646.
Wilson, Derek (2005). Charlemagne: The Great Adventure.
London: Hutchinson.
ISBN 978-0-09-179461-3.
External links
Charlemagne  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
The Making of Charlemagne's Europe (freely available database of prosopographical and socio-economic data from legal documents dating to Charlemagne's reign, produced by King's College London)
Einhard. "Vita Karoli Magni". Medieval Latin (in Latin). The Latin Library.
Bakker, Marco (2003–2011). "Charlemagne". Reportret.
The Sword of Charlemagne (myArmoury.com article)
Snell, Melissa (2011). "Charlemagne Picture Gallery". Medieval History.
About.com.
Charter given by Charlemagne for St.
Emmeram's Abbey showing the Emperor's seal, 22.2.794 . Taken from the collections of the Lichtbildarchiv älterer Originalurkunden at Marburg University
Works by or about Charlemagne at Internet Archive
Works by Charlemagne at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
An interactive map of Charlemagne's travels
Holland, Arthur William; Bryant, Margaret (1911). "Charlemagne" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 5 (11th ed.). pp. 891–897.
"Carolus Magnus imperator". Repertorium "Historical Sources of the German Middle Ages" (Geschichtsquellen des deutschen Mittelalters).
Emperor Charles I the GreatCarolingian dynasty Died: 28 January 814
Regnal titles
Preceded byPippin the Short
King of the Franks 768–814with Carloman I  (768–771)and Charles the Younger  (800–811)
Succeeded byLouis the Pious
Preceded byDesiderius
King of the Lombards 774–814with Pepin Carloman  (781–810)Bernard  (810–818)
New creationProblem of two emperorsConstantine VI as undisputedByzantine emperor
Holy Roman Emperor 800–814with Louis the Pious  (813–814)
History of the Catholic ChurchGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
By country or region
Ecclesiastical history
Timeline
Papacy
Papal primacy
Catholic ecumenical councils
First seven
Catholic Bible
Biblical canon
Vulgate
Crusading movement
History of the Roman Curia
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Catholic culture
Art
Role in civilization
Vatican City
Papal States
Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Early Church(30–325/476)Origins andApostolic Age (30–100)
Jesus
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Holy Spirit
Mary
John the Baptist
Apostles in the New Testament
Commissioning
Peter
John
Paul
Stephen
Council of Jerusalem
Split with Judaism
New Testament
Background
Gospels
Acts
Pauline epistles
General epistles
Revelation
Ante-Nicene period (100–325)
Persecution
Church Fathers
Apostolic Fathers
Pope Clement I
Polycarp
Ignatius
Irenaeus
Justin Martyr
Canon
Tertullian
Origen
Late antiquity(313–476)Great Church(180–451)Romanstate church(380-451)
Constantine the Great
Christianity
Arian controversy
Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran
Old St.
Peter's Basilica
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Early Middle Ages
Benedict of Nursia
Monasticism
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant
Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism
High Middle Ages
Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Universities
Scholasticism
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Late Middle Ages
Thomas Aquinas
Pope Boniface VIII
Western Schism
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI
Age of Discovery
ReformationCatholic Reformation
Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine
Thirty Years' War
Baroque Period to theFrench Revolution
Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Age of Enlightenment
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution
Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum
Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Nazism
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Mother Teresa
Communism
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day
Sexual abuse scandal
Islam
World Youth Day
Pope Benedict XVI
Pope Francis
COVID-19 pandemic
Vatican City portal
Catholicism portal
Holy Roman Emperors
Charlemagne (Charles I)
Louis I
Lothair I
Louis II
Charles II
Charles III
Guy
Lambert
Arnulf
Louis III
Berengar
Otto I
Otto II
Otto III
Henry II
Conrad II
Henry III
Henry IV
Henry V
Lothair III
Frederick I
Henry VI
Otto IV
Frederick II
Henry VII
Louis IV
Charles IV
Sigismund
Frederick III
Maximilian I
Charles V
Ferdinand I
Maximilian II
Rudolph II
Matthias
Ferdinand II
Ferdinand III
Leopold I
Joseph I
Charles VI
Charles VII
Francis I
Joseph II
Leopold II
Francis II
Category
Kings of Italy between 476 and 1556Non-dynastic
Odoacer (476–493)
Ostrogoths
Theodoric (493–526)
Athalaric (526–534)
Theodahad (534–536)
Vitiges (536–540)
Ildibad (540–541)
Eraric (541)
Totila (541–552)
Teia (552–553)
Lombards
Alboin (568–572)
Cleph (572–574)
Interregnum (574–584)
Authari (584–590)
Agilulf (590–616)
Adaloald (616–626)
Arioald (626–636)
Rothari (636-652)
Rodoald (652–653)
Aripert I (653–661)
Godepert (661–662)
Perctarit (661–662)
Grimoald (662–671)
Garibald (671)
Perctarit (671–688)
Cunipert (688–689)
Alahis (689)
Cunipert (689–700)
Liutpert (700–702)
Raginpert (701)
Aripert II (702–712)
Ansprand (712)
Liutprand (712–744)
Hildeprand (744)
Ratchis (744–749)
Aistulf (749–756)
Desiderius (756–774)
Carolingians
Charlemagne (774–814)
Pepin (781–810)
Bernard (810–818)
Lothair I (818–855)
Louis I (855–875)
Charles II (875–877)
Carloman (877–879)
Charles III (879–887)
Arnulf (896–899)
Ratold (896)
Non-dynastic(title disputed 887–933)
Unruochings: Berengar I (887–924)
Guideschi: Guy (889–894)
Lambert (891–897)
Welfs: Rudolph (922–933)
Bosonids: Louis II (900–905)
Hugh (926–947)
Lothair II (945–950)
Anscarids: Berengar II (950–963)
Adalbert (950–963)
Kingdom of Italy within  the Holy Roman Empire (962–1556)
Otto I (962–973)
Otto II (980–983)
Otto III (996–1002)
Arduin I (1002–1014)
Henry II (1004–1024)
Conrad II (1026–1039)
Henry III (1039–1056)
Henry IV (1056–1105)
Conrad II (1093–1101)
Henry V (1106–1125)
Lothair III (or II) (1125–1137)
Conrad III (1138–1152)
Frederick I (1154–1186)
Henry VI (1186–1197)
Otto IV (1209–1212)
Frederick II (1212–1250)
Henry VII (1311–1313)
Louis IV (1327–1347)
Charles IV (1355–1378)
Sigismund (1431–1437)
Frederick III (1452–1493)
Charles V (1530–1556)
Monarchs of France
Detailed family tree
Simplified family tree
List of Frankish kings
List of French monarchs
Merovingians (509–751)
Clovis I
Childebert I
Chlothar I
Charibert I
Guntram
Chilperic I
Sigebert I
Childebert II
Chlothar II
Dagobert I
Sigebert II
Clovis II
Chlothar III
Childeric II
Theuderic III
Clovis IV
Childebert III
Dagobert III
Chilperic II
Chlothar IV
Theuderic IV
Childeric III
Carolingians,Robertians and Bosonids (751–987)
Pepin the Short
Carloman I
Charlemagne (Charles I)
Louis I
Charles II
Louis II
Louis III
Carloman II
Charles the Fat
OdoR
Charles III
Robert IR
RudolphB
Louis IV
Lothair
Louis V
House of Capet (987–1328)
Hugh Capet
Robert II
Henry I
Philip I
Louis VI
Louis VII
Philip II
Louis VIII
Louis IX
Philip III
Philip IV
Louis X
John I
Philip V
Charles IV
House of Valois (1328–1589)
Philip VI
John II
Charles V
Charles VI
Charles VII
Louis XI
Charles VIII
Louis XII
Francis I
Henry II
Francis II
Charles IX
Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422–1453)
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589–1792)
Henry IV
Louis XIII
Louis XIV
Louis XV
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
House of Bonaparte (1804–1814; 1815)
Napoleon I
Napoleon II
House of Bourbon (1814–1815; 1815–1830)
Louis XVIII
Charles X
Louis XIX
Henry V
House of Orléans (1830–1848)
Louis Philippe I
Louis Philippe II
House of Bonaparte (1852–1870)
Napoleon III
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics.
King Charlemagne and the Matter of FranceKey people
Charlemagne
Roland
Ganelon
Naimon
Oliver
Renaud de Montauban
Paladins andother characters
Agolant
Agrican
Albracca
Angelica
Astolfo
Atlantes
Aude
Aymon
Baligant
Blancandrin
Bradamante
Bramimonde
Brandimarte
Brunello
Charlot
Doon de Mayence
Ferragut
Fierabras
Garin de Monglane
Girart de Roussillon
Huon of Bordeaux
Marfisa
Marsile
Maugris
Melissa
Oberon
Ogier the Dane
Pinabel
Rodomonte
Ruggiero
Sacripante
Turpin
William of Gellone
Zerbino
Horses and other animals
Barbamouche
Bayard
Gaignun
Gramimond
Hippogriff
Marmorie
Passecerf
Rabicano
Sautperdu
Sorel
Tachëbrun
Tencendur
Veillantif
Swords and other objects
Almace
Curtana
Durendal
Hauteclere
Joyeuse
Murgleys
Olifant
Précieuse
Places
Aachen
La Brèche de Roland
Roncevaux Pass
Chansons de gesteand other works
The Song of Roland
Le Pèlerinage de Charlemagne
Chanson de Guillaume
Gormond et Isembart
The Four Sons of Aymon
Karlamagnús saga
Orlando Innamorato
Orlando Furioso
Morgante
Pippinids, Arnulfings and CarolingiansLegend:  ≡ "father of",* ≡ "brother of" Begga, the daughter of Pepin I, married Ansegisel, the son of Arnulf of Metz, and was the mother of Pepin II.Pippinids
Carloman  Pepin I  Grimoald I  Childebert the Adopted
Arnulfings
Arnulf of Metz  Chlodulf of Metz
Ansegisel  Pepin II, his sons
Drogo, sons
Arnulf
Hugh of Champagne
Godfrey
Pepin
Grimoald I, son
Theudoald
Charles Martel, sons
Carloman
Pepin III
Grifo
Bernard
Jerome
Remigius
Childebrand I, son
Nibelung I  Nibelungids
EarlyCarolingiansSons of Charles MartelCarloman, son
Drogo
Pepin III, sonsCharlemagne, sons
Pepin the Hunchback
Charles the Younger
Pepin
Louis the Pious
Lothair
Drogo
Hugh
Theoderic
Carloman, son
Pepin
Pepin
Bernard, sons
Wala
Adalhard
Bernhar
CarolingianEmpireSons of CharlemagnePepin, son
Bernard  Pepin, Count of Vermandois  Counts of Vermandois
Louis the Pious,sons
Arnulf of Sens
Lothair I, sons
Louis II of Italy  Ermengard  Louis the Blind  BosonidsLothair II  HughCharles
Pepin I, son
Pepin II
Louis the German,sons
Carloman  Arnulf  Louis the Child
Ratold
Zwentibold  Godfrey
OttoLouis the Younger   Louis
HughCharles the Fat  BernardRatold  Adalbert
Charles the Bald,sons
Louis the Stammerer  Louis III
Carloman II
Charles the SimpleCharles the ChildCarlomanLothair the Lame
Drogo
Pepin
Charles
WestFranciaWest Francia was in the hands of the Robertians from 888 until 898. It was the last Carolingian kingdom.Charles the Simple, sons
Louis IV
Arnulf
Drogo
Rorico
Louis IV, sons
Lothair IV
Charles
Louis
Charles of Lorraine
Henry
Lothair IV, sons
Louis V
Arnulf
Charles of Lorraine, sons
Otto
Louis
Charles
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Taiwan
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Romania
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Netherlands
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
RERO (Switzerland)
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 22:41 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
