Circulatory system - Wikipedia
Circulatory system
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Organ system for circulating blood in animals
This article is about the animal circulatory system.
For plants, see Vascular tissue.
Several terms redirect here.
For the song by Ed Sheeran, see Bloodstream (song). For the album by Youves, see Cardio-Vascular.
Circulatory systemThe human circulatory system (simplified). Red indicates oxygenated blood carried in arteries.
Blue indicates deoxygenated blood carried in veins.
Capillaries join the arteries and veins.IdentifiersMeSHD002319TA98A12.0.00.000TA23891FMA7161Anatomical terminology[edit on Wikidata]
The blood circulatory system is a system of organs that includes the heart, blood vessels, and blood which is circulated throughout the entire body of a human or other vertebrate.
It includes the cardiovascular system, or vascular system, that consists of the heart and blood vessels (from Greek kardia meaning heart, and from Latin vascula meaning vessels). The circulatory system has two divisions, a systemic circulation or circuit, and a pulmonary circulation or circuit.
Some sources use the terms cardiovascular system and vascular system interchangeably with the circulatory system.
The network of blood vessels are the great vessels of the heart including large elastic arteries, and large veins; other arteries, smaller arterioles, 
capillaries that join with venules (small veins), and other veins.
The circulatory system is closed in vertebrates, which means that the blood never leaves the network of blood vessels.
Some invertebrates such as arthropods have an open circulatory system.
Diploblasts such as sponges, and comb jellies lack a circulatory system. 
Blood is a fluid consisting of plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets that is circulated around the body carrying oxygen and nutrients to the tissues, and waste materials away.
Circulated nutrients include proteins and minerals, other components transported are gases such as oxygen, and  carbon dioxide, hormones, and hemoglobin;  providing nourishment, help in the immune system to fight diseases, and in maintaining homeostasis by stabilizing temperature and natural pH. 
In vertebrates, complementary to the circulatory system is the lymphatic system.
This system carries excess plasma filtered from the capillaries as interstitial fluid between cells, away from the body tissues in an accessory route to return the excess fluid back to the blood circulation as lymph.  The passage of lymph takes much longer than that of blood.
The lymphatic system is a subsystem that is essential for the functioning of the blood circulatory system; without it the blood would become depleted of fluid.
The lymphatic system works together with the immune system.
Unlike the  closed circulatory system, the lymphatic system is an open system.
Some sources describe it as a secondary circulatory system.  
The circulatory system can be affected by many cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiologists are medical professionals which specialise in the heart, and cardiothoracic surgeons specialise in operating on the heart and its surrounding areas.
Vascular surgeons focus on disorders of the blood vessels, and lymphatic vessels.
Contents
Structure
Blood flow in the pulmonary and systemic circulations showing capillary networks in the torso sections
The circulatory system includes the heart, blood vessels, and blood.
The cardiovascular system in all vertebrates, consists of the heart and blood vessels.
The circulatory system is further divided into two major circuits – a pulmonary circulation, and a systemic circulation.
The pulmonary circulation is a circuit loop from the right heart taking deoxygenated blood to the lungs where it is oxygenated and returned to the left heart.
The systemic circulation is a circuit loop that delivers oxygenated blood from the left heart to the rest of the body, and returns deoxygenated blood back to the right heart via large veins known as the venae cavae.
The systemic circulation can also be defined as two parts – a macrocirculation and a microcirculation.
An average adult contains five to six quarts (roughly 4.7 to 5.7 liters) of blood, accounting for approximately 7% of their total body weight.
Blood consists of plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
The digestive system also works with the circulatory system to provide the nutrients the system needs to keep the heart pumping.
Further circulatory routes are associated, such as the coronary circulation to the heart itself, the cerebral circulation to the brain, renal circulation to the kidneys, and bronchial circulation to the bronchi in the lungs.
The human circulatory system is closed, meaning that the blood is contained within the vascular network.
Nutrients travel through tiny blood vessels of the microcirculation to reach organs.
The lymphatic system is an essential subsystem of the circulatory system consisting of a network of lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, organs, tissues and circulating lymph.
This subsystem is an open system.
A major function is to carry the lymph, draining and returning interstitial fluid into the lymphatic ducts back to the heart for return to the circulatory system.
Another major function is working together with the immune system to provide defense against pathogens.
Heart
Main article: Heart
Diagram of the human heart showing blood oxygenation to the pulmonary and systemic circulation
The heart pumps blood to all parts of the body providing nutrients and oxygen to every cell, and removing waste products.
The left heart pumps oxygenated blood returned from the lungs to the rest of the body in the systemic circulation.
The right heart pumps deoxygenated blood to the lungs in the pulmonary circulation.
In the human heart there is one atrium and one ventricle for each circulation, and with both a systemic and a pulmonary circulation there are four chambers in total: left atrium, left ventricle, right atrium and right ventricle.
The right atrium is the upper chamber of the right side of the heart.
The blood that is returned to the right atrium is deoxygenated (poor in oxygen) and passed into the right ventricle to be pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs for re-oxygenation and removal of carbon dioxide.
The left atrium receives newly oxygenated blood from the lungs as well as the pulmonary vein which is passed into the strong left ventricle to be pumped through the aorta to the different organs of the body.
Pulmonary circulation
Main article: Pulmonary circulation
The pulmonary circulation as it passes from the heart.
Showing both the pulmonary and bronchial arteries.
The pulmonary circulation is the portion of the cardiovascular system in which oxygen-depleted blood is pumped away from the heart, via the pulmonary artery, to the lungs and returned, oxygenated, to the heart via the pulmonary vein.
Oxygen-deprived blood from the superior and inferior vena cava enters the right atrium of the heart and flows through the tricuspid valve (right atrioventricular valve) into the right ventricle, from which it is then pumped through the pulmonary semilunar valve into the pulmonary artery to the lungs.
Gas exchange occurs in the lungs, whereby CO2 is released from the blood, and oxygen is absorbed.
The pulmonary vein returns the now oxygen-rich blood to the left atrium.
A separate system known as the bronchial circulation supplies blood to the tissue of the larger airways of the lung.
Systemic circulation
Capillary bed
Diagram of capillary network joining the arterial system with the venous system.
The systemic circulation is a circuit loop that delivers oxygenated blood from the left heart to the rest of the body through the aorta.
Deoxygenated blood is returned in the systemic circulation to the right heart via two large veins, the inferior vena cava and the superior vena cava, where it is pumped from the right atrium into the pulmonary circulation for oxygenation.
The systemic circulation can also be defined as having two parts – a macrocirculation and a microcirculation.
Blood vessels
The blood vessels of the circulatory system are the arteries, veins, and capillaries.
The large arteries and veins that take blood to, and away from the heart are known as the great vessels.
Arteries
Main article: Artery
See also: Arterial tree
Depiction of the heart, major veins and arteries constructed from body scans
Oxygenated blood enters the systemic circulation when leaving the left ventricle, through the aortic semilunar valve.
The first part of the systemic circulation is the aorta, a massive and thick-walled artery.
The aorta arches and gives branches supplying the upper part of the body after passing through the aortic opening of the diaphragm at the level of thoracic ten vertebra, it enters the abdomen.
Later, it descends down and supplies branches to abdomen, pelvis, perineum and the lower limbs.
The walls of the aorta are elastic.
This elasticity helps to maintain the blood pressure throughout the body.
When the aorta receives almost five litres of blood from the heart, it recoils and is responsible for pulsating blood pressure.
As the aorta branches into smaller arteries, their elasticity goes on decreasing and their compliance goes on increasing.
Capillaries
Arteries branch into small passages called arterioles and then into the capillaries.
The capillaries merge to bring blood into the venous system.
Veins
Main article: Vein
Capillaries merge into venules, which merge into veins.
The venous system feeds into the two major veins: the superior vena cava – which mainly drains tissues above the heart – and the inferior vena cava – which mainly drains tissues below the heart.
These two large veins empty into the right atrium of the heart.
Portal veins
Main article: Portal venous system
The general rule is that arteries from the heart branch out into capillaries, which collect into veins leading back to the heart.
Portal veins are a slight exception to this.
In humans the only significant example is the hepatic portal vein which combines from capillaries around the gastrointestinal tract where the blood absorbs the various products of digestion; rather than leading directly back to the heart, the hepatic portal vein branches into a second capillary system in the liver.
Coronary circulation
Main article: Coronary circulation
The heart itself is supplied with oxygen and nutrients through a small "loop" of the systemic circulation and derives very little from the blood contained within the four chambers.
The coronary circulation system provides a blood supply to the heart muscle itself.
The coronary circulation begins near the origin of the aorta by two coronary arteries: the right coronary artery and the left coronary artery.
After nourishing the heart muscle, blood returns through the coronary veins into the coronary sinus and from this one into the right atrium.
Back flow of blood through its opening during atrial systole is prevented by Thebesian valve.
The smallest cardiac veins drain directly into the heart chambers.
Cerebral circulation
Main article: Cerebral circulation
The brain has a dual blood supply, an anterior and a posterior circulation from arteries at its front and back.
The anterior circulation arises from the internal carotid arteries to supply the front of the brain.
The posterior circulation arises from the vertebral arteries, to supply the back of the brain and brainstem.
The circulation from the front and the back join (anastomise) at the circle of Willis.
Renal circulation
The renal circulation is the blood supply to the kidneys, contains many specialized blood vessels and receives around 20% of the cardiac output.
It branches from the abdominal aorta and returns blood to the ascending vena cava.
Development
Main articles: Heart development, Vasculogenesis, and Fetal circulation
The development of the circulatory system starts with vasculogenesis in the embryo.
The human arterial and venous systems develop from different areas in the embryo.
The arterial system develops mainly from the aortic arches, six pairs of arches that develop on the upper part of the embryo.
The venous system arises from three bilateral veins during weeks 4 – 8 of embryogenesis.
Fetal circulation begins within the 8th week of development.
Fetal circulation does not include the lungs, which are bypassed via the truncus arteriosus.
Before birth the fetus obtains oxygen (and nutrients) from the mother through the placenta and the umbilical cord.
Arteries
Main article: Aortic arches
Animation of a typical human red blood cell cycle in the circulatory system.
This animation occurs at a faster rate (~20 seconds of the average 60-second cycle) and shows the red blood cell deforming as it enters capillaries, as well as the bars changing color as the cell alternates in states of oxygenation along the circulatory system.
The human arterial system originates from the aortic arches and from the dorsal aortae starting from week 4 of embryonic life.
The first and second aortic arches regress and form only the maxillary arteries and stapedial arteries respectively.
The arterial system itself arises from aortic arches 3, 4 and 6 (aortic arch 5 completely regresses).
The dorsal aortae, present on the dorsal side of the embryo, are initially present on both sides of the embryo.
They later fuse to form the basis for the aorta itself.
Approximately thirty smaller arteries branch from this at the back and sides.
These branches form the intercostal arteries, arteries of the arms and legs, lumbar arteries and the lateral sacral arteries.
Branches to the sides of the aorta will form the definitive renal, suprarenal and gonadal arteries.
Finally, branches at the front of the aorta consist of the vitelline arteries and umbilical arteries.
The vitelline arteries form the celiac, superior and inferior mesenteric arteries of the gastrointestinal tract.
After birth, the umbilical arteries will form the internal iliac arteries.
Veins
Further information: Vasculogenesis
The human venous system develops mainly from the vitelline veins, the umbilical veins and the cardinal veins, all of which empty into the sinus venosus.
Function
Main article: Blood § Oxygen transport
About 98.5% of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human, breathing air at sea-level pressure, is chemically combined with hemoglobin molecules.
About 1.5% is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to hemoglobin.
The hemoglobin molecule is the primary transporter of oxygen in vertebrates.
Clinical significance
Further information: List of circulatory system conditions
Many diseases affect the circulatory system.
These include a number of cardiovascular diseases, affecting the heart and blood vessels; hematologic diseases that affect the blood, such as anemia, and lymphatic diseases affecting the lymphatic system.
Cardiologists are medical professionals which specialise in the heart, and cardiothoracic surgeons specialise in operating on the heart and its surrounding areas.
Vascular surgeons focus on the blood vessels.
Cardiovascular disease
Main article: Cardiovascular disease
Diseases affecting the cardiovascular system are called cardiovascular disease.
Many of these diseases are called "lifestyle diseases" because they develop over time and are related to a person's exercise habits, diet, whether they smoke, and other lifestyle choices a person makes.
Atherosclerosis is the precursor to many of these diseases.
It is where small atheromatous plaques build up in the walls of medium and large arteries.
This may eventually grow or rupture to occlude the arteries.
It is also a risk factor for acute coronary syndromes, which are diseases that are characterised by a sudden deficit of oxygenated blood to the heart tissue.
Atherosclerosis is also associated with problems such as aneurysm formation or splitting ("dissection") of arteries.
Another major cardiovascular disease involves the creation of a clot, called a "thrombus". These can originate in veins or arteries.
Deep venous thrombosis, which mostly occurs in the legs, is one cause of clots in the veins of the legs, particularly when a person has been stationary for a long time.
These clots may embolise, meaning travel to another location in the body.
The results of this may include pulmonary embolus, transient ischaemic attacks, or stroke.
Cardiovascular diseases may also be congenital in nature, such as heart defects or persistent fetal circulation, where the circulatory changes that are supposed to happen after birth do not.
Not all congenital changes to the circulatory system are associated with diseases, a large number are anatomical variations.
Investigations
Magnetic resonance angiography of aberrant subclavian artery
The function and health of the circulatory system and its parts are measured in a variety of manual and automated ways.
These include simple methods such as those that are part of the cardiovascular examination, including the taking of a person's pulse as an indicator of a person's heart rate, the taking of blood pressure through a sphygmomanometer or the use of a stethoscope to listen to the heart for murmurs which may indicate problems with the heart's valves.
An electrocardiogram can also be used to evaluate the way in which electricity is conducted through the heart.
Other more invasive means can also be used.
A cannula or catheter inserted into an artery may be used to measure pulse pressure or pulmonary wedge pressures.
Angiography, which involves injecting a dye into an artery to visualise an arterial tree, can be used in the heart (coronary angiography) or brain.
At the same time as the arteries are visualised, blockages or narrowings may be fixed through the insertion of stents, and active bleeds may be managed by the insertion of coils.
An MRI may be used to image arteries, called an MRI angiogram.
For evaluation of the blood supply to the lungs a CT pulmonary angiogram may be used.
Vascular ultrasonography may be used to investigate vascular diseases affecting the venous system and the arterial system including the diagnosis of stenosis, thrombosis or venous insufficiency.
An intravascular ultrasound using a catheter is also an option.
Surgery
This section needs expansion.
You can help by adding to it.  (March 2015)
There are a number of surgical procedures performed on the circulatory system:
Coronary artery bypass surgery
Coronary stent used in angioplasty
Vascular surgery
Vein stripping
Cosmetic procedures
Cardiovascular procedures are more likely to be performed in an inpatient setting than in an ambulatory care setting; in the United States, only 28% of cardiovascular surgeries were performed in the ambulatory care setting.
Other animals
The open circulatory system of the grasshopper – made up of a heart, vessels and hemolymph.
The hemolymph is pumped through the heart, into the aorta, dispersed into the head and throughout the hemocoel, then back through the ostia in the heart and the process repeated.
While humans, as well as other vertebrates, have a closed blood circulatory system (meaning that the blood never leaves the network of arteries, veins and capillaries), some invertebrate groups have an open circulatory system containing a heart but limited blood vessels.
The most primitive, diploblastic animal phyla lack circulatory systems.
An additional transport system, the lymphatic system, which is only found in animals with a closed blood circulation,  is an open system providing an accessory route for excess interstitial fluid to be returned to the blood.
The blood vascular system first appeared probably in an ancestor of the triploblasts over 600 million years ago, overcoming the time-distance constraints of diffusion, while endothelium evolved in an ancestral vertebrate some 540–510 million years ago.
Open circulatory system
See also: Hemolymph
In arthropods, the open circulatory system is a system in which a fluid in a cavity called the hemocoel bathes the organs directly with oxygen and nutrients, with there being no distinction between blood and interstitial fluid; this combined fluid is called hemolymph or haemolymph.
Muscular movements by the animal during locomotion can facilitate hemolymph movement, but diverting flow from one area to another is limited.
When the heart relaxes, blood is drawn back toward the heart through open-ended pores (ostia).
Hemolymph fills all of the interior hemocoel of the body and surrounds all cells.
Hemolymph is composed of water, inorganic salts (mostly sodium, chloride, potassium, magnesium, and calcium), and organic compounds (mostly carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids). The primary oxygen transporter molecule is hemocyanin.
There are free-floating cells, the hemocytes, within the hemolymph.
They play a role in the arthropod immune system.
Flatworms, such as this Pseudoceros bifurcus, lack specialized circulatory organs.
Closed circulatory system
Two-chambered heart of a fish
The circulatory systems of all vertebrates, as well as of annelids (for example, earthworms) and cephalopods (squids, octopuses and relatives) always keep their circulating blood enclosed within heart chambers or blood vessels and are classified as closed, just as in humans.
Still, the systems of fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds show various stages of the evolution of the circulatory system.
Closed systems permit blood to be directed to the organs that require it.
In fish, the system has only one circuit, with the blood being pumped through the capillaries of the gills and on to the capillaries of the body tissues.
This is known as single cycle circulation.
The heart of fish is, therefore, only a single pump (consisting of two chambers).
In amphibians and most reptiles, a double circulatory system is used, but the heart is not always completely separated into two pumps.
Amphibians have a three-chambered heart.
In reptiles, the ventricular septum of the heart is incomplete and the pulmonary artery is equipped with a sphincter muscle.
This allows a second possible route of blood flow.
Instead of blood flowing through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, the sphincter may be contracted to divert this blood flow through the incomplete ventricular septum into the left ventricle and out through the aorta.
This means the blood flows from the capillaries to the heart and back to the capillaries instead of to the lungs.
This process is useful to ectothermic (cold-blooded) animals in the regulation of their body temperature.
Mammals, birds and crocodilians show complete separation of the heart into two pumps, for a total of four heart chambers; it is thought that the four-chambered heart of birds and crocodilians evolved independently from that of mammals.
Double circulatory systems permit blood to be repressurized after returning from the lungs, speeding up delivery of oxygen to tissues.
No circulatory system
Circulatory systems are absent in some animals, including flatworms.
Their body cavity has no lining or enclosed fluid.
Instead, a muscular pharynx leads to an extensively branched digestive system that facilitates direct diffusion of nutrients to all cells.
The flatworm's dorso-ventrally flattened body shape also restricts the distance of any cell from the digestive system or the exterior of the organism.
Oxygen can diffuse from the surrounding water into the cells, and carbon dioxide can diffuse out.
Consequently, every cell is able to obtain nutrients, water and oxygen without the need of a transport system.
Some animals, such as jellyfish, have more extensive branching from their gastrovascular cavity (which functions as both a place of digestion and a form of circulation), this branching allows for bodily fluids to reach the outer layers, since the digestion begins in the inner layers.
History
Human anatomical chart of blood vessels, with heart, lungs, liver and kidneys included.
Other organs are numbered and arranged around it.
Before cutting out the figures on this page, Vesalius suggests that readers glue the page onto parchment and gives instructions on how to assemble the pieces and paste the multilayered figure onto a base "muscle man" illustration. "Epitome", fol.14a.
HMD Collection, WZ 240 V575dhZ 1543.
The earliest known writings on the circulatory system are found in the Ebers Papyrus (16th century BCE), an ancient Egyptian medical papyrus containing over 700 prescriptions and remedies, both physical and spiritual.
In the papyrus, it acknowledges the connection of the heart to the arteries.
The Egyptians thought air came in through the mouth and into the lungs and heart.
From the heart, the air travelled to every member through the arteries.
Although this concept of the circulatory system is only partially correct, it represents one of the earliest accounts of scientific thought.
In the 6th century BCE, the knowledge of circulation of vital fluids through the body was known to the Ayurvedic physician Sushruta in ancient India.
He also seems to have possessed knowledge of the arteries, described as 'channels' by Dwivedi & Dwivedi (2007). The valves of the heart were discovered by a physician of the Hippocratean school around the 4th century BCE. However, their function was not properly understood then.
Because blood pools in the veins after death, arteries look empty.
Ancient anatomists assumed they were filled with air and that they were for the transport of air.
The Greek physician, Herophilus, distinguished veins from arteries but thought that the pulse was a property of arteries themselves.
Greek anatomist Erasistratus observed that arteries that were cut during life bleed.
He ascribed the fact to the phenomenon that air escaping from an artery is replaced with blood that enters between veins and arteries by very small vessels.
Thus he apparently postulated capillaries but with reversed flow of blood.[citation needed]
In 2nd-century AD Rome, the Greek physician Galen knew that blood vessels carried blood and identified venous (dark red) and arterial (brighter and thinner) blood, each with distinct and separate functions.
Growth and energy were derived from venous blood created in the liver from chyle, while arterial blood gave vitality by containing pneuma (air) and originated in the heart.
Blood flowed from both creating organs to all parts of the body where it was consumed and there was no return of blood to the heart or liver.
The heart did not pump blood around, the heart's motion sucked blood in during diastole and the blood moved by the pulsation of the arteries themselves.
Galen believed that the arterial blood was created by venous blood passing from the left ventricle to the right by passing through 'pores' in the interventricular septum, air passed from the lungs via the pulmonary artery to the left side of the heart.
As the arterial blood was created 'sooty' vapors were created and passed to the lungs also via the pulmonary artery to be exhaled.
In 1025, The Canon of Medicine by the Persian physician, Avicenna, "erroneously accepted the Greek notion regarding the existence of a hole in the ventricular septum by which the blood traveled between the ventricles." Despite this, Avicenna "correctly wrote on the cardiac cycles and valvular function", and "had a vision of blood circulation" in his Treatise on Pulse.[verification needed] While also refining Galen's erroneous theory of the pulse, Avicenna provided the first correct explanation of pulsation: "Every beat of the pulse comprises two movements and two pauses.
Thus, expansion : pause : contraction : pause. [...] The pulse is a movement in the heart and arteries ... which takes the form of alternate expansion and contraction."
In 1242, the Arabian physician, Ibn al-Nafis described the process of pulmonary circulation in greater, more accurate detail than his predecessors, though he believed, as they did, in the notion of vital spirit (pneuma), which he believed was formed in the left ventricle.
Ibn al-Nafis stated in his Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon:
"...the blood from the right chamber of the heart must arrive at the left chamber but there is no direct pathway between them.
The thick septum of the heart is not perforated and does not have visible pores as some people thought or invisible pores as Galen thought.
The blood from the right chamber must flow through the vena arteriosa (pulmonary artery) to the lungs, spread through its substances, be mingled there with air, pass through the arteria venosa (pulmonary vein) to reach the left chamber of the heart and there form the vital spirit..."
In addition, Ibn al-Nafis had an insight into what would become a larger theory of the capillary circulation.
He stated that "there must be small communications or pores (manafidh in Arabic) between the pulmonary artery and vein," a prediction that preceded the discovery of the capillary system by more than 400 years.
Ibn al-Nafis' theory, however, was confined to blood transit in the lungs and did not extend to the entire body.
Michael Servetus was the first European to describe the function of pulmonary circulation, although his achievement was not widely recognized at the time, for a few reasons.
He firstly described it in the "Manuscript of Paris" (near 1546), but this work was never published.
And later he published this description, but in a theological treatise, Christianismi Restitutio, not in a book on medicine.
Only three copies of the book survived but these remained hidden for decades, the rest were burned shortly after its publication in 1553 because of persecution of Servetus by religious authorities.
Better known discovery of pulmonary circulation was by Vesalius's successor at Padua, Realdo Colombo, in 1559.
Image of veins from William Harvey's Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus, 1628
Finally, the English physician William Harvey, a pupil of Hieronymus Fabricius (who had earlier described the valves of the veins without recognizing their function), performed a sequence of experiments and published his Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus in 1628, which "demonstrated that there had to be a direct connection between the venous and arterial systems throughout the body, and not just the lungs.
Most importantly, he argued that the beat of the heart produced a continuous circulation of blood through minute connections at the extremities of the body.
This is a conceptual leap that was quite different from Ibn al-Nafis' refinement of the anatomy and bloodflow in the heart and lungs." This work, with its essentially correct exposition, slowly convinced the medical world.
However, Harvey was not able to identify the capillary system connecting arteries and veins; these were later discovered by Marcello Malpighi in 1661.
In 1956, André Frédéric Cournand, Werner Forssmann and Dickinson W. Richards were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine "for their discoveries concerning heart catheterization and pathological changes in the circulatory system."
In his Nobel lecture, Forssmann credits Harvey as birthing cardiology with the publication of his book in 1628.
In the 1970s, Diana McSherry developed computer-based systems to create images of the circulatory system and heart without the need for surgery.
See also
Medicine portal
Cardiology – Branch of medicine dealing with the heart
Cardiovascular drift
Cardiac cycle – Performance of the human heart
Vital heat
Cardiac muscle – Muscular tissue of heart in vertebrates
Major systems of the human body
Amato Lusitano
Vascular resistance – Force from blood vessels that affects blood flow
References
a b Hall, John E. (2011). Guyton and Hall textbook of medical physiology (Twelfth ed.). Philadelphia, Pa. p. 4. ISBN 9781416045748.
a b Saladin, Kenneth S. (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 520. ISBN 9780071222075.
a b Saladin, Kenneth S. (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 540. ISBN 9780071222075.
How does the blood circulatory system work? - InformedHealth.org - NCBI Bookshelf.
Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG). 31 January 2019. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022.
a b Sherwood, Lauralee (2011). Human Physiology: From Cells to Systems.
Cengage Learning. pp. 401–. ISBN 978-1-133-10893-1. Archived from the original on 2020-07-29. Retrieved 2015-06-27.
"The lymphatic system and cancer | Cancer Research UK". 29 October 2014. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022.
Saladin, Kenneth S. (2011). Human anatomy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 610. ISBN 9780071222075.
Cardiovascular+System at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
Pratt, Rebecca. "Cardiovascular System: Blood". AnatomyOne.
Amirsys, Inc.
Archived from the original on 2017-02-24.
a b c d Guyton, Arthur; Hall, John (2000). Guyton Textbook of Medical Physiology (10 ed.). ISBN 978-0-7216-8677-6.
a b Lawton, Cassie M. (2019). The Human Circulatory System.
Cavendish Square Publishing. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-50-265720-6. Archived from the original on 2022-01-28. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
Gartner, Leslie P.; Hiatt, James L. (2010). Concise Histology E-Book.
Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 166. ISBN 978-1-43-773579-6. Archived from the original on 2022-01-28. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
Alberts, B.; Johnson, A.; Lewis, J.; Raff, M.; Roberts, K.; Walters, P. (2002). Molecular Biology of the Cell (4th ed.). New York and London: Garland Science.
ISBN 978-0-8153-3218-3. Archived from the original on 2006-08-17. Retrieved 2017-08-30.
Standring, Susan (2016). Gray's anatomy : the anatomical basis of clinical practice (Forty-first ed.). [Philadelphia]. p. 1024. ISBN 9780702052309.
Iaizzo, Paul A (2015). Handbook of Cardiac Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices.
Springer. p. 93. ISBN 978-3-31919464-6. Archived from the original on 2017-10-11. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
Iaizzo, Paul A (2015). Handbook of Cardiac Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices.
Springer. pp. 5, 77. ISBN 978-3-31919464-6. Archived from the original on 2017-10-11. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
Iaizzo, Paul A (2015). Handbook of Cardiac Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices.
Springer. pp. 5, 41–43. ISBN 978-3-31919464-6. Archived from the original on 2017-10-11. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
a b Vaz, Mario; Raj, Toni; Anura, Kurpad (2016). Guyton & Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology - E-Book: A South Asian Edition.
Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 255. ISBN 978-8-13-124665-8. Archived from the original on 2022-01-28. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
National Institutes of Health. "What Are the Lungs?". nih.gov.
Archived from the original on 2014-10-04.
State University of New York (February 3, 2014). "The Circulatory System". suny.edu.
Archived from the original on February 3, 2014.
Mcconnell, Thomas H.; Hull, Kerry L. (2020). Human Form, Human Function: Essentials of Anatomy & Physiology, Enhanced Edition.
Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 432. ISBN 978-1-28-421805-3. Archived from the original on 2022-01-28. Retrieved 2022-01-28.
Parkinson, Clayton Floyd; Huether, Sue E.; McCance, Kathryn L. (2000). Understanding Pathophysiology.
Mosby. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-32-300792-4.
Whitaker, Kent (2001). "Fetal Circulation". Comprehensive Perinatal and Pediatric Respiratory Care.
Delmar Thomson Learning. pp. 18–20. ISBN 978-0-7668-1373-1.[permanent dead link]
Wier LM, Steiner CA, Owens PL (April 17, 2015). "Surgeries in Hospital-Owned Outpatient Facilities, 2012". HCUP Statistical Brief #188. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Archived from the original on March 12, 2015.
Monahan-Earley, R.; Dvorak, A. M.; Aird, W. C. (2013). "Evolutionary origins of the blood vascular system and endothelium". Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. 11: 46–66. doi:10.1111/jth.12253. PMC 5378490. PMID 23809110.
Bailey, Regina. "Circulatory System". biology.about.com.
Archived from the original on 2016-11-29. Retrieved 2022-02-23.
Simões-Costa, Marcos S.; Vasconcelos, Michelle; Sampaio, Allysson C.; Cravo, Roberta M.; Linhares, Vania L.; Hochgreb, Tatiana; Yan, Chao Y.I.; Davidson, Brad; Xavier-Neto, José (2005). "The evolutionary origin of cardiac chambers". Developmental Biology. 277 (1): 1–15. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.09.026. PMID 15572135.
"Crocodilian Hearts". National Center for Science Education.
October 24, 2008. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved October 3, 2015.
a b Dwivedi, Girish & Dwivedi, Shridhar (2007). "History of Medicine: Sushruta – the Clinician – Teacher par Excellence" Archived October 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci Vol. 49 pp. 243–244,  National Informatics Centre (Government of India).
Shoja, M.M.; Tubbs, R.S.; Loukas, M.; Khalili, M.; Alakbarli, F.; Cohen-Gadol, A.A. (2009). "Vasovagal syncope in the Canon of Avicenna: The first mention of carotid artery hypersensitivity". International Journal of Cardiology. 134 (3): 297–301. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.02.035. PMID 19332359.
Hajar, Rachel (1999). "The Greco-Islamic Pulse". Heart Views. 1 (4): 136–140 . Archived from the original on 2014-01-09.
West, J.B. (2008). "Ibn al-Nafis, the pulmonary circulation, and the Islamic Golden Age". Journal of Applied Physiology. 105 (6): 1877–1880. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.91171.2008. PMC 2612469. PMID 18845773.
Gonzalez Etxeberria, Patxi (2011) Amor a la verdad, el – vida y obra de Miguel servet [The love for truth.
Life and work of Michael Servetus]. Navarro y Navarro, Zaragoza, collaboration with the Government of Navarra, Department of Institutional Relations and Education of the Government of Navarra.
ISBN 84-235-3266-6 pp. 215–228 & 62nd illustration (XLVII)
Michael Servetus Research Archived 2012-11-13 at the Wayback Machine Study with graphical proof on the Manuscript of Paris and many other manuscripts and new works by Servetus
Pormann, Peter E. and Smith, E. Savage (2007) Medieval Islamic medicine Georgetown University, Washington DC, p. 48, ISBN 1-58901-161-9.
"The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1956". Nobel Foundation.
Archived from the original on 2007-09-29. Retrieved 2007-07-28.
"The Role of Heart Catheterization and Angiocardiography in the Development of Modern Medicine". Archived from the original on 2017-10-09. Retrieved 2017-10-08.
Wayne, Tiffany K. (2011). American women of science since 1900. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. pp. 677–678. ISBN 978-1-59884-158-9.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cardiovascular system.
Look up circulatory system in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Library resources about  Circulatory system 
Resources in your library
Circulatory Pathways in Anatomy and Physiology by OpenStax
The Circulatory System
Michael Servetus Research Study on the Manuscript of Paris by Servetus (1546 description of the Pulmonary Circulation)
Anatomy of the heartGeneralSurface
base
apex
sulci
coronary
interatrial
anterior interventricular
posterior interventricular
borders
right
left
Internal
atria
interatrial septum
pectinate muscles
terminal sulcus
ventricles
interventricular septum
trabeculae carneae
chordae tendineae
papillary muscle
valves
cusps
atrioventricular septum
cardiac skeleton
intervenous tubercle
ChambersRight heart
(venae cavae, coronary sinus)  right atrium (atrial appendage, fossa ovalis, limbus of fossa ovalis, crista terminalis, valve of inferior vena cava, valve of coronary sinus)  tricuspid valve  right ventricle (infundibulum, moderator band/septomarginal trabecula, crista supraventricularis),   pulmonary valve  (pulmonary artery and pulmonary circulation)
Left heart
(pulmonary veins)  left atrium (atrial appendage)   mitral valve  left ventricle  aortic valve (aortic sinus)  (aorta and systemic circulation)
LayersEndocardium
heart valves
Myocardium
Conduction system
cardiac pacemaker
SA node
Bachmann's bundle
AV node
bundle of His
bundle branches
Purkinje fibers
Pericardial cavity
pericardial sinus
Pericardium
fibrous pericardium
sternopericardial ligaments
serous pericardium
epicardium/visceral layer
fold of left vena cava
Blood supply
Circulatory system
Coronary circulation
Coronary arteries
Arteries and veinsVesselsArteries
Nutrient artery
Arteriole
Metarteriole
Elastic artery
Capillaries
Types
Continuous
Fenestrated
Sinusoidal
Precapillary sphincter
Precapillary resistance
Veins
Vena comitans
Superficial vein
Deep vein
Emissary veins
Venous plexus
Venule
Lymph
Lymphatic vessel
Lymph
Lymph capillary
Circulatory systemSystemicLeft heart  Aorta  Arteries  Arterioles  Capillaries  Venules  Veins  Vena cava  (Right heart)PulmonaryRight heart  Pulmonary arteries  Lungs  Pulmonary vein  (Left heart)Microanatomy
Microvessel
Microcirculation
Tunica intima
Endothelium
Internal elastic lamina
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Vasa vasorum
Vasa nervorum
Vascular nerves
Rete mirabile
Circulatory anastomosis
Physiology of the cardiovascular systemHeartCardiac output
Cardiac cycle
Cardiac output
Heart rate
Stroke volume
Stroke volume
End-diastolic volume
End-systolic volume
Afterload
Preload
Frank–Starling law
Cardiac function curve
Venous return curve
Wiggers diagram
Pressure volume diagram
Ultrasound
Fractional shortening = (End-diastolic dimension
End-systolic dimension) / End-diastolic dimension
Aortic valve area calculation
Ejection fraction
Cardiac index
Left atrial volume
Heart rate
Cardiac pacemaker
Chronotropic (Heart rate)
Dromotropic (Conduction velocity)
Inotropic (Contractility)
Bathmotropic (Excitability)
Lusitropic (Relaxation)
Conduction
Conduction system
Cardiac electrophysiology
Action potential
cardiac 
atrial
ventricular
Effective refractory period
Pacemaker potential
Electrocardiography
P wave
PR interval
QRS complex
QT interval
ST segment
T wave
U wave
Hexaxial reference system
Chamber pressure
Central venous
Right
atrial
ventricular
pulmonary artery
wedge
Left
atrial
ventricular
Aortic
Other
Ventricular remodeling
Vascular system/HemodynamicsBlood flow
Compliance
Vascular resistance
Pulse
Perfusion
Blood pressure
Pulse pressure
Systolic
Diastolic
Mean arterial pressure
Jugular venous pressure
Portal venous pressure
Critical closing pressure
Regulation of BP
Baroreflex
Kinin–kallikrein system
Renin–angiotensin system
Vasoconstrictors
Vasodilators
Autoregulation
Myogenic mechanism
Tubuloglomerular feedback
Cerebral autoregulation
Paraganglia
Aortic body
Carotid body
Glomus cell
Development of the circulatory systemHeartTubular heart
Truncus arteriosus
Bulbus cordis
Primitive ventricle
Primitive atrium
Sinus venosus
Chamber formation
Atrioventricular
Primary interventricular foramen
Endocardial cushions
Septum intermedium
Atrioventricular canal
Atrial
Septum primum
Foramen secundum
Primary interatrial foramen
Septum secundum
Foramen ovale
Other
Aorticopulmonary septum
Protein signalling in heart development
VesselsArteries
Dorsal aorta
Aortic arches
Aortic sac
Veins
Anterior cardinal vein
Posterior cardinal vein
Common cardinal veins
Lymph vessels
Lymph sacs
Other
Vascular remodelling in the embryo
Extraembryonichemangiogenesis
Blood islands
Chorion
Connecting stalk
Yolk sac
Placenta
Fetal circulation
umbilical cord: Umbilical vein  Ductus venosus  Inferior vena cava  Heart  Pulmonary artery  Ductus arteriosus  Aorta  Umbilical artery
yolk sac: Vitelline veins
Vitelline arteries
Cardiovascular disease (heart)IschaemicCoronary disease
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Coronary artery aneurysm
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD)
Coronary thrombosis
Coronary vasospasm
Myocardial bridge
Active ischemia
Angina pectoris
Prinzmetal's angina
Stable angina
Acute coronary syndrome
Myocardial infarction
Unstable angina
Sequelae
hours
Hibernating myocardium
Myocardial stunning
days
Myocardial rupture
weeks
Ventricular aneurysm
Dressler syndrome
LayersPericardium
Pericarditis
Acute
Chronic / Constrictive
Pericardial effusion
Cardiac tamponade
Hemopericardium
Myocardium
Myocarditis
Chagas disease
Cardiomyopathy
Dilated
Alcoholic
Hypertrophic
Tachycardia-induced
Restrictive
Loeffler endocarditis
Cardiac amyloidosis
Endocardial fibroelastosis
Viral
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
Endocardium / valvesEndocarditis
infective endocarditis
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
non-infective endocarditis
Libman–Sacks endocarditis
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis
Valves
mitral
regurgitation
prolapse
stenosis
aortic
stenosis
insufficiency
tricuspid
stenosis
insufficiency
pulmonary
stenosis
insufficiency
Conduction / arrhythmiaBradycardia
Sinus bradycardia
Sick sinus syndrome
Heart block: Sinoatrial
AV
1°
2°
3°
Intraventricular
Bundle branch block
Right
Left
Left anterior fascicle
Left posterior fascicle
Bifascicular
Trifascicular
Adams–Stokes syndrome
Tachycardia (paroxysmal and sinus)Supraventricular
Atrial
Multifocal
Junctional
AV nodal reentrant
Junctional ectopic
Ventricular
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
Catecholaminergic polymorphic
Torsades de pointes
Premature contraction
Atrial
Junctional
Ventricular
Pre-excitation syndrome
Lown–Ganong–Levine
Wolff–Parkinson–White
Flutter / fibrillation
Atrial flutter
Ventricular flutter
Atrial fibrillation
Familial
Ventricular fibrillation
Pacemaker
Ectopic pacemaker / Ectopic beat
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
Pacemaker syndrome
Parasystole
Wandering atrial pacemaker
Long QT syndrome
Andersen–Tawil
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen
Romano–Ward
Cardiac arrest
Sudden cardiac death
Asystole
Pulseless electrical activity
Sinoatrial arrest
Other / ungrouped
hexaxial reference system
Right axis deviation
Left axis deviation
QT
Short QT syndrome
T wave alternans
ST
Osborn wave
ST elevation
ST depression
Strain pattern
Cardiomegaly
Ventricular hypertrophy
Left
Right / Cor pulmonale
Atrial enlargement
Left
Right
Athletic heart syndrome
Other
Cardiac fibrosis
Heart failure
Diastolic heart failure
Cardiac asthma
Rheumatic fever
Human systems and organsMusculoskeletal systemSkeletal system
Bone
Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum
Cartilage
Joints
Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint
Muscular system
Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm
Circulatory systemCardiovascular system
peripheral
Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel
Heart
Lymphatic system
primary
Bone marrow
Thymus
secondary
Spleen
Lymph node
CNS equivalent
Glymphatic system
Nervous system
Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve
Sensory system
Ear
Eye
Somatic system
Integumentary system
Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast
Mammary gland
Haematopoietic and immune systems
Myeloid
Myeloid immune system
Lymphoid
Lymphoid immune system
Respiratory system
Upper
Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx
Lower
Trachea
Bronchus
Lung
Digestive system
Mouth
Salivary gland
Tongue
Lips
Tooth
upper GI
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach
lower GI
Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus
accessory
Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas
Urinary system
Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra
Reproductive system
Male
Scrotum
Penis
Size
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle
Female
Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta
Endocrine system
Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans
Underwater diving
Diving activities
Diving modes
Atmospheric pressure diving
Freediving
Saturation diving
Scuba diving
Snorkeling
Surface oriented diving
Surface-supplied diving
Unmanned diving
Diving equipment
Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment
Human factors in diving equipment design
Basic equipment
Diving mask
Snorkel
Swimfin
Breathing gas
Bailout gas
Bottom gas
Breathing air
Decompression gas
Emergency gas supply
Heliox
Nitrox
Oxygen
Travel gas
Trimix
Buoyancy andtrim equipment
Buoyancy compensator
Power inflator
Dump valve
Variable buoyancy pressure vessel
Diving weighting system
Ankle weights
Integrated weights
Trim weights
Weight belt
Decompressionequipment
Decompression buoy
Decompression chamber
Decompression cylinder
Decompression trapeze
Dive computer
Diving bell
Diving shot
Diving stage
Jersey upline
Jonline
Diving suit
Atmospheric diving suit
JIM suit
Newtsuit
Dry suit
Sladen suit
Standard diving suit
Rash vest
Wetsuit
Dive skins
Hot-water suit
Helmetsand masks
Anti-fog
Diving helmet
Free-flow helmet
Lightweight demand helmet
Orinasal mask
Reclaim helmet
Shallow water helmet
Standard diving helmet
Diving mask
Band mask
Full-face mask
Half mask
Instrumentation
Bottom timer
Depth gauge
Dive computer
Dive timer
Diving watch
Helium release valve
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Pneumofathometer
Submersible pressure gauge
Mobilityequipment
Diver propulsion vehicle
Diving bell
Closed bell
Wet bell
Diving stage
Swimfin
Monofin
PowerSwim
Towboard
Wet sub
Safetyequipment
Alternative air source
Octopus regulator
Pony bottle
Bolt snap
Buddy line
Dive light
Diver's cutting tool
Diver's knife
Diver's telephone
Through-water communications
Underwater acoustic communication
Diving bell
Diving safety harness
Emergency gas supply
Bailout block
Bailout bottle
Lifeline
Screw gate carabiner
Emergency locator beacon
Rescue tether
Safety helmet
Shark-proof cage
Snoopy loop
Navigation equipment
Distance line
Diving compass
Dive reel
Line marker
Surface marker buoy
Silt screw
Underwaterbreathingapparatus
Atmospheric diving suit
Diving cylinder
Burst disc
Scuba cylinder valve
Diving helmet
Reclaim helmet
Diving regulator
Mechanism of diving regulators
Regulator malfunction
Regulator freeze
Single-hose regulator
Twin-hose regulator
Full face diving mask
Open-circuitscuba
Scuba set
Bailout bottle
Decompression cylinder
Independent doubles
Manifolded twin set
Scuba manifold
Pony bottle
Scuba configuration
Sidemount
Sling cylinder
Diving rebreathers
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Carleton CDBA
CDLSE
Cryogenic rebreather
CUMA
DSEA
Dolphin
Halcyon PVR-BASC
Halcyon RB80
IDA71
Interspiro DCSC
LAR-5
LAR-6
LAR-V
LARU
Mark IV Amphibian
Porpoise
Ray
Siebe Gorman CDBA
Salvus
Siva
Surface-supplieddiving equipment
Air line
Diver's umbilical
Diving air compressor
Gas panel
Hookah
Scuba replacement
Sea Trek
Snuba
Standard diving dress
Divingequipmentmanufacturers
AP Diving
Apeks
Aqua Lung America
Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique
Beuchat
René Cavalero
Cis-Lunar
Cressi-Sub
Dacor
DESCO
Dive Xtras
Divex
Diving Unlimited International
Drägerwerk
Fenzy
Maurice Fernez
Technisub
Oscar Gugen
Heinke
HeinrichsWeikamp
Johnson Outdoors
Mares
Morse Diving
Nemrod
Oceanic Worldwide
Porpoise
Sub Sea Systems
Shearwater Research
Siebe Gorman
Submarine Products
Suunto
Diving support equipmentAccess equipment
Boarding stirrup
Diver lift
Diving bell
Diving ladder
Diving platform (scuba)
Diving stage
Downline
Jackstay
Launch and recovery system
Messenger line
Moon pool
Breathing gashandling
Air filtration
Activated carbon
Hopcalite
Molecular sieve
Silica gel
Booster pump
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Cascade filling system
Diver's pump
Diving air compressor
Diving air filter
Water separator
High pressure breathing air compressor
Low pressure breathing air compressor
Gas blending
Gas blending for scuba diving
Gas panel
Gas reclaim system
Gas storage bank
Gas storage quad
Gas storage tube
Helium analyzer
Nitrox production
Membrane gas separation
Pressure swing adsorption
Oxygen analyser
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Oxygen compatibility
Decompressionequipment
Air-lock
Built-in breathing system
Decompression tables
Diving bell
Bell cursor
Closed bell
Clump weight
Launch and recovery system
Wet bell
Diving chamber
Diving stage
Recreational Dive Planner
Saturation system
Platforms
Dive boat
Canoe and kayak diving
Combat Rubber Raiding Craft
Liveaboard
Subskimmer
Diving support vessel
HMS Challenger (K07)
Underwaterhabitat
Aquarius Reef Base
Continental Shelf Station Two
Helgoland Habitat
Jules' Undersea Lodge
Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station
SEALAB
Tektite habitat
Remotely operatedunderwater vehicles
ABISMO
Atlantis ROV Team
CURV
Deep Drone
Épaulard
Global Explorer ROV
Goldfish-class ROUV
Kaikō ROV
Kaşif ROUV
Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System
Mini Rover ROV
OpenROV
ROV KIEL 6000
ROV PHOCA
Scorpio ROV
Sea Dragon-class ROV
Seabed tractor
Seafox drone
Seahorse ROUV
SeaPerch
SJT-class ROUV
T1200 Trenching Unit
VideoRay UROVs
Safety equipment
Diver down flag
Diving shot
ENOS Rescue-System
Hyperbaric lifeboat
Hyperbaric stretcher
Jackstay
Jonline
Reserve gas supply
General
Diving spread
Air spread
Saturation spread
Hot water system
Sonar
Underwater acoustic positioning system
Underwater acoustic communication
FreedivingActivities
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Haenyeo
Pearl hunting
Ama
Snorkeling
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Underwater ice hockey
Underwater rugby
Underwater target shooting
Competitions
Nordic Deep
Vertical Blue
Disciplines
Constant weight (CWT)
Constant Weight Bi-fins (CWTB)
Constant weight without fins (CNF)
Dynamic apnea (DYN)
Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF)
Free immersion (FIM)
No-limits apnea (NLT)
Static apnea (STA)
Skandalopetra diving
Variable weight apnea (VWT)
Variable weight apnea without fins
Equipment
Diving mask
Diving suit
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Snorkel (swimming)
Speargun
Swimfins
Monofin
Water polo cap
Freedivers
Deborah Andollo
Simone Arrigoni
Peppo Biscarini
Michael Board
Sara Campbell
Derya Can Göçen
Goran Čolak
Carlos Coste
Robert Croft
Mandy-Rae Cruickshank
Yasemin Dalkılıç
Leonardo D'Imporzano
Flavia Eberhard
Şahika Ercümen
Emma Farrell
Francisco Ferreras
Pierre Frolla
Flavia Eberhard
Mehgan Heaney-Grier
Elisabeth Kristoffersen
Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych
Loïc Leferme
Enzo Maiorca
Jacques Mayol
Audrey Mestre
Karol Meyer
Kate Middleton
Stéphane Mifsud
Alexey Molchanov
Natalia Molchanova
Dave Mullins
Patrick Musimu
Guillaume Néry
Herbert Nitsch
Umberto Pelizzari
Liv Philip
Annelie Pompe
Michal Risian
Stig Severinsen
Tom Sietas
Aharon Solomons
Martin Štěpánek
Walter Steyn
Tanya Streeter
William Trubridge
Devrim Cenk Ulusoy
Fatma Uruk
Danai Varveri
Alessia Zecchini
Nataliia Zharkova
Hazards
Barotrauma
Drowning
Freediving blackout
Deep-water blackout
Shallow-water blackout
Hypercapnia
Hypothermia
Historical
Ama
Octopus wrestling
Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming
Organisations
AIDA International
Scuba Schools International
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins
Performance Freediving International
Professional divingOccupations
Ama
Commercial diver
Commercial offshore diver
Hazmat diver
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Diving supervisor
Haenyeo
Media diver
Police diver
Public safety diver
Scientific diver
Underwater archaeologist
Militarydiving
Army engineer diver
Canadian Armed Forces Divers
Clearance diver
Frogman
Minentaucher
Royal Navy ships diver
United States military divers
U.S. Navy diver
U.S.Navy master diver
Militarydivingunits
Clearance Diving Branch (RAN)
Commando Hubert
Combat Divers Service (Lithuania)
Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei
Decima Flottiglia MAS
Frogman Corps (Denmark)
Fuerzas Especiales
Fukuryu
GRUMEC
Grup Gerak Khas
Jagdkommando
JW Formoza
JW GROM
JW Komandosów
Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine
KOPASKA
MARCOS
Marine Commandos
Marinejegerkommandoen
Marine Raider Regiment
Minedykkerkommandoen
Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit
Naval Diving Unit (Singapore)
Naval Service Diving Section
Naval Special Operations Command
Operational Diving Division (SA Navy)
Royal Engineers
Russian commando frogmen
Sappers Divers Group
Shayetet 13
Special Air Service
Special Air Service Regiment
Special Actions Detachment
Special Boat Service
Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka)
Special Forces Command (Turkey)
Special Forces Group (Belgium)
Special Operations Battalion (Croatia)
Special Service Group (Navy)
Special Warfare Diving and Salvage
Tactical Divers Group
US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance
US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions
US Navy SEALs
Underwater Construction Teams
Underwater Demolition Command
Underwater Demolition Team
Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces)
UNGERIN
Underwaterwork
Commercial offshore diving
Dive leader
Diver training
Recreational diver training
Hazmat diving
Hyperbaric welding
Media diving
Nondestructive testing
Pearl hunting
Police diving
Potable water diving
Public safety diving
Scientific diving
Ships husbandry
Sponge diving
Submarine pipeline
Underwater archaeology
Archaeology of shipwrecks
Underwater construction
Offshore construction
Underwater demolition
Underwater logging
Underwater photography
Underwater search and recovery
Underwater searches
Underwater videography
Underwater survey
Salvage diving
SS Egypt
Kronan
La Belle
SS Laurentic
RMS Lusitania
Mars
Mary Rose
USS Monitor
HMS Royal George
Vasa
Divingcontractors
COMEX
Helix Energy Solutions Group
International Marine Contractors Association
Tools andequipment
Abrasive waterjet
Airlift
Baited remote underwater video
In-water surface cleaning
Brush cart
Cavitation cleaning
Pressure washing
Pigging
Lifting bag
Remotely operated underwater vehicle
Thermal lance
Tremie
Water jetting
Underwaterweapons
Limpet mine
Speargun
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Underwaterfirearm
Gyrojet
Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun
Powerhead
Underwater pistols
Heckler & Koch P11
SPP-1 underwater pistol
Underwater revolvers
AAI underwater revolver
Underwater rifles
ADS amphibious rifle
APS underwater rifle
ASM-DT amphibious rifle
Recreational diving
Recreational dive sites
Index of recreational dive sites
List of wreck diving sites
Outline of recreational dive sites
Specialties
Altitude diving
Cave diving
Deep diving
Ice diving
Muck diving
Open-water diving
Rebreather diving
Sidemount diving
Solo diving
Technical diving
Underwater photography
Wreck diving
Diverorganisations
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS)
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS)
Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP)
Diving tourismindustry
Dive center
Diving in East Timor
Diving in the Maldives
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Scuba diving tourism
Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands
Shark tourism
Sinking ships for wreck diving sites
Underwater diving on Guam
Diving eventsand festivals
Diversnight
Underwater Bike Race
Diving safety
Human factors in diving equipment design
Human factors in diving safety
Life-support system
Safety-critical system
Scuba diving fatalities
Water safety
Water surface searches
Divinghazards
List of diving hazards and precautions
Environmental
Current
Delta-P
Entanglement hazard
Overhead
Silt out
Wave action
Equipment
Freeflow
Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment
Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus
Single point of failure
Physiological
Cold shock response
Decompression
Nitrogen narcosis
Oxygen toxicity
Seasickness
Uncontrolled decompression
Diver behaviour and competence
Lack of competence
Overconfidence effect
Panic
Task loading
Trait anxiety
Willful violation
Consequences
Barotrauma
Decompression sickness
Drowning
Hypothermia
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
Hyperthermia
Non-freezing cold injury
Divingprocedures
Ascending and descending
Emergency ascent
Boat diving
Canoe and kayak diving
Buddy diving
buddy check
Decompression
Decompression practice
Pyle stop
Ratio decompression
Dive briefing
Dive log
Dive planning
Rule of thirds
Scuba gas planning
Diver communications
Diver rescue
Diver training
Doing It Right
Drift diving
Gas blending for scuba diving
Night diving
Rebreather diving
Scuba gas management
Solo diving
Riskmanagement
Checklist
Hazard identification and risk assessment
Hazard analysis
Job safety analysis
Risk assessment
Risk control
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Incident pit
Lockout–tagout
Permit To Work
Redundancy
Safety data sheet
Situation awareness
Diving team
Bellman
Chamber operator
Diver medical technician
Diver's attendant
Diving supervisor
Diving systems technician
Gas man
Life support technician
Stand-by diver
Equipmentsafety
Breathing gas quality
Testing and inspection of diving cylinders
Hydrostatic test
Sustained load cracking
Diving regulator
Breathing performance of regulators
Occupationalsafety andhealth
Approaches to safety
Job safety analysis
Risk assessment
Toolbox talk
Housekeeping
Association of Diving Contractors International
Code of practice
Contingency plan
Diving regulations
Emergency procedure
Emergency response plan
Evacuation plan
Hazardous Materials Identification System
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Administrative controls
Engineering controls
Hazard elimination
Hazard substitution
Personal protective equipment
International Marine Contractors Association
Occupational hazard
Biological hazard
Chemical hazard
Physical hazard
Psychosocial hazard
Occupational hygiene
Exposure assessment
Occupational exposure limit
Workplace health surveillance
Safety culture
Code of practice
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Health and safety representative
Operations manual
Safety meeting
Standard operating procedure
Diving medicineDivingdisorders
List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Cramp
Motion sickness
Surfer's ear
Pressurerelated
Alternobaric vertigo
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Air embolism
Aerosinusitis
Barodontalgia
Dental barotrauma
Middle ear barotrauma
Pulmonary barotrauma
Compression arthralgia
Decompression illness
Dysbarism
Oxygen
Freediving blackout
Hyperoxia
Hypoxia
Oxygen toxicity
Inert gases
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
Inner ear decompression sickness
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Taravana
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Nitrogen narcosis
Carbon dioxide
Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia
Breathing gascontaminants
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Immersionrelated
Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Laryngospasm
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema
Treatment
Demand valve oxygen therapy
First aid
Hyperbaric medicine
Hyperbaric treatment schedules
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy
Therapeutic recompression
Personnel
Diving Medical Examiner
Diving Medical Practitioner
Diving Medical Technician
Hyperbaric nursing
Screening
Atrial septal defect
Effects of drugs on fitness to dive
Fitness to dive
Psychological fitness to dive
ResearchList of researchers in diving physiology and medicine
Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bühlmann
John R. Clarke
Guybon Chesney Castell Damant
Kenneth William Donald
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Robert William Hamilton Jr.
Henry Valence Hempleman
Leonard Erskine Hill
Brian Andrew Hills
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
Neal W. Pollock
John Rawlins
Charles Wesley Shilling
Edward D. Thalmann
Jacques Triger
Diving medicalresearchorganisations
Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC)
Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC)
European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC)
European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS)
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS)
Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA)
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS)
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU)
Law
Civil liability in recreational diving
Diving regulations
Duty of care
List of legislation regulating underwater diving
Investigation of diving accidents
Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage
History of underwater diving
History of decompression research and development
History of Diving Museum
History of scuba diving
List of researchers in underwater diving
Lyons Maritime Museum
Timeline of diving technology
Pearling in Western Australia
Archeologicalsites
SS Commodore
USS Monitor
Queen Anne's Revenge
Whydah Gally
Underwater artand artists
The Diver
Jason deCaires Taylor
Engineersand inventors
William Beebe
Georges Beuchat
John R. Clarke
Jacques Cousteau
Charles Anthony Deane
John Deane
Louis de Corlieu
Auguste Denayrouze
Ted Eldred
Henry Fleuss
Émile Gagnan
Joseph-Martin Cabirol
Christian J. Lambertsen
Yves Le Prieur
John Lethbridge
Ernest William Moir
Joseph Salim Peress
Auguste Piccard
Joe Savoie
Willard Franklyn Searle
Gordon Smith
Augustus Siebe
Jacques Triger
Historicalequipment
Aqua-Lung
RV Calypso
SP-350 Denise
Magnesium torch
Nikonos
Porpoise regulator
Standard diving dress
Sub Marine Explorer
Vintage scuba
Diverpropulsionvehicles
Advanced SEAL Delivery System
Cosmos CE2F series
Dry Combat Submersible
Human torpedo
Motorised Submersible Canoe
Necker Nymph
R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle
SEAL Delivery Vehicle
Shallow Water Combat Submersible
Siluro San Bartolomeo
Welfreighter
Wet Nellie
Military andcovert operations
Raid on Alexandria (1941)
Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior
Scientific projects
Mission 31
Awards and events
Hans Hass Award
International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame
London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures
NOGI Awards
Women Divers Hall of Fame
IncidentsDive boat incidents
Sinking of MV Conception
Diver rescues
Alpazat cave rescue
Tham Luang cave rescue
Early diving
John Day (carpenter)
Charles Spalding
Ebenezer Watson
Freediving fatalities
Loïc Leferme
Audrey Mestre
Nicholas Mevoli
Natalia Molchanova
Offshorediving incidents
Byford Dolphin diving bell accident
Drill Master diving accident
Star Canopus diving accident
Stena Seaspread diving accident
Venture One diving accident
Waage Drill II diving accident
Wildrake diving accident
Professionaldiving fatalities
Roger Baldwin
John Bennett
Victor F. Guiel Jr.
Francis P. Hammerberg
Craig M. Hoffman
Peter Henry Michael Holmes
Johnson Sea Link accident
Edwin Clayton Link
Gerard Anthony Prangley
Pier Skipness
Robert John Smyth
Albert D. Stover
Richard A. Walker
Lothar Michael Ward
Joachim Wendler
Bradley Westell
Arne Zetterström
Scuba divingfatalities
Ricardo Armbruster
Allan Bridge
David Bright
Berry L. Cannon
Cotton Coulson
Cláudio Coutinho
E. Yale Dawson
Deon Dreyer
Milan Dufek
Sheck Exley
Maurice Fargues
Fernando Garfella Palmer
Guy Garman
Steve Irwin
death
Jim Jones
Henry Way Kendall
Artur Kozłowski
Yuri Lipski
Kirsty MacColl
Agnes Milowka
François de Roubaix
Chris and Chrissy Rouse
Dave Shaw
Wesley C. Skiles
Dewey Smith
Rob Stewart
Esbjörn Svensson
Josef Velek
PublicationsManuals
NOAA Diving Manual
U.S. Navy Diving Manual
Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival
Underwater Handbook
Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving
Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving
The new science of skin and scuba diving
Professional Diver's Handbook
Basic Scuba
Standards andCodes of Practice
Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO)
DIN 7876
IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving
ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers
General non-fiction
The Darkness Beckons
Goldfinder
The Last Dive
Shadow Divers
The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure
Research
List of Divers Alert Network publications
Dive guides
Training and registrationDivertraining
Competence and assessment
Competency-based learning
Refresher training
Skill assessment
Diver training standard
Diving instructor
Diving school
Occupational diver training
Commercial diver training
Military diver training
Public safety diver training
Scientific diver training
Recreational diver training
Introductory diving
Teaching method
Muscle memory
Overlearning
Stress exposure training
Skills
Combat sidestroke
Diver navigation
Diver trim
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver
Finning techniques
Scuba skills
Buddy breathing
Low impact diving
Diamond Reef System
Surface-supplied diving skills
Underwater searches
RecreationalscubacertificationlevelsCore diving skills
Advanced Open Water Diver
Autonomous diver
CMAS* scuba diver
CMAS** scuba diver
Introductory diving
Low Impact Diver
Master Scuba Diver
Open Water Diver
Supervised diver
Leadership skills
Dive leader
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Master Instructor
Specialist skills
Rescue Diver
Solo diver
Diver trainingcertificationand registrationorganisations
European Underwater Federation (EUF)
International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF)
International Diving Schools Association (IDSA)
International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA)
List of diver certification organizations
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Nautical Archaeology Society
Universal Referral Program
World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC)
Commercial divercertificationauthorities
Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS)
Commercial diver registration in South Africa
Divers Institute of Technology
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
Department of Employment and Labour
Commercial divingschools
Divers Academy International
Norwegian diver school
Free-divingcertificationagencies
AIDA International (AIDA)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Performance Freediving International (PI)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Recreationalscubacertificationagencies
American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC)
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS)
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
International Diving Educators Association (IDEA)
International Life Saving Federation (ILS)
Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF)
National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID)
Sub-Aqua Association (SAA)
Scuba Diving International (SDI)
Scuba Educators International (SEI)
Scottish Sub Aqua Club (ScotSAC)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF)
United Diving Instructors (UDI)
YMCA SCUBA Program
Scientific divercertificationauthorities
American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS)
CMAS Scientific Committee
Technical divercertificationagencies
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Diving Science and Technology (DSAT)
Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID)
Trimix Scuba Association (TSA)
Technical Extended Range (TXR)
Cavediving
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Technical Diving International (TDI)
Military divertraining centres
Defence Diving School
Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center
Underwater Escape Training Unit
Military divertraining courses
United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course
Underwater sportsSurface snorkeling
Finswimming
Snorkeling/breath-hold
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Australia
Turkey
Underwater rugby
Colombia
United States
Underwater target shooting
Breath-hold
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Underwater ice hockey
Open Circuit Scuba
Immersion finswimming
Sport diving
Underwater cycling
Underwater orienteering
Underwater photography
Rebreather
Underwater photography
Sports governingorganisations and federations
International
AIDA International
Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques)
National
AIDA Hellas
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
British Octopush Association
British Underwater Sports Association
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn
Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas
Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins
South African Underwater Sports Federation
Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu
Underwater Society of America)
Competitions
Underwater Hockey World Championships
Underwater Orienteering World Championships
Underwater Rugby World Championships
Underwater diversPioneersof diving
Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro
Aquanaut
Mary Bonnin
James F. Cahill
Jacques Cousteau
Billy Deans
Dottie Frazier
Trevor Hampton
Hans Hass
Dick Rutkowski
Teseo Tesei
Arne Zetterström
Underwaterscientistsarchaeologists andenvironmentalists
Michael Arbuthnot
Robert Ballard
George Bass
Mensun Bound
Louis Boutan
Hugh Bradner
Cathy Church
Eugenie Clark
James P. Delgado
Sylvia Earle
John Christopher Fine
George R. Fischer
Anders Franzén
Honor Frost
Fernando Garfella Palmer
David Gibbins
Graham Jessop
Swietenia Puspa Lestari
Pilar Luna
Robert F. Marx
Anna Marguerite McCann
Innes McCartney
Charles T. Meide
David Moore
Mark M. Newell
Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova
John Peter Oleson
Mendel L. Peterson
Richard Pyle
Andreas Rechnitzer
William R. Royal
Margaret Rule
Gunter Schöbel
Stephanie Schwabe
Myriam Seco
E. Lee Spence
Robert Sténuit
Peter Throckmorton
Cristina Zenato
Scuba recordholders
Pascal Bernabé
Jim Bowden
Mark Ellyatt
Sheck Exley
Nuno Gomes
Claudia Serpieri
Krzysztof Starnawski
Underwaterfilmmakersand presenters
Samir Alhafith
David Attenborough
Ramón Bravo
Jean-Michel Cousteau
Richie Kohler
Paul Rose
Andy Torbet
Ivan Tors
Andrew Wight
Underwaterphotographers
Doug Allan
Tamara Benitez
Georges Beuchat
Adrian Biddle
Jonathan Bird
Eric Cheng
Neville Coleman
Jacques Cousteau
John D. Craig
Ben Cropp
Bernard Delemotte
David Doubilet
Candice Farmer
John Christopher Fine
Dermot FitzGerald
Rodney Fox
Ric Frazier
Stephen Frink
Peter Gimbel
Monty Halls
Hans Hass
Henry Way Kendall
Rudie Kuiter
Joseph B. MacInnis
Luis Marden
Agnes Milowka
Noel Monkman
Pete Oxford
Steve Parish
Zale Parry
Pierre Petit
Leni Riefenstahl
Peter Scoones
Brian Skerry
Wesley C. Skiles
E. Lee Spence
Philippe Tailliez
Ron Taylor
Valerie Taylor
Albert Tillman
John Veltri
Stan Waterman
Michele Westmorland
John Ernest Williamson
J. Lamar Worzel
Underwaterexplorers
Caves
Graham Balcombe
Sheck Exley
Martyn Farr
Jochen Hasenmayer
Jill Heinerth
Jarrod Jablonski
William Hogarth Main
Tom Mount
Jack Sheppard
Bill Stone
Reefs
Arthur C. Clarke
Wrecks
Leigh Bishop
John Chatterton
Clive Cussler
Bill Nagle
Valerie van Heest
Aristotelis Zervoudis
Aquanauts
Andrew Abercromby
Joseph M. Acaba
Clayton Anderson
Richard R. Arnold
Serena Auñón-Chancellor
Michael Barratt (astronaut)
Robert A. Barth
Robert L. Behnken
Randolph Bresnik
Timothy J. Broderick
Justin Brown
Berry L. Cannon
Scott Carpenter
Gregory Chamitoff
Steve Chappell
Catherine Coleman
Robin Cook
Craig B. Cooper
Fabien Cousteau
Philippe Cousteau
Timothy Creamer
Jonathan Dory
Pedro Duque
Sylvia Earle
Jeanette Epps
Sheck Exley
Albert Falco
Andrew J. Feustel
Michael Fincke
Satoshi Furukawa
Ronald J. Garan Jr.
Michael L. Gernhardt
Christopher E. Gerty
David Gruber
Chris Hadfield
Jeremy Hansen
José M. Hernández
John Herrington
Paul Hill
Akihiko Hoshide
Mark Hulsbeck
Emma Hwang
Norishige Kanai
Les Kaufman
Scott Kelly
Karen Kohanowich
Timothy Kopra
Dominic Landucci
Jon Lindbergh
Kjell N. Lindgren
Michael López-Alegría
Joseph B. MacInnis
Sandra Magnus
Thomas Marshburn
Matthias Maurer
K. Megan McArthur
Craig McKinley
Jessica Meir
Simone Melchior
Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger
Andreas Mogensen
Karen Nyberg
John D. Olivas
Takuya Onishi
Luca Parmitano
Nicholas Patrick
Tim Peake
Thomas Pesquet
Marc Reagan
Garrett Reisman
Kathleen Rubins
Dick Rutkowski
Tara Ruttley
David Saint-Jacques
Josef Schmid
Robert Sheats
Dewey Smith
Steve Squyres
Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper
Robert Sténuit
Hervé Stevenin
Nicole Stott
James Talacek
Daniel M. Tani
Robert Thirsk
Bill Todd
Mark T. Vande Hei
Koichi Wakata
Rex J. Walheim
Shannon Walker
John Morgan Wells
Joachim Wendler
Douglas H. Wheelock
Peggy Whitson
Dafydd Williams
Jeffrey Williams
Sunita Williams
Gregory R. Wiseman
Kimiya Yui
Writers and journalists
Michael C. Barnette
Victor Berge
Philippe Diolé
Gary Gentile
Bret Gilliam
Bob Halstead
Hillary Hauser
Trevor Jackson
Steve Lewis
John Mattera
Rescuers
Craig Challen
Richard Harris
Rick Stanton
John Volanthen
Frogmen
Lionel Crabb
Ian Edward Fraser
Sydney Knowles
James Joseph Magennis
Commercial salvors
Keith Jessop
Science of underwater diving
List of researchers in underwater diving
Divingphysics
Metre sea water
Neutral buoyancy
Underwater acoustics
Modulated ultrasound
Underwater vision
Underwater computer vision
Divingphysiology
Blood shift
Cold shock response
Diving reflex
Equivalent narcotic depth
Maximum operating depth
Physiological response to water immersion
Underwater vision
Work of breathing
Decompressiontheory
Decompression models:
Bühlmann decompression algorithm
Haldane's decompression model
Reduced gradient bubble model
Thalmann algorithm
Thermodynamic model of decompression
Varying Permeability Model
Equivalent air depth
Oxygen window
Physiology of decompression
DivingenvironmentClassification
List of diving environments by type
Altitude diving
Benign water diving
Confined water diving
Deep diving
Inland diving
Inshore diving
Muck diving
Night diving
Open-water diving
Black-water diving
Blue-water diving
Penetration diving
Cave diving
Torricellian chamber
Ice diving
Wreck diving
Recreational dive sites
Underwater environment
Impact
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Low impact diving
Other
Bathysphere
Defense against swimmer incursions
Diver detection sonar
Offshore survey
Rugged compact camera
Underwater domain awareness
Underwater vehicle
Deep-submergencevehicle
Aluminaut
DSV Alvin
American submarine NR-1
Bathyscaphe
Archimède
FNRS-2
FNRS-3
Harmony class bathyscaphe
Sea Pole-class bathyscaphe
Trieste II
Deepsea Challenger
Ictineu 3
JAGO
Jiaolong
Konsul-class submersible
Russian submarine Losharik
Mir
Nautile
Pisces-class deep submergence vehicle
DSV Sea Cliff
DSV Shinkai
DSV Shinkai 2000
DSV Shinkai 6500
DSV Turtle
DSV-5 Nemo
Submarine rescue
International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office
Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy)
McCann Rescue Chamber
Submarine rescue ship
Deep-submergencerescue vehicle
LR5
LR7
MSM-1
Mystic-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
DSRV-1 Mystic
DSRV-2 Avalon
NATO Submarine Rescue System
Priz-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28
Russian submarine AS-34
ASRV Remora
SRV-300
Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System
Type 7103 DSRV
URF (Swedish Navy)
Submarine escape
Escape trunk
Submarine escape training facility
Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia)
Escape set
Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus
Momsen lung
Steinke hood
Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment
Specialinterestgroups
Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia
CMAS Europe
Coral Reef Alliance
Diving Equipment and Marketing Association
Divers Alert Network
Green Fins
Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association
Historical Diving Society
Karst Underwater Research
Nautical Archaeology Program
Nautical Archaeology Society
Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club
Project AWARE
Reef Check
Reef Life Survey
Rubicon Foundation
Save Ontario Shipwrecks
SeaKeys
Sea Research Society
Society for Underwater Historical Research
Society for Underwater Technology
Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command
Neutral buoyancyfacilities forAstronaut training
Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory
Neutral buoyancy pool
Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid
Neutral Buoyancy Simulator
Space Systems Laboratory
Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center
Other
Nautilus Productions
Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device
Seabed mining
Category
Commons
Glossary
Indexes: Dive sites
Divers
Diving
Outline
Portal
Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Scientific databases
Terminologia Anatomica
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiversity
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 28 September 2022, at 14:01 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
