Coffee - Wikipedia
Coffee
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Brewed beverage made from coffee beans
This article is about the beverage.
For other uses, see Coffee (disambiguation).
CoffeePiccolo latte and black filtered coffeeTypeUsually hot, can be ice-coldRegion of originHorn of Africa and South ArabiaIntroduced15th centuryColorBlack, dark brown, light brown, beigeFlavorDistinctive, somewhat bitterIngredientsRoasted coffee beans
Coffee is a drink prepared from roasted coffee beans.
Darkly colored, bitter, and slightly acidic, coffee has a stimulating effect on humans, primarily due to its caffeine content.
It is the most popular hot drink in the world.
Seeds of the Coffea plant's fruits are separated to produce unroasted green coffee beans.
The beans are roasted and then ground into fine particles that are typically steeped in hot water before being filtered out, producing a cup of coffee.
It is usually served hot, although chilled or iced coffee is common.
Coffee can be prepared and presented in a variety of ways (e.g., espresso, French press, caffè latte, or already-brewed canned coffee). Sugar, sugar substitutes, milk, and cream are often used to lessen the bitter taste or enhance the flavor.
Though coffee is now a global commodity, it has a long history tied closely to food traditions around the Red Sea.
The earliest credible evidence of coffee drinking in the form of the modern beverage appears in modern-day Yemen from the mid-15th century in Sufi shrines, where coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a manner similar to current methods.
The Yemenis procured the coffee beans from the Ethiopian Highlands via coastal Somali intermediaries and began cultivation.
By the 16th century, the drink had reached the rest of the Middle East and North Africa, later spreading to Europe.
In the 20th century, coffee became a global commodity, creating different coffee cultures around the world.
The two most commonly grown coffee bean types are C. arabica and C. robusta.
Coffee plants are cultivated in over 70 countries, primarily in the equatorial regions of the Americas, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, and Africa.
As of 2018[update], Brazil was the leading grower of coffee beans, producing 35% of the world's total.
Green, unroasted coffee is the most traded agricultural commodity and one of the most traded commodities overall, second only to petroleum.
Despite sales of coffee reaching billions of dollars worldwide, farmers producing coffee beans disproportionately live in poverty.
Critics of the coffee industry have also pointed to its negative impact on the environment and the clearing of land for coffee-growing and water use.
Contents
Etymology
Green coffee describes the beans before roasting.
The word coffee entered the English language in 1582 via the Dutch koffie, borrowed from the Ottoman Turkish kahve (قهوه), borrowed in turn from the Arabic qahwah (قَهْوَة). The Arabic word qahwah was traditionally held to refer to a type of wine whose etymology is given by Arab lexicographers as deriving from the verb قَهِيَ qahiya, 'to lack hunger', in reference to the drink's reputation as an appetite suppressant.[citation needed] The terms coffee pot and coffee break originated in 1705 and 1952 respectively.
History
Main article: History of coffee
Legendary accounts
According to one legend, ancestors of today's Oromo people in a region of Jimma in Ethiopia were the first to recognize the energizing effect of the coffee plant.
However, no direct evidence has been found earlier than the 15th century indicating who among the African populations used it as a stimulant, or where coffee was first cultivated.
The story of Kaldi, the 9th-century Ethiopian goatherd who discovered the stimulating effect of coffee when he noticed how excited his goats became after eating the beans from a coffee plant, did not appear in writing until 1671 and is probably apocryphal.
Another legend attributes the discovery of coffee to Sheikh Omar.
According to an old chronicle (preserved in the Abd-Al-Kadir manuscript), Omar, who was known for his ability to cure the sick through prayer, was once exiled from Mocha in Yemen to a desert cave near Ousab (modern-day Wusab, about 90 kilometres (56 mi) east of Zabid, Yemen). Starving, Omar chewed berries from nearby shrubbery but found them to be too bitter.
He tried roasting the seeds to improve the flavor, but they became hard.
He then tried boiling them to soften the seed, which resulted in a fragrant brown liquid.
Upon drinking the liquid, Omar was revitalized and sustained for days.
As stories of this "miracle drug" reached Mocha, Omar was asked to return and was made a saint.
Historical transmission
The earliest credible evidence of coffee-drinking or knowledge of the coffee tree appears in the middle of the 15th century in the accounts of Ahmed al-Ghaffar in Yemen.
It was here in Arabia that coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a similar way to how it is prepared now.
Coffee was used by Sufi circles to stay awake for their religious rituals.
Accounts differ on the origin of the coffee plant prior to its appearance in Yemen.
From Ethiopia, coffee could have been introduced to Yemen via trade across the Red Sea.
One account credits Muhammad Ibn Sa'd for bringing the beverage to Aden from the African coast.
Other early accounts say Ali ben Omar of the Shadhili Sufi order was the first to introduce coffee to Arabia.
According to al Shardi, Ali ben Omar may have encountered coffee during his stay with the Adal king Sadadin's companions in 1401. Famous 16th-century Islamic scholar Ibn Hajar al-Haytami notes in his writings a beverage called qahwa developed from a tree in the Zeila region in Somaliland.
Coffee was first exported from Ethiopia to Yemen by Somali merchants from Berbera and Zeila in modern-day Somaliland, which was procured from Harar and the Abyssinian interior.
According to Captain Haines, who was the colonial administrator of Aden (1839–1854), Mocha historically imported up to two-thirds of their coffee from Berbera-based merchants before the coffee trade of Mocha was captured by British-controlled Aden in the 19th century.
Thereafter, much of the Ethiopian coffee was exported to Aden via Berbera.
A 1652 handbill advertising coffee for sale in St.
Michael's Alley, London
By the 16th century, coffee had reached the rest of the Middle East, Persia, Turkey, and North Africa.
The first coffee seeds were smuggled out of the Middle East by Sufi Baba Budan from Yemen to the Indian subcontinent during the time.
Before then, all exported coffee was boiled or otherwise sterilized.
Portraits of Baba Budan depict him as having smuggled seven coffee seeds by strapping them to his chest.
The first plants grown from these smuggled seeds were planted in Mysore.
Coffee had spread to Italy by 1600, and then to the rest of Europe, Indonesia, and the Americas.[better source needed]
In 1583, Leonhard Rauwolf, a German physician, gave this description of coffee after returning from a ten-year trip to the Near East:
A beverage as black as ink, useful against numerous illnesses, particularly those of the stomach.
Its consumers take it in the morning, quite frankly, in a porcelain cup that is passed around and from which each one drinks a cupful.
It is composed of water and the fruit from a bush called bunnu.— Léonard Rauwolf, Reise in die Morgenländer (in German)
The thriving trade between Venice and North Africa, Egypt, and the Middle East (back then Ottoman Empire) brought many goods, including coffee, to the Venetian port.
From Venice, it was introduced to the rest of Europe.
Coffee became more widely accepted after it was deemed a Christian beverage by Pope Clement VIII in 1600, despite appeals to ban the "Muslim drink". The first European coffee house opened in Rome in 1645.[citation needed]
As a colonial import
A late 19th-century advertisement for coffee essenceA 1919 advertisement for G Washington's Coffee.
The first instant coffee was invented by inventor George Washington in 1909.
The Dutch East India Company was the first to import coffee on a large scale.
The Dutch later grew the crop in Java and Ceylon.
The first exports of Indonesian coffee from Java to the Netherlands occurred in 1711.
Through the efforts of the British East India Company, coffee became popular in England as well.
In a diary entry of May 1637, John Evelyn recorded tasting the drink at Oxford in England, where it had been brought by a student of Balliol College from Crete named Nathaniel Conopios of Crete.
Oxford's Queen's Lane Coffee House, established in 1654, is still in existence today.
Coffee was introduced in France in 1657, and in Austria and Poland after the 1683 Battle of Vienna, when coffee was captured from supplies of the defeated Turks.
When coffee reached North America during the Colonial period, it was initially not as successful as it had been in Europe, as alcoholic beverages remained more popular.
During the Revolutionary War, the demand for coffee increased so much that dealers had to hoard their scarce supplies and raise prices dramatically; this was also due to the reduced availability of tea from British merchants, and a general resolution among many Americans to avoid drinking tea following the 1773 Boston Tea Party.
After the War of 1812, during which Britain temporarily cut off access to tea imports, the Americans' taste for coffee grew.
During the 18th century, coffee consumption declined in England, giving way to tea drinking.
The latter beverage was simpler to make and had become cheaper with the British conquest of India and the tea industry there.
During the Age of Sail, seamen aboard ships of the British Royal Navy made substitute coffee by dissolving burnt bread in hot water.
The Frenchman Gabriel de Clieu took a coffee plant to the French territory of Martinique in the Caribbean in the 1720s, from which much of the world's cultivated arabica coffee is descended.
Coffee thrived in the climate and was conveyed across the Americas.
Coffee was cultivated in Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) from 1734, and by 1788 it supplied half the world's coffee.
The conditions that the slaves worked in on coffee plantations were a factor in the soon to follow Haitian Revolution.
The coffee industry never fully recovered there.
It made a brief come-back in 1949 when Haiti was the world's third largest coffee exporter, but declined rapidly after that.
Mass production
A coffee can from the first half of the 20th century.
From the Museo del Objeto del Objeto collection.Meanwhile, coffee had been introduced to Brazil in 1727, although its cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822. After this time, massive tracts of rainforest were cleared for coffee plantations, first in the vicinity of Rio de Janeiro and later São Paulo.
Brazil went from having essentially no coffee exports in 1800 to being a significant regional producer in 1830, to being the largest producer in the world by 1852. In 1910–20, Brazil exported around 70% of the world's coffee, Colombia, Guatemala, and Venezuela exported half of the remaining 30%, and Old World production accounted for less than 5% of world exports.
Cultivation was taken up by many countries in Central America in the latter half of the 19th century, and almost all involved the large-scale displacement and exploitation of the indigenous people.
Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups, and bloody suppression of peasants.
The notable exception was Costa Rica, where lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms.
Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and 20th centuries.
Rapid growth in coffee production in South America during the second half of the 19th century was matched by growth in consumption in developed countries, though nowhere has this growth been as pronounced as in the United States, where a high rate of population growth was compounded by doubling of per capita consumption between 1860 and 1920. Though the United States was not the heaviest coffee-drinking nation at the time (Nordic countries, Belgium, and the Netherlands all had comparable or higher levels of per capita consumption), due to its sheer size, it was already the largest consumer of coffee in the world by 1860, and, by 1920, around half of all coffee produced worldwide was consumed in the US.
Coffee has become a vital cash crop for many developing countries.
Over one hundred million people in developing countries have become dependent on coffee as their primary source of income.
It has become the primary export and backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, as well as many Central American countries.
Biology
Main articles: Coffea and coffee varieties
Illustration of Coffea arabica plant and seeds
Several species of shrub of the genus Coffea produce the berries from which coffee is extracted.
The two main species commercially cultivated are Coffea canephora (predominantly a form known as 'robusta') and C. arabica. C. arabica, the most highly regarded species, is native to the southwestern highlands of Ethiopia and the Boma Plateau in southeastern Sudan and Mount Marsabit in northern Kenya. C. canephora is native to western and central Subsaharan Africa, from Guinea to Uganda and southern Sudan.
Less popular species are C. liberica, C. stenophylla, C. mauritiana, and C. racemosa.
All coffee plants are classified in the large family Rubiaceae.
They are evergreen shrubs or trees that may grow 5 m (15 ft) tall when unpruned.
The leaves are dark green and glossy, usually 10–15 cm (4–6 in) long and 6 cm (2.4 in) wide, simple, entire, and opposite.
Petioles of opposite leaves fuse at the base to form interpetiolar stipules, characteristic of Rubiaceae.
The flowers are axillary, and clusters of fragrant white flowers bloom simultaneously.
Gynoecium consists of an inferior ovary, also characteristic of Rubiaceae.
The flowers are followed by oval berries of about 1.5 cm (0.6 in). When immature, they are green, and they ripen to yellow, then crimson, before turning black on drying.
Each berry usually contains two seeds, but 5–10% of the berries have only one; these are called peaberries.
Arabica berries ripen in six to eight months, while robusta takes nine to eleven months.
Coffea arabica is predominantly self-pollinating, and as a result, the seedlings are generally uniform and vary little from their parents.
In contrast, Coffea canephora, and C. liberica are self-incompatible and require outcrossing.
This means that useful forms and hybrids must be propagated vegetatively.
Cuttings, grafting, and budding are the usual methods of vegetative propagation.
On the other hand, there is great scope for experimentation in search of potential new strains.
Cultivation and production
Further information: Coffee production
Map showing areas of coffee cultivation: r: Coffea canephora m: Coffea canephora and Coffea arabica a: Coffea arabica
The traditional method of planting coffee is to place 20 seeds in each hole at the beginning of the rainy season.
This method loses about 50% of the seeds' potential, as about half fail to sprout.
A more effective process of growing coffee, used in Brazil, is to raise seedlings in nurseries that are then planted outside after six to twelve months.
Coffee is often intercropped with food crops, such as corn, beans, or rice during the first few years of cultivation as farmers become familiar with its requirements.
Coffee plants grow within a defined area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, termed the bean belt or coffee belt.
In 2020, the world production of green coffee beans was 175,647,000 60 kg bags, led by Brazil with 39% of the total, followed by Vietnam, Colombia, and Indonesia.
Brazil is the largest coffee exporting nation, accounting for 15% of all world exports in 2019. As of 2021, no synthetic coffee products are publicly available but multiple bioeconomy companies have reportedly produced first batches that are highly similar on the molecular level and are close to commercialization.
Species variations
Of the two main species grown, arabica coffee (from C. arabica) is generally more highly regarded than robusta coffee (from C. canephora). Robusta coffee tends to be bitter and has less flavor but better body than arabica.
For these reasons, about three-quarters of coffee cultivated worldwide is C. arabica.
Robusta strains also contain about 40–50% more caffeine than arabica.
Consequently, this species is used as an inexpensive substitute for arabica in many commercial coffee blends.
Good quality robusta beans are used in traditional Italian espresso blends to provide a full-bodied taste and a better foam head (known as crema).
Additionally, Coffea canephora is less susceptible to disease than C. arabica and can be cultivated in lower altitudes and warmer climates where C. arabica will not thrive.
The robusta strain was first collected in 1890 from the Lomani River, a tributary of the Congo River, and was conveyed from the Congo Free State (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) to Brussels to Java around 1900. From Java, further breeding resulted in the establishment of robusta plantations in many countries.
In particular, the spread of the devastating coffee leaf rust (Hemileia vastatrix), to which C. arabica is vulnerable, hastened the uptake of the resistant robusta.
Hemileia vastatrix is a fungal pathogen and results in light, rust-colored spots on the undersides of coffee plant leaves.
Hemileia vastatrix grows exclusively on the leaves of coffee plants.
Coffee leaf rust is found in virtually all countries that produce coffee.
Beans from different countries or regions can usually be distinguished by differences in flavor, aroma, body, and acidity.
These taste characteristics are dependent not only on the coffee's growing region, but also on genetic subspecies (varietals) and processing.
Varietals are generally known by the region in which they are grown, such as Colombian, Java, and Kona.
Arabica coffee beans are cultivated mainly in Latin America, eastern Africa or Asia, while robusta beans are grown in central Africa, southeast Asia, and Brazil.
Pests and treatments
Coffea robusta flowersA flowering Coffea arabica tree in a Brazilian plantationCoffea arabica berries on the bush
Mycena citricolor, commonly referred to as American Leaf Spot, is a fungus that can affect the whole coffee plant.
It can grow on leaves, resulting in leaves with holes that often fall from the plant.
It is a threat primarily in Latin America.
Over 900 species of insect have been recorded as pests of coffee crops worldwide.
Of these, over a third are beetles, and over a quarter are bugs.
Some 20 species of nematodes, 9 species of mites, and several snails and slugs also attack the crop.
Birds and rodents sometimes eat coffee berries, but their impact is minor compared to invertebrates.
In general, arabica is the more sensitive species to invertebrate predation overall.
Each part of the coffee plant is assailed by different animals.
Nematodes attack the roots, coffee borer beetles burrow into stems and woody material, and the foliage is attacked by over 100 species of larvae (caterpillars) of butterflies and moths.
Mass spraying of insecticides has often proven disastrous, as predators of the pests are more sensitive than the pests themselves.
Instead, integrated pest management has developed, using techniques such as targeted treatment of pest outbreaks, and managing crop environment away from conditions favoring pests.
Branches infested with scale are often cut and left on the ground, which causes scale parasites to not only attack the scale on the fallen branches but in the plant as well.
The 2-mm-long coffee borer beetle (Hypothenemus hampei) is the most damaging insect pest to the world's coffee industry, destroying up to 50 percent or more of the coffee berries on plantations in most coffee-producing countries.
The adult female beetle nibbles a single tiny hole in a coffee berry and lays 35 to 50 eggs.
Inside, the offspring grow, mate, and then emerge from the commercially ruined berry to disperse, repeating the cycle.
Pesticides are mostly ineffective because the beetle juveniles are protected inside the berry nurseries, but they are vulnerable to predation by birds when they emerge.
When groves of trees are nearby, the American yellow warbler, rufous-capped warbler, and other insectivorous birds have been shown to reduce by 50 percent the number of coffee berry borers in Costa Rica coffee plantations.
Ecological effects
See also: Sustainable coffee
Originally, coffee farming was done in the shade of trees that provided a habitat for many animals and insects.
Remnant forest trees were used for this purpose, but many species have been planted as well.
These include leguminous trees of the genera Acacia, Albizia, Cassia, Erythrina, Gliricidia, Inga, and Leucaena, as well as the nitrogen-fixing non-legume sheoaks of the genus Casuarina, and the silky oak Grevillea robusta.
This method is commonly referred to as the traditional shaded method, or "shade-grown". Starting in the 1970s, many farmers switched their production method to sun cultivation, in which coffee is grown in rows under full sun with little or no forest canopy.
This causes berries to ripen more rapidly and bushes to produce higher yields, but requires the clearing of trees and increased use of fertilizer and pesticides, which damage the environment and cause health problems.
Unshaded coffee plants grown with fertilizer yield the most coffee, although unfertilized shaded crops generally yield more than unfertilized unshaded crops: the response to fertilizer is much greater in full sun.
While traditional coffee production causes berries to ripen more slowly and produce lower yields, the quality of the coffee is allegedly superior.
In addition, the traditional shaded method provides living space for many wildlife species.
Proponents of shade cultivation say environmental problems such as deforestation, pesticide pollution, habitat destruction, and soil and water degradation are the side effects of the practices employed in sun cultivation.
Worms from a coffee ground compost pile
The American Birding Association, Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center, National Arbor Day Foundation, and the Rainforest Alliance have led a campaign for 'shade-grown' and organic coffees, which can be sustainably harvested.
Shaded coffee cultivation systems show greater biodiversity than full-sun systems, and those more distant from continuous forest compare rather poorly to undisturbed native forest in terms of habitat value for some bird species.
Coffee production uses a large volume of water.
On average it takes about 140 litres (37 US gal) of water to grow the coffee beans needed to produce one cup of coffee.
Growing the plants needed to produce 1 kg (2.2 lb) of roasted coffee in Africa, South America or Asia requires 26,400 litres (7,000 US gal) of water.
As with many other forms of agriculture, often much of this is rainwater, much of which would otherwise run off into rivers or coastlines, while much water actually absorbed by the plants is transpired straight back into the local environment through the plants' leaves (especially for cooling effects); broad estimates aside, consequential margins vary considerably based on details of local geography and horticultural practice.
Coffee is often grown in countries where there is a water shortage, such as Ethiopia.
Used coffee grounds may be used for composting or as a mulch.
They are especially appreciated by worms and acid-loving plants such as blueberries.
Climate change may significantly impact coffee yields during the 21st century, such as in Nicaragua and Ethiopia which could lose more than half of the farming land suitable for growing (Arabica) coffee.
As of 2016, at least 34% of global coffee production was compliant with voluntary sustainability standards such as Fairtrade, UTZ, and 4C (The Common Code for the Coffee Community).
Preprocessing
Coffee berries are traditionally selectively picked by hand, which is labor-intensive as it involves the selection of only the berries at the peak of ripeness.
More commonly, crops are strip picked, where all berries are harvested simultaneously regardless of ripeness by person or machine.
After picking, green coffee is processed by one of two types of method—a dry process method which is often simpler and less labor-intensive, and a wet process method, which incorporates batch fermentation, uses larger amounts of water in the process, and often yields a milder coffee.
Then they are sorted by ripeness and color, and most often the flesh of the berry is removed, usually by machine, and the seeds are fermented to remove the slimy layer of mucilage still present on the seed.
When the fermentation is finished, the seeds are washed with large quantities of fresh water to remove the fermentation residue, which generates massive amounts of coffee wastewater.
Finally, the seeds are dried.
The best (but least used) method of drying coffee is using drying tables.
In this method, the pulped and fermented coffee is spread thinly on raised beds, which allows the air to pass on all sides of the coffee, and then the coffee is mixed by hand.
The drying that then takes place is more uniform, and fermentation is less likely.
Most African coffee is dried in this manner and certain coffee farms around the world are starting to use this traditional method.
Next, the coffee is sorted, and labeled as green coffee.
Some companies use cylinders to pump in heated air to dry the coffee seeds, though this is generally in places where the humidity is very high.
An Asian coffee known as kopi luwak undergoes a peculiar process made from coffee berries eaten by the Asian palm civet, passing through its digestive tract, with the beans eventually harvested from feces.
Coffee brewed from this process is among the most expensive in the world, with bean prices reaching $160 per pound or $30 per brewed cup.
Kopi luwak coffee is said to have a uniquely rich, slightly smoky aroma and flavor with hints of chocolate, resulting from the action of digestive enzymes breaking down bean proteins to facilitate partial fermentation.
In Thailand, black ivory coffee beans are fed to elephants whose digestive enzymes reduce the bitter taste of beans collected from dung.
These beans sell for up to $1,100 a kilogram ($500 per lb), achieving the world's most expensive coffee, three times costlier than palm civet coffee beans.
Processing
Roasting
Main article: Coffee roasting
Roasted coffee beans
The next step in the process is the roasting of green coffee.
Coffee is usually sold in a roasted state, and with rare exceptions, such as infusions from green coffee beans, coffee is roasted before it is consumed.
It can be sold roasted by the supplier, or it can be home roasted.
The roasting process influences the taste of the beverage by changing the coffee bean both physically and chemically.
The bean decreases in weight as moisture is lost and increases in volume, causing it to become less dense.
The density of the bean also influences the strength of the coffee and the requirements for packaging.
The actual roasting begins when the temperature inside the bean reaches approximately 200 °C (392 °F), though different varieties of seeds differ in moisture and density and therefore roast at different rates.
During roasting, caramelization occurs as intense heat breaks down starches, changing them to simple sugars that begin to brown, which darkens the color of the bean.
Sucrose is rapidly lost during the roasting process, and may disappear entirely in darker roasts.
During roasting, aromatic oils and acids weaken, changing the flavor; at 205 °C (401 °F), other oils start to develop.
One of these oils, caffeol, is created at about 200 °C (392 °F), which is largely responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.
The difference of caffeine content between a light roast and a dark roast is only about 0.1%.
Grading roasted beans
See also: Food grading
Coffee "cuppers", or professional tasters, grade the coffee.
Depending on the color of the roasted beans as perceived by the human eye, they will be labeled as light, medium light, medium, medium dark, dark, or very dark.
A more accurate method of discerning the degree of roast involves measuring the reflected light from roasted seeds illuminated with a light source in the near-infrared spectrum.
This elaborate light meter uses a process known as spectroscopy to return a number that consistently indicates the roasted coffee's relative degree of roast or flavor development.
Coffee has, in many countries, been graded by size longer than it has been graded by quality.
Grading is generally done with sieves, numbered to indicate the size of the perforations.
Roast characteristics
The degree of roast affects coffee flavor and body.
Darker roasts are generally bolder because they have less fiber content and a more sugary flavor.
Lighter roasts have a more complex and therefore perceived stronger flavor from aromatic oils and acids otherwise destroyed by longer roasting times.
Roasting does not alter the amount of caffeine in the bean, but does give less caffeine when the beans are measured by volume because the beans expand during roasting.
A small amount of chaff is produced during roasting from the skin left on the seed after processing.
Chaff is usually removed from the seeds by air movement, though a small amount is added to dark roast coffees to soak up oils on the seeds.
Decaffeination
Decaffeination of coffee seeds is done while the seeds are still green.
Many methods can remove caffeine from coffee, but all involve either soaking the green seeds in hot water (often called the "Swiss water process") or steaming them, then using a solvent to dissolve caffeine-containing oils.
Decaffeination is often done by processing companies, and the extracted caffeine is usually sold to the pharmaceutical industry.
Storage
Main article: Coffee bean storage
Coffee container
Coffee is best stored in an airtight container made of ceramic, glass or non-reactive metal.
Higher quality prepackaged coffee usually has a one-way valve that prevents air from entering while allowing the coffee to release gases.
Coffee freshness and flavor is preserved when it is stored away from moisture, heat, and light.
The tendency of coffee to absorb strong smells from food means that it should be kept away from such smells.
Storage of coffee in refrigerators is not recommended due to the presence of moisture which can cause deterioration.
Exterior walls of buildings that face the sun may heat the interior of a home, and this heat may damage coffee stored near such a wall.
Heat from nearby ovens also harms stored coffee.
In 1931, a method of packing coffee in a sealed vacuum in cans was introduced.
The roasted coffee was packed and then 99% of the air was removed, allowing the coffee to be stored indefinitely until the can was opened.
Today this method is in mass use for coffee in a large part of the world.
Brewing
Main article: Coffee preparation
A contemporary automatic coffeemaker
Coffee beans must be ground and brewed to create a beverage.
The criteria for choosing a method include flavor and economy.
Almost all methods of preparing coffee require that the beans be ground and then mixed with hot water long enough to allow the flavor to emerge but not so long as to draw out bitter compounds.
The liquid can be consumed after the spent grounds are removed.
Brewing considerations include the fineness of the grind, the way in which the water is used to extract the flavor, the ratio of coffee grounds to water (the brew ratio), additional flavorings such as sugar, milk, and spices, and the technique to be used to separate spent grounds.
Optimal coffee extraction occurs between 91 and 96 °C (196 and 205 °F). Ideal holding temperatures range from 85 to 88 °C (185 to 190 °F) to as high as 93 °C (199 °F) and the ideal serving temperature is 68 to 79 °C (154 to 174 °F).
Coffee beans may be ground in various ways.
A burr grinder uses revolving elements to shear the seed; a blade grinder cuts the seeds with blades moving at high speed, and a mortar and pestle crushes the seeds.
For most brewing methods a burr grinder is deemed superior because the grind is more even and the grind size can be adjusted.
The type of grind is often named after the brewing method for which it is generally used.
Turkish grind is the finest grind, while coffee percolator or French press are the coarsest grinds.
Most common grinds are between these two extremes: a medium grind is used in most home coffee-brewing machines.
Coffee may be brewed by several methods.
It may be boiled, steeped, or pressurized:
Brewing coffee by boiling was the earliest method, and Turkish coffee is an example of this method.
It is prepared by grinding or pounding the seeds to a fine powder, then adding it to water and bringing it to a boil for no more than an instant in a pot called a cezve or, in Greek, a μπρίκι : bríki (from Turkish ibrik). This produces a strong coffee with a layer of foam on the surface and sediment (which is not meant for drinking) settling at the bottom of the cup.
Drip brewers and automatic coffeemakers brew coffee using gravity.
In an automatic coffeemaker, hot water drips onto coffee grounds that are held in a paper, plastic, or perforated metal coffee filter, allowing the water to seep through the ground coffee while extracting its oils and essences.
The liquid drips through the coffee and the filter into a carafe or pot, and the spent grounds are retained in the filter.
In a coffee percolator, water is pulled under a pipe by gravity, which is then forced into a chamber above a filter by steam pressure created by boiling.
The water then seeps through the grounds, and the process is repeated until terminated by removing from the heat, by an internal timer,
or by a thermostat that turns off the heater when the entire pot reaches a certain temperature.
The espresso method forces hot pressurized water through finely ground coffee.
As a result of brewing under high pressure (typically 9 bar), the espresso beverage is more concentrated (as much as 10 to 15 times the quantity of coffee to water as gravity-brewing methods can produce) and has a more complex physical and chemical constitution.
A well-prepared espresso has a reddish-brown foam called crema that floats on the surface.
Other pressurized water methods include the moka pot and vacuum coffee maker.
The AeroPress also works in a similar way, moving a column of water through a bed of coffee.
Cold brew coffee is made by steeping coarsely ground beans in cold water for several hours, then filtering them.
This results in a brew lower in acidity than most hot-brewing methods.
Serving
"Black coffee" redirects here.
For other uses, see Black Coffee (disambiguation).
See also: List of coffee drinks
Enjoying coffee in Ottoman Empire.
Painting by unknown artist in the Pera Museum
Once brewed, coffee may be served in a variety of ways.
Drip-brewed, percolated, or French-pressed/cafetière coffee may be served as white coffee with a dairy product such as milk or cream, or dairy substitute, or as black coffee with no such addition.
It may be sweetened with sugar or artificial sweetener.
When served cold, it is called iced coffee.
Espresso-based coffee has a variety of possible presentations.
In its most basic form, an espresso is served alone as a shot or short black, or with hot water added, when it is known as Caffè Americano.
A long black is made by pouring a double espresso into an equal portion of water, retaining the crema, unlike Caffè Americano.
Milk is added in various forms to an espresso: steamed milk makes a caffè latte, equal parts steamed milk and milk froth make a cappuccino, and a dollop of hot foamed milk on top creates a caffè macchiato.
A flat white is prepared by adding steamed hot milk (microfoam) to two espresso shots.
It has less milk than a latte, but both are varieties of coffee to which the milk can be added in such a way as to create a decorative surface pattern.
Such effects are known as latte art.
Coffee is frequently served iced.
Popular options include Frappés, Iced lattes, or simply stronger brewed coffee served with ice.
Coffee can also be incorporated with alcohol to produce a variety of beverages: it is combined with whiskey in Irish coffee, and it forms the base of alcoholic coffee liqueurs such as Kahlúa and Tia Maria.
Some craft beers have coffee or coffee extracts added to the beer, although porter and stout beers may have a coffee-like taste solely due to roasted grains.
Instant coffee
Main article: Instant coffee
Instant coffee
A number of products are sold for the convenience of consumers who do not want to prepare their own coffee or who do not have access to coffeemaking equipment.
Instant coffee is dried into soluble powder or freeze-dried into granules that can be quickly dissolved in hot water.
Originally invented in 1907, it rapidly gained in popularity in many countries in the post-war period, with Nescafé being the most popular product.
Many consumers determined that the convenience in preparing a cup of instant coffee more than made up for a perceived inferior taste, although, since the late 1970s, instant coffee has been produced differently in such a way that is similar to the taste of freshly brewed coffee.
Paralleling (and complementing) the rapid rise of instant coffee was the coffee vending machine invented in 1947 and widely distributed since the 1950s.
Canned coffee has been popular in Asian countries for many years, particularly in China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.
Vending machines typically sell varieties of flavored canned coffee, much like brewed or percolated coffee, available both hot and cold.
Japanese convenience stores and groceries also have a wide availability of bottled coffee drinks, which are typically lightly sweetened and pre-blended with milk.
Bottled coffee drinks are also consumed in the United States.
Liquid coffee concentrates are sometimes used in large institutional situations where coffee needs to be produced for thousands of people at the same time.
It is described as having a flavor about as good as low-grade robusta coffee and costs about 10¢ a cup to produce.
The machines can process up to 500 cups an hour, or 1,000 if the water is preheated.[failed verification]
Economics
Main article: Economics of coffee
This section needs to be updated.
Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (October 2019)
Over 90 percent of coffee production takes place in developing countries—mainly South America—while consumption happens primarily in industrialized economies.
There are 25 million small producers who rely on coffee for a living worldwide.
In Brazil, where almost a third of the world's coffee is produced, over five million people are employed in the cultivation and harvesting of over three billion coffee plants; it is a more labor-intensive culture than alternative cultures of the same regions, such as sugar cane or cattle, as its cultivation is not automated, requiring frequent human attention.
World production
Top Ten Green Coffee Producers in 2020(millions of metric tons)
Brazil
Vietnam
Colombia
Indonesia
Ethiopia
Peru
Honduras
India
Uganda
Guatemala
World Total
Source : FAOSTAT
Since the beginning of the 20th century, annual world production has grown to over 100 million bags, which corresponds to six to seven million tonnes, whereas in 1825 only 100,000 tonnes were produced.
More than 80% of the bags are exported each year.
Nearly 90 countries export coffee cherries, 60 of them developing countries, with coffee constituting the main export revenue for countries such as Burundi, Ethiopia, Rwanda, and formerly Haiti.
The largest producer by far is Brazil (almost 30% of world production in 2015), followed by Vietnam, Colombia, Indonesia, and Ethiopia.
Statistical data on world agricultural coffee production differs slightly depending on whether it comes from the FAO or the ICO. However, these data are monitored monthly by the ICO and cross-checked, which makes the Organisation a more established reference for international market.
Beyond the occasional overproduction crises and inventory differences, the volumes produced, traded, and consumed are following an upward trend.
Coffee production provides a living for about twenty-five million people, mainly small-scale producers, while imports, processing, and distribution provide a living for about one hundred to one hundred and ten million people.
Commodity market
Coffee prices 1973 - 2022
Coffee distributionSmall-sized bag of coffee beans
Coffee is bought and sold as green coffee beans by roasters, investors, and price speculators as a tradable commodity in commodity markets and exchange-traded funds.
Coffee futures contracts for Grade 3 washed arabicas are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange under ticker symbol KC, with contract deliveries occurring every year in March, May, July, September, and December.
Higher and lower grade arabica coffees are sold through other channels.
Futures contracts for robusta coffee are traded on the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange and, since 2007, on the New York Intercontinental Exchange.
Dating to the 1970s, coffee has been incorrectly described by many, including historian Mark Pendergrast, as the world's "second most legally traded commodity". Instead, "coffee was the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries," from 1970 to circa 2000. This fact was derived from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Commodity Yearbooks which show "Third World" commodity exports by value in the period 1970–1998 with crude oil in first place, coffee in second, followed by sugar, cotton, and others.
Coffee continues to be an important commodity export for developing countries, but more recent figures are not readily available due to the shifting and politicized nature of the category "developing country".
International Coffee Day, which is claimed to have originated in Japan in 1983 with an event organized by the All Japan Coffee Association, takes place on 29 September in several countries.
There are numerous trade associations and lobbying and other organizations representing the coffee industry.
Consumption
Coffee consumption (kg. per capita and year)
Over 2.25 billion cups of coffee are consumed in the world daily which amounts to 2.5 cups of coffee consumed per person on average.
Nordic countries are the highest coffee-consuming nations when measured per capita; consumption in Finland is the world's highest, close to or more than double that of Brazil; Italy; France; Greece; and Canada, which is the 10th-highest consumer, and close to triple coffee consumption in the United States, which ranked 25th in 2018. The top 10 coffee-consuming countries, measured per capita, per annum are:
Finland     – 12 kg (26 lb)
Norway      – 9.9 kg (21 lb 13 oz)
Iceland     – 9 kg (20 lb)
Denmark     – 8.7 kg (19 lb 3 oz)
Netherlands – 8.4 kg (18 lb 8 oz)
Sweden      – 8.2 kg (18 lb 1 oz)
Switzerland – 7.9 kg (17 lb 7 oz)
Belgium     – 6.8 kg (15 lb 0 oz)
Luxembourg  – 6.5 kg (14 lb 5 oz)
Canada      – 6.5 kg (14 lb 5 oz)
Economic impacts
Further information: List of countries by coffee production
Map of coffee areas in Brazil
Market volatility, and thus increased returns, during 1830 encouraged Brazilian entrepreneurs to shift their attention from gold to coffee, a crop hitherto reserved for local consumption.
Concurrent with this shift was the commissioning of vital infrastructures, including approximately 7,000 km (4,300 mi) of railroads between 1860 and 1885. The creation of these railways enabled the importation of workers, to meet the enormous need for labor.
This development primarily affected the State of Rio de Janeiro, as well as the Southern States of Brazil, most notably São Paulo, due to its favorable climate, soils, and terrain.
Coffee production attracted immigrants in search of better economic opportunities in the early 1900s.
Mainly, these were Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, and Japanese nationals.
For instance, São Paulo received approximately 733,000 immigrants in the decade preceding 1900, whilst only receiving approximately 201,000 immigrants in the six years to 1890. The production yield of coffee increases.
In 1880, São Paulo produced 1.2 million bags (25% of total production), in 1888 2.6 million (40%), and in 1902 8 million bags (60%). Coffee is then 63% of the country's exports.
The gains made by this trade allow sustained economic growth in the country.
The four years between planting a coffee and the first harvest extend seasonal variations in the price of coffee.
The Brazilian Government is thus forced, to some extent, to keep strong price subsidies during production periods.
Fair trade
Main article: Fair trade coffee
See also: Fair trade debate
The concept of fair trade labeling, which guarantees coffee growers a negotiated preharvest price, began in the late 1980s with the Max Havelaar Foundation's labeling program in the Netherlands.
In 2004, 24,222 metric tons (of 7,050,000 produced worldwide) were fair trade; in 2005, 33,991 metric tons out of 6,685,000 were fair trade, an increase from 0.34% to 0.51%. A number of fair trade impact studies have shown that fair trade coffee produces a mixed impact on the communities that grow it.
Many studies are skeptical about fair trade, reporting that it often worsens the bargaining power of those who are not part of it.
The very first fair-trade coffee was an effort to import Guatemalan coffee into Europe as "Indio Solidarity Coffee".
Since the founding of organizations such as the European Fair Trade Association (1987), the production and consumption of fair trade coffee has grown as some local and national coffee chains started to offer fair trade alternatives.
For example, in April 2000, after a year-long campaign by the human rights organization Global Exchange, Starbucks decided to carry fair-trade coffee in its stores.
Since September 2009 all Starbucks Espresso beverages in UK and Ireland are made with Fairtrade and Shared Planet certified coffee.
A 2005 study done in Belgium concluded that consumers' buying behavior is not consistent with their positive attitude toward ethical products.
On average 46% of European consumers claimed to be willing to pay substantially more for ethical products, including fair-trade products such as coffee.
The study found that the majority of respondents were unwilling to pay the actual price premium of 27% for fair trade coffee.
Speciality coffee and new trading relationships
Speciality coffee has driven a desire for more traceable coffee, and as such businesses are offering coffees that may come from a single origin, or a single lot from a single farm.
This can give rise to the roaster developing a relationship with the producer, to discuss and collaborate on coffee.
The roaster may also choose to cut out the importers and exporters to directly trade with the producer, or they may "fairly trade", where any third-parties involved in the transaction are thought to have added value, and there is a high level of transparency around the price, although often there is no certification to back it up.
This process tends to only be done for high-quality products since keeping the coffee separate from other coffees adds costs, and so only coffee that roasters believe can command a higher price will be kept separate.
Some coffee is sold through internet auction – much of it is sold through a competition, with coffees passing through local and international jurors, and then the best coffees being selected to be bid on.
Some estates known for high-quality coffee also sell their coffee through an online auction.
This can lead to increased price transparency since the final price paid is usually published.
Pharmacology
Main articles: List of chemical compounds in coffee and Health effects of coffee
Skeletal formula of a caffeine molecule
Brewed coffee from typical grounds has no essential nutrients in significant content.
In espresso, however, likely due to its higher amount of suspended solids, there are significant contents of magnesium, the B vitamins, niacin and riboflavin, and 212 mg of caffeine per 100 grams of grounds.
One psychoactive chemical in coffee is caffeine, an adenosine receptor antagonist that is known for its stimulant effects.
Coffee also contains the monoamine oxidase inhibitors β-carboline and harmane, which may contribute to its psychoactivity.
In a healthy liver, caffeine is mostly broken down by hepatic enzymes.
The excreted metabolites are mostly paraxanthines—theobromine and theophylline—and a small amount of unchanged caffeine.
Therefore, the metabolism of caffeine depends on the state of this enzymatic system of the liver.
Polyphenols in coffee have been shown to affect free radicals in vitro, but there is no evidence that this effect occurs in humans.
Polyphenol levels vary depending on how beans are roasted as well as for how long.
As interpreted by the Linus Pauling Institute and the European Food Safety Authority, dietary polyphenols, such as those ingested by consuming coffee, have little or no direct antioxidant value following ingestion.
A 2017 review of clinical trials found that drinking coffee is generally safe within usual levels of intake and is more likely to improve health outcomes than to cause harm at doses of 3 or 4 cups of coffee daily.
Exceptions include possible increased risk in women having bone fractures, and a possible increased risk in pregnant women of fetal loss or decreased birth weight.
Results were complicated by poor study quality, and differences in age, gender, health status, and serving size.
Caffeine content
See also: Low caffeine coffee
Depending on the type of coffee and method of preparation, the caffeine content of a single serving can vary greatly.
The caffeine content of a cup of coffee varies depending mainly on the brewing method, and also on the coffee variety.
According to the USDA National Nutrient Database, a 240-millilitre (8 US fl oz) cup of "coffee brewed from grounds" contains 95 mg caffeine, whereas an espresso (25 ml) contains 53 mg.
According to an article in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association, coffee has the following caffeine content, depending on how it is prepared:
Serving size
Caffeine content
Brewed
Drip
Espresso
Caffeine remains stable up to 200 °C (392 °F) and completely decomposes around 285 °C (545 °F). Given that roasting temperatures do not exceed 200 °C (392 °F) for long and rarely if ever reach 285 °C (545 °F), the caffeine content of a coffee is not likely changed much by the roasting process.
Society and culture
Main article: Coffee culture
Coffee is often consumed alongside (or instead of) breakfast by many at home or when eating out at diners or cafeterias.
It is often served at the end of a formal meal, normally with a dessert, and at times with an after-dinner mint, especially when consumed at a restaurant or dinner party.
Coffeehouses
Main article: Coffeehouse Coffee is an important part of Bosnian culture, and was a major part of its economy in the past.
Widely known as coffeehouses or cafés, establishments serving prepared coffee or other hot beverages have existed for over five hundred years.
The first coffeehouse in Constantinople was opened in 1475 by traders arriving from Damascus and Aleppo.
A contemporary term for a person who makes coffee beverages, often a coffeehouse employee, is a barista.
The Specialty Coffee Association of Europe and the Specialty Coffee Association of America have been influential in setting standards and providing training.
Break
A coffee break in the United States and elsewhere is a short mid-morning rest period granted to employees in business and industry, corresponding with the Commonwealth terms "elevenses", "smoko" (in Australia), "morning tea", "tea break", or even just "tea". An afternoon coffee break, or afternoon tea, often occurs as well.
The coffee break originated in the late 19th century in Stoughton, Wisconsin, with the wives of Norwegian immigrants.
The city celebrates this every year with the Stoughton Coffee Break Festival.
In 1951, Time noted that "[s]ince the war, the coffee break has been written into union contracts". The term subsequently became popular through a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign of 1952 which urged consumers, "Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You." John B. Watson, a behavioral psychologist who worked with Maxwell House later in his career, helped to popularize coffee breaks within the American culture.
Other historians accredit the conception of the Coffee Break to John Catrone, an electrician, who coined the phrase while working in Revere, Massachusetts in the 1950s.
Prohibition and condemnation
The Coffee Bearer, an Orientalist painting by John Frederick Lewis (1857)
Historically, several religious groups have prohibited or condemned the consumption of coffee.
The permissibility of coffee was debated in the Islamic world during the early 16th century, variously being permitted or prohibited until it was ultimately accepted by the 1550s.
Contention existed among Ashkenazi Jews as to whether coffee was acceptable for Passover until it was certified kosher in 1923. Some Christian groups, such as Mormons and Seventh-day Adventists, discourage the consumption of coffee.
Furthermore, coffee has been prohibited for political and economic reasons.
King Charles II of England outlawed coffeehouses to quell perceived rebellion.
King Frederick the Great banned it in Prussia, concerned about the price of importing of coffee without production colonies.
Sweden prohibited coffee in the 18th century for the same reasons.
Coffee has seldom been prohibited based on its intoxicating effect.
Folklore and culture
There are many stories about coffee and its impact on people and society.
The Oromo people would customarily plant a coffee tree on the graves of powerful sorcerers.
They believed that the first coffee bush sprang up from the tears that the god of heaven shed over the corpse of a dead sorcerer.
Johann Sebastian Bach was inspired to compose the humorous Coffee Cantata, about dependence on the beverage, which was controversial in the early 18th century.
Coffee portal
Drink portal
Food portal
References
Citations
Souza, Richard M. (2008) Plant-Parasitic Nematodes of Coffee.
Springer. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-4020-8720-2
a b c Weinberg & Bealer 2001, pp. 3–4.
"Coffee Report 2022". Statista.
Retrieved 23 September 2022.
"Coffee". Oxford English Dictionary.
Vol. 2 (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. 1893. p. 589, Col. 3.Text at Internet Archive
"coffee". Online Etymology Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Sweetser, Heather Marie (2012). A Chapter in the History of Coffee: A Critical Edition and Translation of Murtaḍā az-Zabīdī's Epistle on Coffee (M.A.). Ohio State University. p. 12. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016.
Ukers, William (1935). All About Coffee.
New York: Tea & Coffee Trade Journal Company. pp. 9–10.
a b Houtsma, M. Th.; Wensinck, A. J.; Arnold, T. W.; Heffening, W.; Lévi-Provençal, E., eds. (1993). "Ḳawah". First Encyclopedia of Islam.
Vol. IV. E.J. Brill. p. 631. ISBN 978-90-04-09790-2. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
Souza 2008, p. 3.
Hattox, Ralph S. (1985). Coffee and coffeehouses: The origins of a social beverage in the medieval Near East.
University of Washington Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-295-96231-3. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2020.
Burton, Richard F. (1856). First footsteps in East Africa.
London: Longman. p. 78. ali omar coffee yemen.
R. J., Gavin (1975). Aden Under British Rule, 1839–1967. C. Hurst & Co.
Publishers. p. 53.
Wild, Antony (2004). Coffee: A Dark History.
Fourth Estate. pp. 52–53. ISBN 978-1-84115-649-1.
Meyers, Hannah (7 March 2005). "Suave Molecules of Mocha—Coffee, Chemistry, and Civilization". New Partisan.
New Partisan.
Archived from the original on 22 March 2011.
Ukers, William H. (1922). "The Introduction of Coffee into Holland". All About Coffee.
New York: Tea and Coffee Trade Journal.
ISBN 978-0-8103-4092-3. Archived from the original on 5 September 2010. Retrieved 12 February 2010.
a b c d Dobelis, Inge N., ed. (1986). Magic and medicine of plants.
Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest. pp. 370–71. ISBN 978-0-89577-221-3.
Fischer, Dieter. "History of Indonesian coffee". Specialty Coffee Association of Indonesia.
Archived from the original on 5 August 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2010.
"Caffeine and plants prototype page". Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022.
Diary of John Evelyn (various editions)
Pendergrast 2001, p. 9.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 39.
(1) Adams, John (6 July 1774). "John Adams to Abigail Adams". The Adams Papers: Digital Editions: Adams Family Correspondence, Volume 1. Massachusetts Historical Society.
Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. I believe I forgot to tell you one Anecdote: When I first came to this House it was late in the Afternoon, and I had ridden 35 miles at least. "Madam" said I to Mrs.
Huston, "is it lawful for a weary Traveller to refresh himself with a Dish of Tea provided it has been honestly smuggled or paid no Duties?""No sir, said she, we have renounced all Tea in this Place.
I can't make Tea, but I'll make you Coffee." Accordingly, I have drunk Coffee every Afternoon since and have borne it very well.
Tea must be universally renounced.
I must be weaned, and the sooner, the better.(2) Stone, William L. (1867). "Continuation of Mrs.
General Riedesel's Adventures". Mrs.
General Riedesel: Letters and Journals relating to the War of Independence and the Capture of the Troops at Saratoga (Translated from the Original German). Albany: Joel Munsell. p. 147. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015. She then became more gentle, and offered me bread and milk.
I made tea for ourselves.
The woman eyed us longingly, for the Americans love it very much; but they had resolved to drink it no longer, as the famous duty on the tea had occasioned the war.
At Google Books.
Note: Fredricka Charlotte Riedesel was the wife of General Friedrich Adolf Riedesel, commander of all German and Indian troops in General John Burgoyne's Saratoga campaign and American prisoner of war during the American Revolution.(3) Heiss, Mary Lou; Heiss, Robert J. (2007). "A History of Tea: The Boston Tea Party". The Story of Tea: A Cultural History and Drinking Guide. pp. 21–24. ISBN 978-1-60774-172-5. Archived from the original on 3 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2015. At Google Books.(4) Zuraw, Lydia (24 April 2013). "How Coffee Influenced The Course of History". NPR. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014.(5) DeRupo, Joseph (3 July 2013). "American Revolution: Stars, Stripes—and Beans". NCA News.
National Coffee Association.
Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014.(6) Luttinger, Nina; Dicum, Gregory (2006). The coffee book: anatomy of an industry from crop to the last drop.
The New Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-59558-724-4. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2015 – via Google Books.
a b Pendergrast 2001, p. 13.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory (2005). Nelson's Sailors.
Osprey Publishing. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-84176-906-6. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Lacour, Auguste (1855). Histoire de la Guadeloupe 1635–1789 [History of Guadeloupe 1635–1789] (in French). Vol. 1. Basse-Terre, Guadeloupe. p. 235ff.
Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 – via Google Books.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 14.
Pendergrast, Mark (2010). Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How It Transformed Our World.
Basic Books. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-465-02404-9. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 16.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 19.
Pendergrast 2001, pp. 20–24.
a b "The production and consumption of coffee". Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
Pendergrast 2001, pp. 33–34.
Pendergrast 2001, pp. 35–36.
Cousin, Tracey L. (June 1997). "Ethiopia Coffee and Trade". American University.
Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
a b c "Botanical Aspects". London: International Coffee Organization.
Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
Anthony F, Berthaud J, Guillaumet JL, Lourd M. "Collecting wild Coffea species in Kenya and Tanzania". Plant Genet Resources Newsletter. 69 (1987): 23–29.
van der Vossen, H. A. M. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 53
a b Duke, James A. (1983). "Coffea arabica L". Purdue University.
Archived from the original on 21 February 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
"Feature Article: Peaberry Coffee". Acorns. 2004. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
Hamon, S.; Noirot, M.; Anthony, F. (1995). "Developing a coffee core collection using the principal components score strategy with quantitative data" (PDF). Core Collections of Plant Genetic Resources.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 4 January 2010.
Pradeepkumar, T.; Kumar, Pradeep (2008). Management of Horticultural Crops: Vol.11 Horticulture Science Series: In 2 Parts.
New India Publishing. pp. 601–. ISBN 978-81-89422-49-3. Archived from the original on 3 December 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
a b Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 158.
Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, pp. 161–62.
"Major coffee producers". National Geographic. 2015. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 25 September 2015.
Coffee production by exporting countries (PDF). International Coffee Organization.
February 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2021.
Daniel Workman (28 April 2020). "Coffee exports by country". World's Top Exports.
Archived from the original on 27 June 2020. Retrieved 24 June 2020.
Lavars, Nick (20 September 2021). "Lab-grown coffee cuts out the beans and deforestation". New Atlas.
Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021.
"Sustainable coffee grown in Finland – | VTT News". vttresearch.com.
Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021.
"Eco-friendly, lab-grown coffee is on the way, but it comes with a catch". The Guardian. 16 October 2021. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2021.
Belachew, Mekete (2003). "Coffee".  In Uhlig, Siegbert (ed.). Encyclopaedia Aethiopica.
Vol. 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. p. 763.
Daviron, Benoit; Ponte, Stefano (2005). The Coffee Paradox: Global Markets, Commodity Trade and the Elusive Promise of Development.
Zed Books. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-84277-457-1. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
van der Vossen, H. A. M. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 55
Levetin, Estelle; McMchon, Karen (2012). Plants & Society.
New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 263–67. ISBN 978-0-07-352422-1.
Waller, J. M. (1972). "Coffee Rust in Latin America". PANS Pest Articles & News Summaries. 18 (4): 402–08. doi:10.1080/09670877209412699.
Waller, J.M.; Bigger, M.; Hillocks, R.J. (2007). Coffee pests, diseases and their management.
Wallingford, Oxfordshire: CABI. p. 171. ISBN 978-1-84593-129-2.
Davids, Kenneth (2001). Coffee: A Guide to Buying, Brewing, and Enjoying (5th ed.). New York: St.
Martin's Griffin.
ISBN 978-0-312-24665-5.
Castle, Timothy James (1991). The Perfect Cup: A Coffee Lover's Guide to Buying, Brewing, and Tasting.
Reading, MA: Aris Books. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-201-57048-9.
Krishnan, Sarada (28 June 2017). "Sustainable Coffee Production". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science.
Vol. 1. pp. 1–34. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.224. ISBN 9780199389414. Archived from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 15 April 2018.
Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, pp. 208–209.
Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 210.
Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 211.
Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 213.
Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 214.
Graham, Rex (5 September 2013). "Insect-eating birds reduce worst coffee plantation pest by 50 percent". birdsnews.com.
Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 20 September 2013.
a b Janzen, Daniel H., ed. (1983). Costa Rican natural history.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-39334-6.
Wilson, K.C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 166.
Salvesen, David (1996). "The Grind Over Sun Coffee". Zoogoer. 25 (4). Archived from the original on 22 September 2009. Retrieved 5 January 2010.
Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985, p. 165.
"Measuring Consumer Interest in Mexican Shade-grown Coffee" (PDF). Montréal: Commission for Environmental Cooperation.
October 1999. p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2010.
"The Problems with Sun Coffee". Coffee & Conservation.
Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 19 February 2014.
"Shade-Grown Coffee Plantations". Smithsonian Zoolongical Park website – Migratory Bird Center.
Smithsonian Institution.
Archived from the original on 25 October 2009. Retrieved 8 January 2010.
"Rain Forest- Saving Arbor Day Coffee". Arbor Day Foundation.
Archived from the original on 1 January 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2010.
"Rainforest Alliance Certified Coffee". 24 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019.
Wong, Kate (27 September 2000). "Is Shade-Grown Coffee for the Birds?". Scientific American.
Archived from the original on 27 October 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2010.
Rickert, Eve (15 December 2005). Environmental effects of the coffee crisis: a case study of land use and avian communities in Agua Buena, Costa Rica (MES). The Evergreen State College.
Retrieved 11 January 2010.
Arthus-Bertrand, Yann. "On Water". European Investment Bank.
Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2020.
Pearce, Fred (25 February 2006). "Earth: The parched planet". New Scientist.
Archived from the original on 5 September 2009. Retrieved 5 January 2010.
Martin, Deborah L.; Gershuny, Grace, eds. (1992). "Coffee wastes". The Rodale book of composting.
Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-87857-991-4. Retrieved 5 January 2010.
Läderach, Peter; Ramirez–Villegas, Julian; Navarro-Racines, Carlos; Zelaya, Carlos; Martinez–Valle, Armando; Jarvis, Andy (26 October 2016). "Climate change adaptation of coffee production in space and time". Climatic Change. 141 (1): 47–62. doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1788-9. ISSN 0165-0009.
Moat, Justin; Williams, Jenny; Baena, Susana; Wilkinson, Timothy; Gole, Tadesse W.; Challa, Zeleke K.; Demissew, Sebsebe; Davis, Aaron P. (19 June 2017). "Resilience potential of the Ethiopian coffee sector under climate change". Nature Plants. 3 (7): 17081. doi:10.1038/nplants.2017.81. ISSN 2055-0278. PMID 28628132. S2CID 6873955.
Justin Worland (21 June 2018). "Your Morning Cup of Coffee Is in Danger.
Can the Industry Adapt in Time?". Time.
Archived from the original on 4 August 2019. Retrieved 13 October 2019.
Voora, Vivek; Bermúdez, Steffany; Larrea, Cristina; Baliño, Sofia (2019). "Global Market Report: Coffee" (PDF). The International Institute for Sustainable Development.
Retrieved 2 September 2022.
Vincent, J.-C. in Clarke & Macrae 1987, p. 1.
a b c Kummer 2003, p. 38
a b Marcone, Massimo F. (2004). "Composition and properties of Indonesian palm civet coffee (Kopi Luwak) and Ethiopian civet coffee". Food Research International. 37 (9): 901–12. doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2004.05.008.
a b c Thuot, Buon Me (15 January 2012). "Coffee in Vietnam: it's the shit". The Economist.
Archived from the original on 16 November 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2015.
a b Topper, Rachel (15 October 2012). "Elephant Dung Coffee: World's Most Expensive Brew Is Made With Pooped-Out Beans". HuffPost.
Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2012.
Macheiner, Lukas; Schmidt, Anatol; Schreiner, Matthias; Mayer, Helmut K. (2019). "Green coffee infusion as a source of caffeine and chlorogenic acid". Journal of Food Composition and Analysis. 84: 103307. doi:10.1016/j.jfca.2019.103307. S2CID 202882087.
Kummer 2003, p. 37
a b c Ball, Trent; Guenther, Sara; Labrousse, Ken; Wilson, Nikki. "Coffee Roasting". Washington State University.
Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 18 July 2007.
Kummer 2003, p. 261
Steiman, Shawn (15 December 2015). The Little Coffee Know-It-All: A Miscellany for Growing, Roasting, and Brewing, Uncompromising and Unapologetic.
Quarry Books. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-63159-053-5.
Hoffmann, James (2018). The World Atlas of Coffee 2nd Edition.
Great Britain: Mitchell Beazley. p. 40. ISBN 978-1-78472-429-0.
Cipolla, Mauro. "Educational Primer: Degrees of Roast". Bellissimo Info Group.
Archived from the original on 7 May 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
"Which Has More Caffeine: Light or Dark Roast Coffee?". Scribblers Coffee.
Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013.
"Coffee Roasting Operations". Permit Handbook.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District. 15 May 1998. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
"Swiss Water Process". Swisswater.com.
Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. Retrieved 26 October 2011.
a b "Top Coffee Ratings – Coffee Buying Guide". Consumer Reports.
May 2013. Storing coffee.
Archived from the original on 27 February 2014. Retrieved 27 February 2014.
Brown, Alton. "True Brew". Food Network.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2003. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
New Process Keep Coffee Fresh in High Vacuum Cans.
Popular Science.
October 1931. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2011.
"How to Brew Coffee: The NCA Guide to Brewing Essentials". NCA: National Coffee Association of USA. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
Borchgrevink, Carl P.; Susskind, Alex M.; Tarras, John M. (1999). "Consumer preferred hot beverage temperatures". Food Quality and Preference. 10 (2): 117–21. doi:10.1016/S0950-3293(98)00053-6. hdl:1813/72021. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 24 July 2019.
Cadwalader, Zac (9 July 2021). "How To Get The Most Out Of Your Blade Grinder". Sprudge.
Retrieved 19 September 2022.
a b c Rothstein, Scott. "Brewing Techniques". The Coffee FAQ. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
Ukers, William Harrison (1922). All about Coffee (2nd ed.). Gale Research. p. 725. ISBN 978-0-8103-4092-3. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 12 January 2010.
Levy, Joel (2002). Really Useful: The Origins of Everyday Things.
Firefly Books. p. 1948. ISBN 978-1-55297-622-7. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
"Coffee Percolators". Fante's Kitchen. 20 February 2016. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022.
Vittori, Sauro; Caprioli, Giovanni; Cortese, Manuela; Sagratini, Gianni (1 January 2015). "Chapter 28 – Espresso Machine and Coffee Composition".  In Preedy, Victor R. (ed.). Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention.
Academic Press. pp. 255–263. ISBN 978-0-12-409517-5. Archived from the original on 1 February 2020. Retrieved 1 February 2020.
Salvaggio, A.; Periti, M.; Miano, L.; Quaglia, G.; Marzorati, D. (1991). "Coffee and cholesterol, an Italian study". American Journal of Epidemiology. 134 (2): 149–56. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116067. PMID 1862798.
Bonné, Jon (20 August 2004). "My coffee is cold: A brewing system without heat proves it's a contender when it comes to taste". Today.com.
Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
a b Castle, Timothy; Nielsen, Joan (1999). The Great Coffee Book.
Ten Speed Press. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-58008-122-1. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
Fried, Eunice (November 1993). "The lowdown on caffè latte". Black Enterprise.
Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
Miller, Emily Wise (May 2003). The Food Lover's Guide to Florence: With Culinary Excursions in Tuscany.
Ten Speed Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-58008-435-2. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
"Hipster Drink of Choice Gets Co-Opted By Starbucks". Time.
Retrieved 3 September 2022.
Bonné, Jon (29 October 2003). "Meet espresso's exacting master". NBC News.
Retrieved 3 September 2022. [H]e may be best known for introducing U.S. customers to "latte art," intricate ribbon patterns in the foam atop his cappucinos, macchiatos and lattes that result from carefully manipulating the cup and milk pitcher.
"The Ultimate Iced Coffee Taste Test". HuffPost. 5 August 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2022.
"The Art of Brewing Coffee Beers". All About Beer.
Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 24 November 2015.
The Oxford Companion to Beer.
Oxford University Press. 2011. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-19-991210-0. Retrieved 24 November 2015.
Hobhouse, Henry (2005). Seeds of Wealth: Five Plants That Made Men Rich.
Shoemaker & Hoard. p. 294. ISBN 978-1-59376-089-2. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 119.
"Instant Coffee – How it's made". Coffeetea.about.com. 6 October 2009. Archived from the original on 9 February 2017. Retrieved 25 May 2012.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 195.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 196.
Beckerman, Jim. "What on earth ever happened to instant coffee?". North Jersey Media Group.
Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 197.
"Report: Coke, Pepsi faceoff brewing". CNN Money.
Cable news network. 6 December 2005. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2010.
"Regarding liquid coffee concentrate". Commodities Report.
The Wall Street Journal. 21 March 2005. p. C4.
Commodity atlas, United Nations Publications, 2004, p. 12
Coffee: World Markets and Trade, Office of Global Analysis of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, December 2015
"La production mondiale". 
"Coffee". WikiInvest.
Archived from the original on 11 September 2018.
"Coffee Futures". WikiInvest.
Archived from the original on 18 September 2018.
Ellis, Blake (10 September 2010). "Coffee prices on the rise". CNN Money.
Archived from the original on 16 January 2012. Retrieved 3 April 2012.
Galatola, Thomas (14 February 2012). "Coffee Futures Fall to Lowest in 14 Months: Commodities at Close". Bloomberg News.
Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 3 April 2012.
"Historical Coffee Intraday Data (KCA)". PortaraCQG. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022.
a b Pendergrast, Mark (April 2009). "Coffee: Second to Oil?". Tea & Coffee Trade Journal: 38–41. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
Pendergrast 2001.
Talbot, John M. (2004). Grounds for Agreement: The Political Economy of the Coffee Commodity Chain.
Rowman & Littlefield. p. 50. ISBN 9780742526297. So many people who have written about coffee have gotten it wrong.
Coffee is not the second most valuable primary commodity in world trade, as is often stated. [...] It is not the second most traded commodity, a nebulous formulation that repeatedly occurs in the media.
Coffee is the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries.
Ismail, Izwan (29 September 2014). "Let's drink to coffee!". New Straits Times.
Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 23 February 2022.
Golob, Peter; Farrell, Graham; Orchard, John E. (15 April 2008). Crop Post-Harvest: Science and Technology, Volume 1: Principles and Practice.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 471. ISBN 978-1-4051-7210-3.
Luttinger, Nina; Dicum, Gregory (1 May 2012). "The Rise of the International Coffee Trade". The Coffee Book: Anatomy of an Industry from Crop to the Last Drop.
New Press, The. p. 120. ISBN 978-1-59558-724-4.
Bernard, Kristine (5 January 2018). "Top 10 Coffee Consuming Nations". Worldatlas.com.
Quebec, Canada: World Atlas.
Archived from the original on 29 October 2019. Retrieved 29 October 2019.
Mattoon, Robert H. Jr. (2 May 1977). "Railroads, Coffee, and the Growth of Big Business in São Paulo, Brazil". The Hispanic American Historical Review. 57 (2): 273–95. doi:10.2307/2513775. JSTOR 2513775.
Hudson, Rex A., ed. (1997). "The Coffee Economy, 1840–1930". Brazil: A Country Study.
Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress.
Archived from the original on 27 December 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2022.
"Total Production of Exporting Countries, 2003 to 2008". International Coffee Organization.
Archived from the original on 6 July 2010. Retrieved 13 January 2010.
"Coffee". Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International.
Archived from the original on 20 April 2009. Retrieved 13 January 2010.
Rice, Robert A. (March 2001). "Noble Goals and Challenging Terrain: Organic and Fair Trade Coffee Movements" (PDF). Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics. 14 (1): 39–66. doi:10.1023/A:1011367008474. S2CID 56052913. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2010. Retrieved 13 January 2010.
"European Fair Trade Association". EFTA. 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2010.
a b De Pelsmacker, Patrick; Driesen, Liesbeth; Rayp, Glenn (2005). "Do Consumers Care about Ethics? Willingness to Pay for Fair-Trade Coffee". Journal of Consumer Affairs. 39 (2): 363–85. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6606.2005.00019.x.
"Starbucks Serves up its First Fairtrade Lattes and Cappuccinos Across the UK and Ireland". London: Fairtrade Foundation. 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
a b Hoffmann, James (2018). The World Atlas of Coffee (2nd ed.). pp. 44–45. ISBN 9781784724290.
A Beginner's Guide To Buying Great Coffee, retrieved 11 September 2022
Basic Report: 14209, Coffee, brewed from grounds, prepared with tap water a  ndb.nal.usda.gov
"Full Report (All Nutrients): 14210, Beverages, coffee, brewed, espresso, restaurant-prepared". usda.gov.
May 2016. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
Cappelletti, S.; Daria, P.; Sani, G.; Aromatario, M. (2015). "Caffeine: Cognitive and Physical Performance Enhancer or Psychoactive Drug?". Current Neuropharmacology. 13 (1): 71–88. doi:10.2174/1570159X13666141210215655. PMC 4462044. PMID 26074744.
Herraiz, Tomas; Chaparro, Carolina (2006). "Human monoamine oxidase enzyme inhibition by coffee and β-carbolines norharman and harman isolated from coffee". Life Sciences. 78 (8): 795–802. doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2005.05.074. PMID 16139309.
Zivković, R. (2000). "Coffee and health in the elderly". Acta Medica Croatica. 54 (1): 33–36. PMID 10914439.
Bakalar, Nicholas (15 August 2006). "Coffee as a Health Drink? Studies Find Some Benefits". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 23 April 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2010.
Williams, Robert J.; Spencer, Jeremy P. E; Rice-Evans, Catherine (2004). "Flavonoids: Antioxidants or signalling molecules?". Free Radical Biology and Medicine. 36 (7): 838–49. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2004.01.001. PMID 15019969.
"Studies force new view on biology of flavonoids Archived 24 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine", by David Stauth, EurekAlert!. Adapted from a news release issued by Oregon State University
EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (2011). "Scientific Opinion on the substantiation of a health claim related to coffee C21 and reduction of spontaneous DNA strand breaks pursuant to Article 13(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/20061". EFSA Journal. 9 (12): 2465. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2011.2465.
Poole R, Kennedy OJ, Roderick P, Fallowfield JA, Hayes PC, Parkes J (November 2017). "Coffee consumption and health: umbrella review of meta-analyses of multiple health outcomes". BMJ. 359: j5024. doi:10.1136/bmj.j5024. PMC 5696634. PMID 29167102.
Coffee and Caffeine's Frequently Asked Questions from the alt.drugs.caffeine, alt.coffee, rec.food.drink.coffee Newsgroups, 7 January 1998
a b Bunker, M. L.; McWilliams, M. (1979). "Caffeine content of common beverages". Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 74 (1): 28–32. doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(21)39775-9. PMID 762339. S2CID 10192823.
"Caffeine content of common beverages". Mayo Clinic. 3 October 2009. Archived from the original on 3 July 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2007.
See for example the following websites: "How Much Caffeine in a Cup of Coffee, Tea, Cola or Chocolate Bar?". talkaboutcoffee.com.
Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010., "How much caffeine is there in (drink/food/pill?)". 15 January 2006. Archived from the original on 13 December 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2022.
Coffee, brewed, espresso, restaurant-prepared and Coffee, brewed from grounds, prepared with tap water, in the USDA nutrient database
Wang, Rui; Xue, Jingjing; Meng, Lei; Lee, Jin-Wook; Zhao, Zipeng; Sun, Pengyu; Cai, Le; Huang, Tianyi; Wang, Zhengxu; Wang, Zhao-Kui; Duan, Yu (June 2019). "Caffeine Improves the Performance and Thermal Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells". Joule. 3 (6): 1464–1477. doi:10.1016/j.joule.2019.04.005.
Wahyuni, N L E; Rispiandi, R; Hariyadi, T (19 May 2020). "Effect of bean maturity and roasting temperature on chemical content of robusta coffee". IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 830 (2): 022019. Bibcode:2020MS&E..830b2019W. doi:10.1088/1757-899X/830/2/022019. ISSN 1757-899X.
Casal, S.; Beatriz Oliveira, M.; Ferreira, Margarida A. (March 2000). "HPLC/diode-array applied to the thermal degradation of trigonelline, nicotinic acid and caffeine in coffee". Food Chemistry. 68 (4): 481–485. doi:10.1016/S0308-8146(99)00228-9. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022., cited in Lashermes, Philippe, ed. (2018). Achieving sustainable cultivation of coffee : breeding and quality traits.
Philadelphia, PA. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-78676-152-1. OCLC 969828311.
"The Food Timeline: popular American decade foods, menus, products & party planning tips". foodtimeline.org.
Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022.
Cohen, Brad (16 July 2014). "The complicated culture of Bosnian coffee". BBC. Archived from the original on 10 February 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2020.
La Dolce Vita. 1999. Coffee.
London, UK: New Holland Books
"Barista Training Standards – A Global Perspective". Cafe Culture. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015. Retrieved 10 June 2015.
"Stoughton, WI – Where the Coffee Break Originated". stoughtonwi.com.
Stoughton, Wisconsin Chamber of Commerce.
Archived from the original on 20 May 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2009. Mr.
Osmund Gunderson decided to ask the Norwegian wives, who lived just up the hill from his warehouse, if they would come and help him sort the tobacco.
The women agreed, as long as they could have a break in the morning and another in the afternoon, to go home and tend to their chores.
Of course, this also meant they were free to have a cup of coffee from the pot that was always hot on the stove.
Mr.
Gunderson agreed and with this simple habit, the coffee break was born.
"Time – March 1951". Time. 5 March 1951.
"The Coffee break". npr.org. 2 December 2002. Archived from the original on 28 May 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2009. Wherever the coffee break originated, Stamberg says, it may not actually have been called a coffee break until 1952. That year, a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign urged consumers, 'Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You.'
Hunt, Morton M. (1993). The story of psychology (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-385-24762-7. [work] for Maxwell House that helped make the 'coffee break' an American custom in offices, factories, and homes.
Brown, Daniel W. (2004). A new introduction to Islam.
Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 149–151. ISBN 978-1-4051-5807-7.
"A few new Passover haggadahs, and a facelift for an old favorite". Jewish Telegraphic Agency.
Archived from the original on 24 March 2011.
"Who Are the Mormons?". Beliefnet.
Archived from the original on 5 October 2008. Retrieved 13 February 2010.
"Coffee consumption and mortality in Seventh-Day Adventists". Nutrition Research Newsletter.
Frost & Sullivan.
September 1992. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 13 February 2010.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 11.
Bersten 1999, p. 53.
Knutsson, Anna; Hodacs, Hanna (2021). "When coffee was banned: strategies of labour and leisure among Stockholm's poor women, 1794–1796 and 1799–1802". Scandinavian Economic History Review: 1–23. doi:10.1080/03585522.2021.2000489. ISSN 0358-5522. S2CID 244415520.
Topik, Steven (2009). "Coffee as a Social Drug". Cultural Critique. 71 (71): 81–106. doi:10.1353/cul.0.0027. ISSN 0882-4371. JSTOR 25475502.
Allen 1999, p. 27.
Pendergrast 2001, p. 10.
Works cited
Allen, Stewart Lee (1999). The Devil's Cup: Coffee, the Driving Force in History.
Soho: Random House.
ISBN 978-1-56947-174-6. OCLC 41961356.
Bersten, Ian (1999). Coffee, Sex & Health: A History of Anti-coffee Crusaders and Sexual Hysteria.
Sydney: Helian Books.
ISBN 978-0-9577581-0-0. OCLC 222519244.
Clarke, Ronald James; Macrae, R., eds. (1987). Coffee.
Vol. 2: Technology.
Barking, Essex: Elsevier Applied Science.
ISBN 978-1-85166-034-6.
Clifford, M. N.; Wilson, K.C., eds. (1985). Coffee: Botany, Biochemistry and Production of Beans and Beverage.
Westport, Connecticut: AVI Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-7099-0787-9. OCLC 11444112.
Kingston, Lani (2015). How to Make Coffee: The Science Behind the Bean (1st ed.). Lewes: Ivy Press.
ISBN 978-1782405184. OCLC 898155710.
Kummer, Corby (2003). The Joy of Coffee: The Essential guide to Buying, Brewing, and Enjoying.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN 978-0-618-30240-6. OCLC 51969208.
Pendergrast, Mark (2001) . Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How It Transformed Our World.
London: Texere.
ISBN 978-1-58799-088-5. OCLC 48931999.
Souza, Ricardo M. (2008). Plant-Parasitic Nematodes of Coffee.
Dordrecht: シュプリンガー・ジャパン株式会社. ISBN 978-1-4020-8719-6. OCLC 288603555. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Weinberg, Bennett Alan; Bealer, Bonnie K. (2001). The World of Caffeine: The Science and Culture of the World's Most Popular Drug.
New York: Routledge. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-415-92722-2. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Further reading
Bhanoo, Sindya N. (25 March 2013). "The Secret May Be in the Coffee". The New York Times.
Retrieved 4 December 2013.
Ganchy, Sally (2009). Islam and Science, Medicine, and Technology.
The Rosen Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-1-4358-5066-8.
Von Hünersdorff, Richard; Hasenkamp, Holger G. (2002). Coffee : a bibliography : a guide to the literature on coffee.
London: Hünersdorff.
ISBN 978-0-9527121-0-7. OCLC 52041916.
Jacob, Heinrich Eduard (1998). Coffee: The Epic of a Commodity.
Short Hills, NJ: Burford Books.
ISBN 978-1-58080-070-9. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Joffe-Walt, Benjamin; Burkeman, Oliver (16 September 2005). "Coffee trail—from the Ethiopian village of Choche to a London coffee shop". The Guardian.
Mahamid, Hatim; Nissim, Chaim (5 December 2018). "Sufis and Coffee Consumption: Religio-Legal and Historical Aspects of a Controversy in the Late Mamluk and Early Ottoman Periods". Journal of Sufi Studies. 7 (1–2): 140–164. doi:10.1163/22105956-12341311. S2CID 182410390.
Metcalf, Allan A. (1999). The World in So Many Words: A Country-by-country Tour of Words that have Shaped our Language.
Houghton Mifflin. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-395-95920-6. Retrieved 18 November 2015.
Rao, Scott (2008). The professional barista's handbook : an expert's guide to preparing espresso, coffee, and tea.
USA: The author.
ISBN 978-1-60530-098-6. OCLC 311542398.
Rendle, Alfred Barton; Freeman, William George (1911). "Coffee" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 6 (11th ed.). pp. 646–649. (inc. trade figures for 1904–5, diagrams etc.)
Siasos, G.; Oikonomou, E.; Chrysohoou, C.; Tousoulis, D.; Panagiotakos, D.; Zaromitidou, M.; Zisimos, K.; Kokkou, E.; Marinos, G.; Papavassiliou, A. G.; Pitsavos, C.; Stefanadis, C. (2013). "Consumption of a boiled Greek type of coffee is associated with improved endothelial function: The Ikaria Study". Vascular Medicine. 18 (2): 55–62. doi:10.1177/1358863X13480258. PMID 23509088.
Siasos, G.; Tousoulis, D.; Stefanadis, C. (February 2014). "Effects of habitual coffee consumption on vascular function". Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 63 (6): 606–07. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.1642. PMID 24184234.
Weissman, Michaele (2008). God in a Cup: The Obsessive Quest for the Perfect Coffee.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 9780470173589. OCLC 938341854.
External links
Media related to Coffee at Wikimedia Commons
Quotations related to Coffee at Wikiquote
CoffeeTopics
Economics
Fair trade
History
International Coffee Day
Single-origin coffee
Third wave of coffee
Production
Coffee production
List of countries by coffee production
Coffee roasting
Coffee wastewater
Decaffeination
Home roasting
Species and varieties
Arabica
Benguet
Blue Mountain
Bonifieur
Bourbon
Geisha
Kona
Maracaturra
Maragogipe
Molokai
S795
Sagada
Charrieriana
Liberica
Barako
Racemosa
Robusta
Sulu
Components
Cafestol
Caffeic acid
Caffeine
Coffee bean
Furan-2-ylmethanethiol
Kahweol
Preparation
AeroPress
Arabic coffee
Jebena
Brewed coffee
Chemex
Cezve
Chorreador
Coffeemaker
Cold brew
nitro
Espresso
doppio
lungo
ristretto
Espresso machine
French press
Instant coffee
Coffee syrup
Knockbox
Moka pot
Neapolitan flip coffee pot
Percolator
Turkish coffee
Vacuum maker
Single-serve coffee container
Coffee drinks
Affogato
Americano
Beaten coffee
Bica
Bicerin
Black Russian
Cà phê sữa đá
Café au lait
Café com cheirinho
Café con leche
Café de olla
Café Touba
Café corretto
Café crema
Caffè macchiato
Café mocha
Cappuccino
Carajillo
Coffee cabinet
Coffee milk
Cortado
Café Cubano
Dalgona coffee
Egg coffee
Espresso
Flat white
Frappé coffee
Frappuccino
Galão
Garoto
Gassosa al caffè
Iced coffee
Indian filter coffee
Ipoh white coffee
Irish coffee
Karsk
Kopi
Kopi luwak
Kopi tubruk
Kurdish coffee
Latte macchiato
Latte
Liqueur coffee
Long black
Lungo
Marocchino
Mazagran
Moretta
Oliang
Raf coffee
Red eye
Ristretto
Rüdesheimer Kaffee
Tenom coffee
Turkish coffee
White coffee
White Russian
Wiener Melange
Yuenyeung
Organization lists
Bakery cafés
Coffee companies
Coffeehouses
Lifestyle
Barista
Bikini barista
Caffè sospeso
Coffee break
Coffee ceremony
CoffeeCon
Coffee culture
Coffee cupping
Coffee palace
Coffeehouse
Historical coffeehouses
Kopi tiam
Latte art
Viennese coffee house
Substitutes
Barley coffee
Barley tea
Barleycup
Caro
Chicory
Dandelion coffee
Inka
Maya nut
Postum
Qishr
Roasted grain drink
Serving vessels
Coffee cup
sleeve
Cezve
Demitasse
spoon
Tasse à café
Zarf
Competitions
United States Barista Championship
World Barista Championship
World Brewers Cup
Misc.
Coffee and doughnuts
Coffee bag
Coffee service
Coffee leaf rust
Gustav III of Sweden's coffee experiment
Canned coffee
Coffee vending machine
Used coffee grounds
Sustainable coffee
Coffee portal
Category: Coffee
Lists of countries by agricultural output rankingsCereals
Barley
Buckwheat
Maize
Millet
Oat
Rice
Rye
Sorghum
Triticale
Wheat
exports
Fruit
Apple
Apricot
Avocado
Banana
Cherry
Citrus
Orange
Coconut
Cucumber
Eggplant
Grape
Lemon
Lime
Mango
Papaya
Pear
Pineapple
Plum
Raspberry
Tomato
Vegetables
Artichoke
Carrot
Garlic
Onion
Potato
Rapeseed
Soybean
Turnip
Other
Cacao
Cassava
Coffee
Cotton
Fish
Milk
Palm oil
Sugar beet
Sugar cane
Sunflower seed
Tea
Tobacco
Wine
Related
Irrigated land
Land use
Organic farmland
List of international rankings
Lists by country
Coffee production by regionTop 20  producers (2014)
Brazil
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Guatemala
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Java
Ivory Coast
Mexico
Nicaragua
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Tanzania
Thailand
Uganda
Vietnam
Coffee portalOther cultivators
Angola
Bolivia
China
Cameroon
Cuba
Democratic Republic of the Congo
East Timor
Guadeloupe
Guam
Haiti
Jamaica
Kenya
Laos
Martinique
Panama
Paraguay
Philippines
Puerto Rico
Sri Lanka
United States (Hawaii)
Venezuela
Lists
List of countries by coffee production
List of countries by coffee exports
Health effects of food, drink, and use of natural substancesFood
Chocolate
Honey
Sugar
Drink
Alcohol
Coffee
Tea
Wine
Phytochemicals
Caffeine
Natural phenols and polyphenols (including tannins)
Other
Cannabis
Noise pollution
Pesticide exposure
Sun exposure
Tobacco
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 20:13 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
