Colonialism - Wikipedia
Colonialism
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Creation and maintenance of colonies by people from another area
This article needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Colonialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The pith helmet, an icon of colonialism in tropical lands.
This one was used by the Kingdom of Madagascar, inspired by those used by the Second French colonial empire.
Colonialism is a practice or policy of control by one people or power over other people or areas, often by establishing colonies and generally with the aim of economic dominance.
In the process of colonisation, colonisers may impose their religion, language, economics, and other cultural practices.
The foreign administrators rule the territory in pursuit of their interests, seeking to benefit from the colonised region's people and resources.
It is associated with but distinct from imperialism.
Though colonialism has existed since ancient times, the concept is most strongly associated with the European colonial period starting with the 15th century when some European states established colonising empires.
At first, European colonising countries followed policies of mercantilism, aiming to strengthen the home-country economy, so agreements usually restricted the colony to trading only with the metropole (mother country). By the mid-19th century, the British Empire gave up mercantilism and trade restrictions and adopted the principle of free trade, with few restrictions or tariffs.
Christian missionaries were active in practically all of the European-controlled colonies because the metropoles were Christian.
Historian Philip Hoffman calculated that by 1800, before the Industrial Revolution, Europeans already controlled at least 35% of the globe, and by 1914, they had gained control of 84% of the globe.
In the aftermath of World War II colonial powers retreated between 1945 and 1975; over which time nearly all colonies gained independence, entering into changed colonial, so-called postcolonial and neocolonialist relations.
Postcolonialism and neocolonialism have continued or shifted relations and ideologies of colonialism, justifying its continuation with concepts such as development and new frontiers, as in exploring outer space for colonization.
Contents
Definitions
1541: Spanish Conquistadors founding Santiago de Chile
Collins English Dictionary defines colonialism as "the practice by which a powerful country directly controls less powerful countries and uses their resources to increase its own power and wealth". Webster's Encyclopedic Dictionary defines colonialism as "the system or policy of a nation seeking to extend or retain its authority over other people or territories". The Merriam-Webster Dictionary offers four definitions, including "something characteristic of a colony" and "control by one power over a dependent area or people". Etymologically, the word "colony" comes from the Latin colōnia—"a place for agriculture".
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy uses the term "to describe the process of European settlement and political control over the rest of the world, including the Americas, Australia, and parts of Africa and Asia". It discusses the distinction between colonialism, imperialism and conquest and states that "[t]he difficulty of defining colonialism stems from the fact that the term is often used as a synonym for imperialism.
Both colonialism and imperialism were forms of conquest that were expected to benefit Europe economically and strategically," and continues "given the difficulty of consistently distinguishing between the two terms, this entry will use colonialism broadly to refer to the project of European political domination from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries that ended with the national liberation movements of the 1960s".
In his preface to Jürgen Osterhammel's Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview, Roger Tignor says "For Osterhammel, the essence of colonialism is the existence of colonies, which are by definition governed differently from other territories such as protectorates or informal spheres of influence." In the book, Osterhammel asks, "How can 'colonialism' be defined independently from 'colony?'" He settles on a three-sentence definition:
Colonialism is a relationship between an indigenous (or forcibly imported) majority and a minority of foreign invaders.
The fundamental decisions affecting the lives of the colonised people are made and implemented by the colonial rulers in pursuit of interests that are often defined in a distant metropolis.
Rejecting cultural compromises with the colonised population, the colonisers are convinced of their own superiority and their ordained mandate to rule.
Types
Dutch family in Java, 1927
The Times once quipped that there were three types of colonial empire: "The English, which consists in making colonies with colonists; the German, which collects colonists without colonies; the French, which sets up colonies without colonists." Modern studies of colonialism have often distinguished between various overlapping categories of colonialism, broadly classified into four types: settler colonialism, exploitation colonialism, surrogate colonialism, and internal colonialism.
Some historians have identified other forms of colonialism, including national and trade forms.
Settler colonialism involves large-scale immigration by settlers to colonies, often motivated by religious, political, or economic reasons.
This form of colonialism aims largely to supplant prior existing populations with a settler one, and involves large number of settlers emigrating to colonies for the purpose of settling down and establishing settlements.
Australia, Canada, the United States, South Africa (and to a more controversial extent Israel) are examples of nations created in their modern form by settler colonization.
Exploitation colonialism involves fewer colonists and focuses on the exploitation of natural resources or labour to the benefit of the metropole.
This form consists of trading posts as well as larger colonies where colonists would constitute much of the political and economic administration.
The European colonization of Africa and Asia was largely conducted under the auspices of exploitation colonialism.
Surrogate colonialism involves a settlement project supported by a colonial power, in which most of the settlers do not come from the same ethnic group as the ruling power.
Internal colonialism is a notion of uneven structural power between areas of a state.
The source of exploitation comes from within the state.
This is demonstrated in the way control and exploitation may pass from people from the colonizing country to an immigrant population within a newly independent country.
National colonialism is a process involving elements of both settler and internal colonialism, in which nation-building and colonization are symbiotically connected, with the colonial regime seeking to remake the colonized peoples into their own cultural and political image.
The goal is to integrate them into the state, but only as reflections of the state's preferred culture.
The Republic of China in Taiwan is the archetypal example of a national-colonialist society.
Trade colonialism involves the undertaking of colonialist ventures in support of trade opportunities for merchants.
This form of colonialism was most prominent in 19th-century Asia, where previously isolationist states were forced to open their ports to Western powers.
Examples of this include the Opium Wars and the opening of Japan.
Socio-cultural evolution
As colonialism often played out in pre-populated areas, sociocultural evolution included the formation of various ethnically hybrid populations.
Colonialism gave rise to culturally and ethnically mixed populations such as the mestizos of the Americas, as well as racially divided populations such as those found in French Algeria or in Southern Rhodesia.
In fact, everywhere where colonial powers established a consistent and continued presence, hybrid communities existed.
Notable examples in Asia include the Anglo-Burmese, Anglo-Indian, Burgher, Eurasian Singaporean, Filipino mestizo, Kristang and Macanese peoples.
In the Dutch East Indies (later Indonesia) the vast majority of "Dutch" settlers were in fact Eurasians known as Indo-Europeans, formally belonging to the European legal class in the colony (see also Indos in pre-colonial history and Indos in colonial history).
History
Main articles: History of colonialism and Chronology of Western colonialism
Map of colonial and land-based empires throughout the world in 1800.
Map of colonial and land-based empires throughout the world in 1914.
Map of colonial empires (and Soviet Union) throughout the world in 1936.
Map of colonial empires at the end of the Second World War, 1945.
"Why do the Christian nations, which were so weak in the past compared with Muslim nations begin to dominate so many lands in modern times and even defeat the once victorious Ottoman armies?"..."Because they have laws and rules invented by reason."
Ibrahim Muteferrika, Rational basis for the Politics of Nations (1731)
Antiquity
Activity that could be called colonialism has a long history, starting at least as early as the Ancient Egyptians.
Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans founded colonies in antiquity.
Phoenicia had an enterprising maritime trading-culture that spread across the Mediterranean from 1550 BC to 300 BC; later the Persian empire and various Greek city-states continued on this line of setting up colonies.
The Romans would soon follow, setting up coloniae throughout the Mediterranean, in Northern Africa, and in Western Asia.
Beginning in the 7th century, Arabs colonized a substantial portion of the Middle East, Northern Africa, and parts of Asia and Europe.
From the 9th century Vikings (Norsemen) established colonies in Britain, Ireland, Iceland, Greenland, North America, present-day Russia and Ukraine, France (Normandy) and Sicily.
In the 9th century a new wave of Mediterranean colonisation began, with competitors such as the Venetians, Genovese and Amalfians infiltrating the wealthy previously Byzantine or Eastern Roman islands and lands.
European Crusaders set up colonial regimes in Outremer (in the Levant, 1097–1291) and in the Baltic littoral (12th century onwards). Venice began to dominate Dalmatia and reached its greatest nominal colonial extent at the conclusion of the Fourth Crusade in 1204, with the declaration of the acquisition of three octaves of the Byzantine Empire.
Modernity
Iberian Union of Spain and Portugal between 1580 and 1640
More than a century before the Jamestown, Virginia settlement led by captain Christopher Newport, modern colonialism started with the Portuguese Prince Henry the Navigator (1394–1460), initiating the Age of Exploration and establishing African trading posts (1445 onwards). Spain (initially the Crown of Castile) and soon after Portugal encountered the Americas (1492 onwards) through sea travel and built trading posts or conquered large extents of land.
For some people,[which?] it is this building of colonies across oceans that differentiates colonialism from other types of expansionism.
Madrid and Lisbon divided the areas of these "new" lands between the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire in 1494; other would-be colonial powers paid little heed to the theoretical demarcation.
The 17th century saw the birth of the French colonial empire and the Dutch Empire, as well as the English overseas possessions, which later became the British Empire.
It also saw the establishment of a Danish colonial empire and some Swedish overseas colonies.
A first wave of independence movements started with the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), initiating a new phase for the British Empire.
The Spanish Empire largely collapsed in the Americas with the Latin American wars of independence (c.  1808 onwards). Empire-builders established several new colonies after this time, including in the German colonial empire and the Belgian colonial empire.
In the late-19th century, many European powers became involved in the Scramble for Africa.
The Russian Empire, Ottoman Empire and Austrian Empire existed at the same time as the above empires but did not expand over oceans.
Rather, these empires expanded through the more traditional route of the conquest of neighbouring territories.
There was, though, some Russian colonisation of the Americas across the Bering Strait.
From the 1860s, the Empire of Japan modelled itself on European colonial empires and expanded its territories in the Pacific and on the Asian mainland.
Argentina and the Empire of Brazil fought for hegemony in South America.[clarification needed] The United States of America gained overseas territories after the 1898 Spanish–American War – hence the coining of the term "American Empire".
Map of the British Empire (as of 1910)
Colonial Governor of the Seychelles inspecting police guard of honour in 1972
The world's colonial population at the outbreak of the First World War (1914) – a high point for colonialism – totalled about 560 million people, of whom 70% lived in British possessions, 10% in French possessions, 9% in Dutch possessions, 4% in Japanese possessions, 2% in German possessions, 2% in American possessions, 3% in Portuguese possessions, 1% in Belgian possessions and 0.5% in Italian possessions.
The domestic domains of the colonial powers had a total population of about 370 million people.
Outside Europe, few areas had remained without coming under formal colonial tutorship – and even Siam, China, Nepal, Japan, Afghanistan, Persia and Abyssinia had felt varying degrees of Western colonial-style influence – concessions, unequal treaties, extraterritoriality and the like.
Asking whether colonies paid, economic historian Grover Clark (1891–1938) argues an emphatic "No!" He reports that in every case the support cost, especially the military system necessary to support and defend colonies, outran the total trade they produced.
Apart from the British Empire, they did not provide favoured destinations for the immigration of surplus metropole populations.
The question of whether colonies paid is a complicated one when recognizing the multiplicity of interests involved.
In some cases colonial powers paid a lot in military costs while private investors pocketed the benefits.
In other cases the colonial powers managed to move the burden of administrative costs to the colonies themselves by imposing taxes.
After the First World War of 1914–1918, the victorious allies divided up the German colonial empire and much of the Ottoman Empire between themselves as League of Nations mandates, grouping these territories into three classes according to how quickly it was deemed that they could prepare for independence.
The empires of Russia and Austria collapsed in 1917–1918. Nazi Germany set up short-lived colonial systems (Reichskommissariate, Generalgouvernement) in Eastern Europe in the early 1940s.
After World War II (1939–1945) decolonisation progressed rapidly, due to a number of reasons.
First, the Japanese victories in the Pacific War of 1941–1945 had showed Indians and other subject peoples that the colonial powers were not invincible.
Second, World War II had significantly weakened all the overseas colonial powers economically.[need quotation to verify]
The word "neocolonialism" originated from Jean-Paul Sartre in 1956, to refer to a variety of contexts since the decolonisation that took place after World War II. Generally it does not refer to a type of direct colonisation – rather to colonialism or colonial-style exploitation by other means.
Specifically, neocolonialism may refer to the theory that former or existing economic relationships, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Central American Free Trade Agreement, or the operations of companies (such as Royal Dutch Shell in Nigeria and Brunei) fostered by former colonial powers were or are used to maintain control of former colonies and dependencies after the colonial independence movements of the post–World War II period.[citation needed]
The term "neocolonialism" became popular in ex-colonies in the late-20th century.
List of colonies
British
Harbour Street, Kingston, Jamaica, c. 1820
The Battle of Isandlwana during the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879. After an initial defeat the British were able to conquer Zululand.
Main article: British Empire
Aden
Afghanistan
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
Ascension Island
Australia
New South Wales
Victoria
Tasmania
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Bahamas
Barbados
Basutoland
Bechuanaland
British Borneo
Brunei
Labuan
North Borneo
Sarawak
British East Africa
British Guiana
British Honduras
British Hong Kong
British Leeward Islands
Anguilla
Antigua
Barbuda
British Virgin Islands
Dominica
Montserrat
Nevis  The Delhi Durbar of 1877: the proclamation of Queen Victoria as Empress of India
Saint Kitts
British Malaya  The First Anglo-Sikh War, 1845–46
Federated Malay States
Straits Settlements
Unfederated Malay States
British Somaliland
British Western Pacific Territories
British Solomon Islands
Fiji
Gilbert and Ellice Islands
Phoenix Islands
Pitcairn Islands
New Hebrides (condominium with France)
Tonga
Union Islands
British Windward Islands
Barbados
Dominica
Grenada
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Myanmar
Canada
Ceylon
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Cyprus (including Akrotiri and Dhekelia) The result of the Boer Wars was the annexation of the Boer Republics to the British Empire in 1902
Egypt
Falkland Islands
Falkland Islands Dependencies
Graham Land
South Georgia
South Orkney Islands
South Shetland Islands
South Sandwich Islands
Victoria Land
Gambia
Gibraltar
Gold Coast
India (including what is today Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar)  A view of shops with anti-British and pro-Independence signs, Malta, c. 1960
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Ireland
Jamaica
Kenya
Maldives
Malta
Mandatory Palestine
Emirate of Transjordan
Mandatory Iraq
Mauritius
Muscat and Oman
Norfolk Island
Nigeria
Northern Rhodesia
Nyasaland  Gibraltar National Day in British-controlled Gibraltar
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Shanghai International Settlement
South Africa
Cape Colony
Natal
Transvaal Colony
Orange River Colony
Southern Rhodesia
St Helena
Swaziland
Trinidad and Tobago
Tristan da Cunha
Trucial States
Uganda
Tonga
1966 flag of the Anglo-French Condominium of the New Hebrides
French
Main article: List of French possessions and colonies
Acadia
Algeria
Canada
Clipperton Island
Comoros Islands (including Mayotte) Siege of Constantine (1836) during the French conquest of Algeria.
French Guiana
French Equatorial Africa
Chad
Oubangui-Chari
French Congo
Gabon
French India (Pondichéry, Chandernagor, Karikal, Mahé and Yanaon)
French Indochina
Annam  French officers and Tonkinese riflemen, 1884
Tonkin
Cochinchina
Cambodia
Laos
French Polynesia
French Somaliland
French Southern and Antarctic Lands
French West Africa
Ivory Coast
Dahomey
Guinea  Contemporary illustration of Major Marchand's trek across Africa in 1898
French Sudan
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
Upper Volta
Guadeloupe
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
La Réunion
Louisiana
Madagascar
Martinique
French Morocco
French Mandate for Syria and Lebanon
New Caledonia
Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon
Saint-Domingue
Shanghai French Concession (similar concessions in Kouang-Tchéou-Wan, Tientsin, Hankéou)
Tunisia
New Hebrides (condominium with Britain)
Wallis-et-Futuna
American
Further information: List of Guano Island claims and United States territorial acquisitions
Governor General William Howard Taft addressing the audience at the Philippine Assembly in the Manila Grand Opera House
American Concession in Tianjin (1869–1902)
American Concession in Shanghai (1848–1863)
American Concession in Beihai (1876–1943)
American Concession in Harbin (1898–1943)
American Samoa
Beijing Legation Quarter (1861–1945)
Corn Islands (1914–1971)
Canton and Enderbury Islands
Caroline Islands
Cuba (Platt Amendment turned Cuba into a protectorate – until Cuban Revolution)
Falkland Islands (1832)
Guantánamo Bay
Guam
Gulangyu Island (1903–1945)
Haiti (1915–1934)
Indian Territory (1834–1907)
Isle of Pines (1899–1925)
Liberia (Independent since 1847, US protectorate until post-WW2)
Marshall Islands
Midway
Nicaragua (1912–1933)
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Palmyra Atoll
Panama (Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty turned Panama into a protectorate, protectorate until post-WW2)
Panama Canal Zone (1903–1979)
Philippines (1898–1946)
Puerto Rico
Quita Sueño Bank (1869–1981)
Roncador Bank (1856–1981)
Ryukyu Islands (1945–1972) 
Shanghai International Settlement (1863–1945)
Sultanate of Sulu (1903–1915)
Swan Islands, Honduras (1914–1972)
Treaty Ports of China, Korea and Japan
United States Virgin Islands
Wake Island
Wilkes Land
Russian
The Russian settlement of St.
Paul's Harbour (present-day Kodiak, Alaska), Russian America, 1814
Emirate of Bukhara (1873–1917)
Grand Duchy of Finland (1809–1917)
Khiva Khanate (1873–1917)
Kauai (Hawaii) (1816–1817)
Russian America (Alaska) (1733–1867)
Fort Ross (California)
Russian Dalian (1898-1905)
German
Kamerun (by R. Hellgrewe, 1908)
Bismarck Archipelago
Kamerun
Caroline Islands
German New Guinea
German Samoa
German Solomon Islands
German East Africa
German South-West Africa
Gilbert Islands
Jiaozhou Bay
Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Palau
Togoland
Tianjin
Italian
Postcard of the Italian invasion of Libya during the Italo-Turkish War
Italian Aegean Islands
Italian Albania (1918–1920)
Italian Albania (1939–1943)
Italian concession of Tientsin
Italian governorate of Dalmatia
Italian governorate of Montenegro
Hellenic State
Italian Eritrea
Italian Somaliland
Italian Trans-Juba (briefly; annexed)
Libya
Italian Tripolitania
Italian Cyrenaica
Italian Libya
Italian East Africa
Italian occupation of Majorca (1936-1939)
Dutch
Dutch Brazil
Dutch Ceylon
Dutch Formosa
Dutch Cape Colony
Aruba
Bonaire
Curaçao
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Surinam (Dutch colony)
Dutch East Indies
Dutch New Guinea
Portuguese
Portuguese women in Goa, India, 16th century
Main article: Portuguese Empire
Portuguese Africa
Cabinda
Ceuta
Madeira
Portuguese Angola
Portuguese Cape Verde
Portuguese Guinea
Portuguese Mozambique
Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe
Fort of São João Baptista de Ajudá
Portuguese Asia
Portuguese India
Goa
Daman
Diu
Portuguese Macau
Portuguese Oceania
Flores
Portuguese Timor
Solor
Portuguese South America
Colonial Brazil
Cisplatina
Misiones Orientales
Portuguese North America
Azores
Newfoundland and Labrador
Spanish
An 18th-century casta painting from New Spain shows a Spanish man and his indigenous wife.
The Battle of Tétouan, 1860, by Marià Fortuny
Spanish General Arsenio Martínez Campos in Havana, Colonial Cuba, 1878
Main article: Spanish Empire
Canary Islands
Cape Juby
Captaincy General of Cuba
Spanish Florida
Spanish Louisiana
Captaincy General of the Philippines
Caroline Islands
Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Palau Islands
Ifni
Río de Oro
Saguia el-Hamra
Spanish Morocco
Spanish Netherlands
Spanish Sahara
Spanish Sardinia
Spanish Sicily
Viceroyalty of Peru
Captaincy General of Chile
Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata
Spanish Guinea
Annobón
Fernando Po
Río Muni
Viceroyalty of New Granada
Captaincy General of Venezuela
Viceroyalty of New Spain
Captaincy General of Guatemala
Captaincy General of Yucatán
Captaincy General of Santo Domingo
Captaincy General of Puerto Rico
Spanish Formosa
Austrian and Austro-Hungarian
Main article: Austrian colonial policy
Muslim Bosniak resistance during the battle of Sarajevo in 1878 against the Austro-Hungarian occupation
Bosnia and Herzegovina 1878–1918.
Tianjin, China, 1902–1917.
Austrian Netherlands, 1714–1797
Nicobar Islands, 1778–1783
North Borneo, 1876–1879
Danish
Main article: Danish colonial empire
Map of the European Union in the world, with Overseas Countries and Territories and Outermost Regions. (N.B. The United Kingdom left the Union in 2020.)
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Danish West Indies (now United States Virgin Islands)
Danish Norway
Faroe Islands
Greenland
Iceland
Serampore
Danish Gold Coast
Danish India
Belgian
Belgian Congo
Ruanda-Urundi
Tianjin
Swedish
Guadeloupe
New Sweden
Saint Barthélemy
Swedish Gold Coast
Dominions of Sweden in continental Europe
Norwegian
Svalbard
Jan Mayen
Bouvet Island
Queen Maud Land
Peter I Island
Ottoman
Rumelia
Ottoman North Africa
Ottoman Arabia
Australian
Papua New Guinea
Christmas Island
Cocos Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island
Nauru
Australian Antarctic Territory
New Zealand
Governor Lord Ranfurly reading the annexation proclamation to Queen Makea on 7 October 1900.
Cook Islands
Nauru
Niue
Ross Dependency
Balleny Islands
Ross Island
Scott Island
Roosevelt Island
Japanese
Main articles: Japanese colonial empire and List of territories occupied by Imperial Japan
Bonin Islands  Three Koreans shot for pulling up rails as a protest against seizure of land without payment by the Japanese
Karafuto
Korea
Kuril Islands
Kwantung Leased Territory
Nanyo
Caroline Islands
Marshall Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau Islands
Penghu Islands
Ryukyu Domain
Taiwan
Volcano Islands
Chinese
Camp of the Qing Military in Dzungar in 1756.
Dzungaria (Xinjiang) from 1758–present
Kashgaria (East Turkistan) from 1884 – 1933, 1934–1944, 1949–present
Guangxi (Tusi)
Hainan
Nansha Islands
Xisha Islands
Manchuria
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia (Mongolia & Tuva) during the late Qing dynasty
Taiwan
Tibet (Kashag)
Yunnan (Tusi)
Vietnam during the Han, Sui, and Tang dynasties
Omani
Omani Empire
Following the expulsion of the Portuguese colonizers, Sultanate of Oman was the preeminent power in the western Indian Ocean during the 17th century.
Swahili coast
Zanzibar
Qatar
Bahrain
Somalia
Socotra
Mexican
The Californias
Texas
Central America
Clipperton Island
Revillagigedo Islands
Chiapas
Ecuatorian
Galápagos Islands
Colombian
Panama
Ecuador
Venezuela
Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina
Argentine
Argentine C-130 and control tower, Marambio Airport
The Conquest of the Desert extended Argentine power into Patagonia.
Protectorate of Peru (1820–1822)
Gobierno del Cerrito (1843–1851)
Chile (1817–1818)
Paraguay (1810–1811, 1873)
Uruguay (1810–1813)
Bolivia (1810–1822)
Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Falkland Islands and Dependencies  (1829–1831, 1832–1833, 1982)
Argentine Antarctica
Misiones
Formosa
Puna de Atacama (1839– )
Argentina expedition to California (1818)
Equatorial Guinea (1810–1815)
Paraguayan colonies
Mato Grosso do Sul
Formosa
Bolivian
Puna de Atacama (1825–1839 ceded to Argentina) (1825–1879 ceded to Chile)
Acre
Ethiopian
Eritrea
Moroccan
Western Sahara
Indian
Gilgit Baltistan
Thai/Siamese
Siamese Army in Laos in 1893.
Kingdom of Vientiane (1778–1828)
Kingdom of Luang Prabang (1778–1893)
Kingdom of Champasak (1778–1893)
Kingdom of Cambodia (1771–1867)
Kedah (1821–1826)
Perlis (1821–1836)
Ancient Egyptian
Canaan
Nubia
Khedivate Egyptian
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
Habesh Eyalet
Sidon Eyalet
Damascus Eyalet
Impact
Main article: Analysis of Western European colonialism and colonization § Colonial actions and their impacts
A 1904 cartoon by Bob Satterfield about the brutality committed by Western nations: the personifications of England, the United States, and Germany carrying spears topped by the severed heads of Tibet, the Philippines, and Southwest Africa respectively.
The caption describes this as "The advance guard of civilization".
The Dutch Public Health Service provides medical care for the natives of the Dutch East Indies, May 1946
The impacts of colonisation are immense and pervasive.
Various effects, both immediate and protracted, include the spread of virulent diseases, unequal social relations, detribalization, exploitation, enslavement, medical advances, the creation of new institutions, abolitionism, improved infrastructure, and technological progress.
Colonial practices also spur the spread of colonist languages, literature and cultural institutions, while endangering or obliterating those of native peoples.
The native cultures of the colonised peoples can also have a powerful influence on the imperial country.
Economy, trade and commerce
Economic expansion, sometimes described as the colonial surplus, has accompanied imperial expansion since ancient times.[citation needed] Greek trade networks spread throughout the Mediterranean region while Roman trade expanded with the primary goal of directing tribute from the colonised areas towards the Roman metropole.
According to Strabo, by the time of emperor Augustus, up to 120 Roman ships would set sail every year from Myos Hormos in Roman Egypt to India.
With the development of trade routes under the Ottoman Empire,
Gujari Hindus, Syrian Muslims, Jews, Armenians, Christians from south and central Europe operated trading routes that supplied Persian and Arab horses to the armies of all three empires, Mocha coffee to Delhi and Belgrade, Persian silk to India and Istanbul.
Portuguese trade routes (blue) and the rival Manila-Acapulco galleons trade routes (white) established in 1568
Aztec civilisation developed into an extensive empire that, much like the Roman Empire, had the goal of exacting tribute from the conquered colonial areas.
For the Aztecs, a significant tribute was the acquisition of sacrificial victims for their religious rituals.
On the other hand, European colonial empires sometimes attempted to channel, restrict and impede trade involving their colonies, funneling activity through the metropole and taxing accordingly.
Despite the general trend of economic expansion, the economic performance of former European colonies varies significantly.
In "Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-run Growth", economists Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson compare the economic influences of the European colonists on different colonies and study what could explain the huge discrepancies in previous European colonies, for example, between West African colonies like Sierra Leone and Hong Kong and Singapore.
According to the paper, economic institutions are the determinant of the colonial success because they determine their financial performance and order for the distribution of resources.
At the same time, these institutions are also consequences of political institutions – especially how de facto and de jure political power is allocated.
To explain the different colonial cases, we thus need to look first into the political institutions that shaped the economic institutions.
Dutch East India Company was the first-ever multinational corporation, financed by shares that established the first modern stock exchange.
For example, one interesting observation is "the Reversal of Fortune" – the less developed civilisations in 1500, like North America, Australia, and New Zealand, are now much richer than those countries who used to be in the prosperous civilisations in 1500 before the colonists came, like the Mughals in India and the Incas in the Americas.
One explanation offered by the paper focuses on the political institutions of the various colonies: it was less likely for European colonists to introduce economic institutions where they could benefit quickly from the extraction of resources in the area.
Therefore, given a more developed civilisation and denser population, European colonists would rather keep the existing economic systems than introduce an entirely new system; while in places with little to extract, European colonists would rather establish new economic institutions to protect their interests.
Political institutions thus gave rise to different types of economic systems, which determined the colonial economic performance.
European colonisation and development also changed gendered systems of power already in place around the world.
In many pre-colonialist areas, women maintained power, prestige, or authority through reproductive or agricultural control.
For example, in certain parts of sub-Saharan Africa[where?]      women maintained farmland in which they had usage rights.
While men would make political and communal decisions for a community, the women would control the village's food supply or their individual family's land.
This allowed women to achieve power and autonomy, even in patrilineal and patriarchal societies.
Through the rise of European colonialism came a large push for development and industrialisation of most economic systems.
When working to improve productivity, Europeans focused mostly on male workers.
Foreign aid arrived in the form of loans, land, credit, and tools to speed up development, but were only allocated to men.
In a more European fashion, women were expected to serve on a more domestic level.
The result was a technologic, economic, and class-based gender gap that widened over time.
Within a colony, the presence of extractive colonial institutions in a given area has been found have effects on the modern day economic development, institutions and infrastructure of these areas.
Slavery and indentured servitude
Further information: Atlantic slave trade, Indentured servant, Coolie, and Blackbirding
European nations entered their imperial projects with the goal of enriching the European metropoles.
Exploitation of non-Europeans and of other Europeans to support imperial goals was acceptable to the colonisers.
Two outgrowths of this imperial agenda were the extension of slavery and indentured servitude.
In the 17th century, nearly two-thirds of English settlers came to North America as indentured servants.
European slave traders brought large numbers of African slaves to the Americas by sail.
Spain and Portugal had brought African slaves to work in African colonies such as Cape Verde and São Tomé and Príncipe, and then in Latin America, by the 16th century.
The British, French and Dutch joined in the slave trade in subsequent centuries.
The European colonial system took approximately 11 million Africans to the Caribbean and to North and South America as slaves.
Slave traders in Gorée, Senegal, 18th century
European empire
Colonial destination
Number of slaves imported between 1450 and 1870
Portuguese Empire
Brazil
3,646,800
British Empire
British Caribbean
1,665,000
French Empire
French Caribbean
1,600,200
Spanish Empire
Latin America
1,552,100
Dutch Empire
Dutch Caribbean
British Empire
British North America
Abolitionists in Europe and Americas protested the inhumane treatment of African slaves, which led to the elimination of the slave trade (and later, of most forms of slavery) by the late 19th century.
One (disputed) school of thought points to the role of abolitionism in the American Revolution: while the British colonial metropole started to move towards outlawing slavery, slave-owning elites in the Thirteen Colonies saw this as one of the reasons to fight for their post-colonial independence and for the right to develop and continue a largely slave-based economy.
British colonising activity in New Zealand from the early 19th century played a part in ending slave-taking and slave-keeping among the indigenous Māori.
On the other hand, British colonial administration in Southern Africa, when it officially abolished slavery in the 1830s, caused rifts in society which arguably perpetuated slavery in the Boer Republics and fed into the philosophy of apartheid.
The labour shortages that resulted from abolition inspired European colonisers in Queensland, British Guaiana and Fiji (for example) to develop new sources of labour, re-adopting a system of indentured servitude.
Indentured servants consented to a contract with the European colonisers.
Under their contract, the servant would work for an employer for a term of at least a year, while the employer agreed to pay for the servant's voyage to the colony, possibly pay for the return to the country of origin, and pay the employee a wage as well.
The employees became "indentured" to the employer because they owed a debt back to the employer for their travel expense to the colony, which they were expected to pay through their wages.
In practice, indentured servants were exploited through terrible working conditions and burdensome debts imposed by the employers, with whom the servants had no means of negotiating the debt once they arrived in the colony.
India and China were the largest source of indentured servants during the colonial era.
Indentured servants from India travelled to British colonies in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, and also to French and Portuguese colonies, while Chinese servants travelled to British and Dutch colonies.
Between 1830 and 1930, around 30 million indentured servants migrated from India, and 24 million returned to India.
China sent more indentured servants to European colonies, and around the same proportion returned to China.
Following the Scramble for Africa, an early but secondary focus for most colonial regimes was the suppression of slavery and the slave trade.
By the end of the colonial period they were mostly successful in this aim, though slavery persists in Africa and in the world at large with much the same practices of de facto servility despite legislative prohibition.
Military innovation
The First Anglo-Ashanti War, 1823–31
Conquering forces have throughout history applied innovation in order to gain an advantage over the armies of the people they aim to conquer.
Greeks developed the phalanx system, which enabled their military units to present themselves to their enemies as a wall, with foot soldiers using shields to cover one another during their advance on the battlefield.
Under Philip II of Macedon, they were able to organise thousands of soldiers into a formidable battle force, bringing together carefully trained infantry and cavalry regiments.
Alexander the Great exploited this military foundation further during his conquests.
The Spanish Empire held a major advantage over Mesoamerican warriors through the use of weapons made of stronger metal, predominantly iron, which was able to shatter the blades of axes used by the Aztec civilisation and others.
The use of gunpowder weapons cemented the European military advantage over the peoples they sought to subjugate in the Americas and elsewhere.
End of empire
This section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Gandhi with Lord Pethwick-Lawrence, British Secretary of State for India, after a meeting on 18 April 1946
The populations of some colonial territories, such as Canada, enjoyed relative peace and prosperity as part of a European power, at least among the majority.
Minority populations such as First Nations peoples and French-Canadians experienced marginalisation and resented colonial practices.
Francophone residents of Quebec, for example, were vocal in opposing conscription into the armed services to fight on behalf of Britain during World War I, resulting in the Conscription crisis of 1917. Other European colonies had much more pronounced conflict between European settlers and the local population.
Rebellions broke out in the later decades of the imperial era, such as India's Sepoy Rebellion of 1857.
The territorial boundaries imposed by European colonisers, notably in central Africa and South Asia, defied the existing boundaries of native populations that had previously interacted little with one another.
European colonisers disregarded native political and cultural animosities, imposing peace upon people under their military control.
Native populations were often relocated at the will of the colonial administrators.
The Partition of British India in August 1947 led to the Independence of India and the creation of Pakistan.
These events also caused much bloodshed at the time of the migration of immigrants from the two countries.
Muslims from India and Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan migrated to the respective countries they sought independence for.
Post-independence population movement
The annual Notting Hill Carnival in London is a celebration led by the Trinidadian and Tobagonian British community.
In a reversal of the migration patterns experienced during the modern colonial era, post-independence era migration followed a route back towards the imperial country.
In some cases, this was a movement of settlers of European origin returning to the land of their birth, or to an ancestral birthplace. 900,000 French colonists (known as the Pied-Noirs) resettled in France following Algeria's independence in 1962. A significant number of these migrants were also of Algerian descent. 800,000 people of Portuguese origin migrated to Portugal after the independence of former colonies in Africa between 1974 and 1979; 300,000 settlers of Dutch origin migrated to the Netherlands from the Dutch West Indies after Dutch military control of the colony ended.
After WWII 300,000 Dutchmen from the Dutch East Indies, of which the majority were people of Eurasian descent called Indo Europeans, repatriated to the Netherlands.
A significant number later migrated to the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Global travel and migration in general developed at an increasingly brisk pace throughout the era of European colonial expansion.
Citizens of the former colonies of European countries may have a privileged status in some respects with regard to immigration rights when settling in the former European imperial nation.
For example, rights to dual citizenship may be generous, or larger immigrant quotas may be extended to former colonies.[citation needed]
In some cases, the former European imperial nations continue to foster close political and economic ties with former colonies.
The Commonwealth of Nations is an organisation that promotes cooperation between and among Britain and its former colonies, the Commonwealth members.
A similar organisation exists for former colonies of France, the Francophonie; the Community of Portuguese Language Countries plays a similar role for former Portuguese colonies, and the Dutch Language Union is the equivalent for former colonies of the Netherlands.[citation needed]
Migration from former colonies has proven to be problematic for European countries, where the majority population may express hostility to ethnic minorities who have immigrated from former colonies.
Cultural and religious conflict have often erupted in France in recent decades, between immigrants from the Maghreb countries of north Africa and the majority population of France.
Nonetheless, immigration has changed the ethnic composition of France; by the 1980s, 25% of the total population of "inner Paris" and 14% of the metropolitan region were of foreign origin, mainly Algerian.
On colonisers
Since 1945, immigration to the United Kingdom under British nationality law has been significant, in particular from the former British Empire.
In his 1955 essay, Discourse on Colonialism (French: Discours sur le colonialisme), French poet Aimé Césaire evaluates the effects of racist, sexist, and capitalist attitudes and motivations on the civilisations that attempted to colonise other civilisations.
In explaining his position, he says, "I admit that it is a good thing to place different civilisations in contact with each other that it is an excellent thing to blend different worlds; that whatever its own particular genius may be, a civilisation that withdraws into itself atrophies; that for civilisations, exchange is oxygen."
To illustrate his point, he explains that colonisation relies on racist and xenophobic frameworks that dehumanise the targets of colonisation and justify their extreme and brutal mistreatment.
Every time an immoral act perpetrated by colonisers onto the colonised is justified by racist, sexist, otherwise xenophobic, or capitalist motivations to subjugate a group of people, the colonising civilisation "acquires another dead weight, a universal regression takes place, a gangrene sets in, a centre of infection begins to spread." Césaire argues the result of this process is that "a poison [is] instilled into the veins of Europe and, slowly but surely, the continent proceeds toward savagery."
Introduced diseases
See also: Globalisation and disease, Columbian Exchange, and Impact and evaluation of colonialism and colonization
Aztecs dying of smallpox, ("The Florentine Codex" 1540–85)
Encounters between explorers and populations in the rest of the world often introduced new diseases, which sometimes caused local epidemics of extraordinary virulence.
For example, smallpox, measles, malaria, yellow fever, and others were unknown in pre-Columbian America.
Half the native population of Hispaniola in 1518 was killed by smallpox.
Smallpox also ravaged Mexico in the 1520s, killing 150,000 in Tenochtitlan alone, including the emperor, and Peru in the 1530s, aiding the European conquerors.
Measles killed a further two million Mexican natives in the 17th century.
In 1618–1619, smallpox wiped out 90% of the Massachusetts Bay Native Americans.
Smallpox epidemics in 1780–1782 and 1837–1838 brought devastation and drastic depopulation among the Plains Indians.
Some believe[who?] that the death of up to 95% of the Native American population of the New World was caused by Old World diseases.
Over the centuries, the Europeans had developed high degrees of immunity to these diseases, while the indigenous peoples had no time to build such immunity.
Smallpox decimated the native population of Australia, killing around 50% of indigenous Australians in the early years of British colonisation.
It also killed many New Zealand Māori.
As late as 1848–49, as many as 40,000 out of 150,000 Hawaiians are estimated to have died of measles, whooping cough and influenza.
Introduced diseases, notably smallpox, nearly wiped out the native population of Easter Island.
In 1875, measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, approximately one-third of the population.
The Ainu population decreased drastically in the 19th century, due in large part
to infectious diseases brought by Japanese settlers pouring into Hokkaido.
Conversely, researchers have hypothesised that a precursor to syphilis may have been carried from the New World to Europe after Columbus's voyages.
The findings suggested Europeans could have carried the nonvenereal tropical bacteria home, where the organisms may have mutated into a more deadly form in the different conditions of Europe.
The disease was more frequently fatal than it is today; syphilis was a major killer in Europe during the Renaissance.
The first cholera pandemic began in Bengal, then spread across India by 1820. Ten thousand British troops and countless Indians died during this pandemic.
Between 1736 and 1834 only some 10% of East India Company's officers survived to take the final voyage home.
Waldemar Haffkine, who mainly worked in India, who developed and used vaccines against cholera and bubonic plague in the 1890s, is considered the first microbiologist.
According to a 2021 study by Jörg Baten and Laura Maravall on the anthropometric influence of colonialism on Africans, the average height of Africans decreased by 1.1 centimetres upon colonization and later recovered and increased overall during colonial rule.
The authors attributed the decrease to diseases, such as malaria and sleeping sickness, forced labor during the early decades of colonial rule, conflicts, land grabbing, and widespread cattle deaths from the rinderpest viral disease.
Countering disease
As early as 1803, the Spanish Crown organised a mission (the Balmis expedition) to transport the smallpox vaccine to the Spanish colonies, and establish mass vaccination programs there.
By 1832, the federal government of the United States established a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans.
Under the direction of Mountstuart Elphinstone a program was launched to propagate smallpox vaccination in India.
From the beginning of the 20th century onwards, the elimination or control of disease in tropical countries became a driving force for all colonial powers.
The sleeping sickness epidemic in Africa was arrested due to mobile teams systematically screening millions of people at risk.
In the 20th century, the world saw the biggest increase in its population in human history due to lessening of the mortality rate in many countries due to medical advances.
The world population has grown from 1.6 billion in 1900 to over seven billion today.[citation needed]
Botany
Colonial botany refers to the body of works concerning the study, cultivation, marketing and naming of the new plants that were acquired or traded during the age of European colonialism.
Notable examples of these plants included sugar, nutmeg, tobacco, cloves, cinnamon, Peruvian bark, peppers and tea.
This work was a large part of securing financing for colonial ambitions, supporting European expansion and ensuring the profitability of such endeavors.
Vasco de Gama and Christopher Columbus were seeking to establish routes to trade spices, dyes and silk from the Moluccas, India and China by sea that would be independent of the established routes controlled by Venetian and Middle Eastern merchants.
Naturalists like Hendrik van Rheede, Georg Eberhard Rumphius, and Jacobus Bontius compiled data about eastern plants on behalf of the Europeans.
Though Sweden did not possess an extensive colonial network, botanical research based on Carl Linnaeus identified and developed techniques to grow cinnamon, tea and rice locally as an alternative to costly imports.
Geography
British Togoland in 1953
Settlers acted as the link between indigenous populations and the imperial hegemony, thus bridging the geographical, ideological and commercial gap between the colonisers and colonised.
While the extent in which geography as an academic study is implicated in colonialism is contentious, geographical tools such as cartography, shipbuilding, navigation, mining and agricultural productivity were instrumental in European colonial expansion.
Colonisers' awareness of the Earth's surface and abundance of practical skills provided colonisers with a knowledge that, in turn, created power.
Anne Godlewska and Neil Smith argue that "empire was 'quintessentially a geographical project'".[clarification needed] Historical geographical theories such as environmental determinism legitimised colonialism by positing the view that some parts of the world were underdeveloped, which created notions of skewed evolution.
Geographers such as Ellen Churchill Semple and Ellsworth Huntington put forward the notion that northern climates bred vigour and intelligence as opposed to those indigenous to tropical climates (See The Tropics) viz a viz a combination of environmental determinism and Social Darwinism in their approach.
Political geographers also maintain that colonial behaviour was reinforced by the physical mapping of the world, therefore creating a visual separation between "them" and "us". Geographers are primarily focused on the spaces of colonialism and imperialism; more specifically, the material and symbolic appropriation of space enabling colonialism.: 5 
Comparison of Africa in the years 1880 and 1913
Maps played an extensive role in colonialism, as Bassett would put it "by providing geographical information in a convenient and standardised format, cartographers helped open West Africa to European conquest, commerce, and colonisation". Because the relationship between colonialism and geography was not scientifically objective, cartography was often manipulated during the colonial era.
Social norms and values had an effect on the constructing of maps.
During colonialism map-makers used rhetoric in their formation of boundaries and in their art.
The rhetoric favoured the view of the conquering Europeans; this is evident in the fact that any map created by a non-European was instantly regarded as inaccurate.
Furthermore, European cartographers were required to follow a set of rules which led to ethnocentrism; portraying one's own ethnicity in the centre of the map.
As J.B. Harley put it, "The steps in making a map – selection, omission, simplification, classification, the creation of hierarchies, and 'symbolisation' – are all inherently rhetorical."
A common practice by the European cartographers of the time was to map unexplored areas as "blank spaces". This influenced the colonial powers as it sparked competition amongst them to explore and colonise these regions.
Imperialists aggressively and passionately looked forward to filling these spaces for the glory of their respective countries.
The Dictionary of Human Geography notes that cartography was used to empty 'undiscovered' lands of their Indigenous meaning and bring them into spatial existence via the imposition of "Western place-names and borders, [therefore] priming 'virgin' (putatively empty land, 'wilderness') for colonisation (thus sexualising colonial landscapes as domains of male penetration), reconfiguring alien space as absolute, quantifiable and separable (as property)."
David Livingstone stresses "that geography has meant different things at different times and in different places" and that we should keep an open mind in regards to the relationship between geography and colonialism instead of identifying boundaries.
Geography as a discipline was not and is not an objective science, Painter and Jeffrey argue, rather it is based on assumptions about the physical world.
Comparison of exogeographical representations of ostensibly tropical environments in science fiction art support this conjecture, finding the notion of the tropics to be an artificial collection of ideas and beliefs that are independent of geography.
Imperialism
Governor-General Félix Éboué welcomes Charles de Gaulle to Chad
A colony is a part of an empire and so colonialism is closely related to imperialism.
Robert J. C. Young suggests that imperialism is the concept while colonialism is the practice.
Colonialism is based on an imperial outlook, thereby creating a consequential relationship.
Through an empire, colonialism is established and capitalism is expanded, on the other hand a capitalist economy naturally enforces an empire.
Marxism
Marxism views colonialism as a form of capitalism, enforcing exploitation and social change.
Marx thought that working within the global capitalist system, colonialism is closely associated with uneven development.
It is an "instrument of wholesale destruction, dependency and systematic exploitation producing distorted economies, socio-psychological disorientation, massive poverty and neocolonial dependency". Colonies are constructed into modes of production.
The search for raw materials and the current search for new investment opportunities is a result[according to whom?] of inter-capitalist rivalry for capital accumulation[citation needed]. Lenin regarded colonialism as the root cause of imperialism, as imperialism was distinguished by monopoly capitalism via colonialism and as Lyal S. Sunga explains: "Vladimir Lenin advocated forcefully the principle of self-determination of peoples in his "Theses on the Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination" as an integral plank in the programme of socialist internationalism" and he quotes Lenin who contended that "The right of nations to self-determination implies exclusively the right to independence in the political sense, the right to free political separation from the oppressor nation.
Specifically, this demand for political democracy implies complete freedom to agitate for secession and for a referendum on secession by the seceding nation." Non Russian marxists within the RSFSR and later the USSR, like Sultan Galiev and Vasyl Shakhrai, meanwhile, between 1918 and 1923 and then after 1929, considered the Soviet Regime a renewed version of the Russian imperialism and colonialism.
In his critique of colonialism in Africa, the Guyanese historian and political activist Walter Rodney states:
"The decisiveness of the short period of colonialism and its negative consequences for Africa spring mainly from the fact that Africa lost power.
Power is the ultimate determinant in human society, being basic to the relations within any group and between groups.
It implies the ability to defend one's interests and if necessary to impose one's will by any means available ... When one society finds itself forced to relinquish power entirely to another society that in itself is a form of underdevelopment ... During the centuries of pre-colonial trade, some control over social political and economic life was retained in Africa, in spite of the disadvantageous commerce with Europeans.
That little control over internal matters disappeared under colonialism.
Colonialism went much further than trade.
It meant a tendency towards direct appropriation by Europeans of the social institutions within Africa.
Africans ceased to set indigenous cultural goals and standards, and lost full command of training young members of the society.
Those were undoubtedly major steps backwards ... Colonialism was not merely a system of exploitation, but one whose essential purpose was to repatriate the profits to the so-called 'mother country'. From an African view-point, that amounted to consistent expatriation of surplus produced by African labour out of African resources.
It meant the development of Europe as part of the same dialectical process in which Africa was underdeveloped.
Colonial Africa fell within that part of the international capitalist economy from which surplus was drawn to feed the metropolitan sector.
As seen earlier, exploitation of land and labour is essential for human social advance, but only on the assumption that the product is made available within the area where the exploitation takes place."
According to Lenin, the new imperialism emphasised the transition of capitalism from free trade to a stage of monopoly capitalism to finance capital.
He states it is, "connected with the intensification of the struggle for the partition of the world". As free trade thrives on exports of commodities[according to whom?], monopoly capitalism thrived on the export of capital amassed by profits from banks and industry.
This, to Lenin, was the highest stage of capitalism.
He goes on to state that this form of capitalism was doomed for war between the capitalists and the exploited nations with the former inevitably losing.
War is stated to be the consequence of imperialism.
As a continuation of this thought G.N. Uzoigwe states, "But it is now clear from more serious investigations of African history in this period that imperialism was essentially economic in its fundamental impulses."
Liberalism and capitalism
Classical liberals were generally in abstract opposition to colonialism and imperialism, including Adam Smith, Frédéric Bastiat, Richard Cobden, John Bright, Henry Richard, Herbert Spencer, H.R. Fox Bourne, Edward Morel, Josephine Butler, W.J. Fox and William Ewart Gladstone.
Their philosophies found the colonial enterprise, particularly mercantilism, in opposition to the principles of free trade and liberal policies.
Adam Smith wrote in The Wealth of Nations that Britain should grant independence to all of its colonies and also argued that it would be economically beneficial for British people in the average, although the merchants having mercantilist privileges would lose out.
Race and gender
During the colonial era, the global process of colonisation served to spread and synthesize the social and political belief systems of the "mother-countries" which often included a belief in a certain natural racial superiority of the race of the mother-country.
Colonialism also acted to reinforce these same racial belief systems within the "mother-countries" themselves.
Usually also included within the colonial belief systems was a certain belief in the inherent superiority of male over female.
This particular belief was often pre-existing amongst the pre-colonial societies, prior to their colonisation.
Popular political practices of the time reinforced colonial rule by legitimising European (and/ or Japanese) male authority, and also legitimising female and non-mother-country race inferiority through studies of craniology, comparative anatomy, and phrenology.
Biologists, naturalists, anthropologists, and ethnologists of the 19th century were focused on the study of colonised indigenous women, as in the case of Georges Cuvier's study of Sarah Baartman.
Such cases embraced a natural superiority and inferiority relationship between the races based on the observations of naturalists' from the mother-countries.
European studies along these lines gave rise to the perception that African women's anatomy, and especially genitalia, resembled those of mandrills, baboons, and monkeys, thus differentiating colonised Africans from what were viewed as the features of the evolutionarily superior, and thus rightfully authoritarian, European woman.
In addition to what would now be viewed as pseudo-scientific studies of race, which tended to reinforce a belief in an inherent mother-country racial superiority, a new supposedly "science-based" ideology concerning gender roles also then emerged as an adjunct to the general body of beliefs of inherent superiority of the colonial era.
Female inferiority across all cultures was emerging as an idea supposedly supported by craniology that led scientists to argue that the typical brain size of the female human was, on the average, slightly smaller than that of the male, thus inferring that therefore female humans must be less developed and less evolutionarily advanced than males.
This finding of relative cranial size difference was later simply attributed to the general typical size difference of the human male body versus that of the typical human female body.
Within the former European colonies, non-Europeans and women sometimes faced invasive studies by the colonial powers in the interest of the then prevailing pro-colonial scientific ideology of the day.
Such seemingly flawed studies of race and gender coincided with the era of colonialism and the initial introduction of foreign cultures, appearances, and gender roles into the now gradually widening world-views of the scholars of the mother-countries.[citation needed]
Othering
"The East offering its riches to Britannia", painted by Spiridione Roma for the boardroom of the British East India Company
Othering is the process of creating a separate entity to persons or groups who are labelled as different or non-normal due to the repetition of characteristics.
Othering is the creation of those who discriminate, to distinguish, label, categorise those who do not fit in the societal norm.
Several scholars in recent decades developed the notion of the "other" as an epistemological concept in social theory.
For example, postcolonial scholars, believed that colonising powers explained an "other" who were there to dominate, civilise, and extract resources through colonisation of land.
Political geographers explain how colonial/imperial powers "othered" places they wanted to dominate to legalise their exploitation of the land.
During and after the rise of colonialism the Western powers perceived the East as the "other", being different and separate from their societal norm.
This viewpoint and separation of culture had divided the Eastern and Western culture creating a dominant/subordinate dynamic, both being the "other" towards themselves.
Post-colonialism
Main articles: Post-colonialism and Postcolonial literature
Further information: Dutch Indies literatureThis section does not cite any sources.
Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Queen Victoria Street in the former British colony of Hong Kong
Post-colonialism (or post-colonial theory) can refer to a set of theories in philosophy and literature that grapple with the legacy of colonial rule.
In this sense, one can regard post-colonial literature as a branch of postmodern literature concerned with the political and cultural independence of peoples formerly subjugated in colonial empires.
Many practitioners take Edward Saïd's book  Orientalism (1978) as the theory's founding work (although French theorists such as Aimé Césaire (1913–2008) and Frantz Fanon (1925–1961) made similar claims decades before Saïd). Saïd analyzed the works of Balzac, Baudelaire and Lautréamont, arguing that they helped to shape a societal fantasy of European racial superiority.
Writers of post-colonial fiction interact with the traditional colonial discourse, but modify or subvert it; for instance by retelling a familiar story from the perspective of an oppressed minor character in the story.
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak's Can the Subaltern Speak? (1998) gave its name to Subaltern Studies.
In A Critique of Postcolonial Reason (1999), Spivak argued that major works of European metaphysics (such as those of  Kant and Hegel) not only tend to exclude the subaltern from their discussions, but actively prevent non-Europeans from occupying positions as fully human subjects.
Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit (1807), famous for its explicit ethnocentrism, considers  Western civilisation as the most accomplished of all, while Kant also had some traces of  racialism in his work.
Colonistics
The field of colonistics studies colonialism from such viewpoints as those of economics, sociology and psychology.
British public opinion about the British Empire
The 2014 YouGov survey found that British people are mostly proud of colonialism and the British Empire:
A new YouGov survey finds that most think the British Empire is more something to be proud of (59%) than to be ashamed of (19%). 23% don't know.
Young people are least likely to feel pride over shame when it comes to the Empire, though about half (48%) of 18–24 year old's do.
In comparison, about two-thirds (65%) of over 60's feel mostly proud. ... A third of British people (34%) also say they would like it if Britain still had an empire.
Under half (45%) say they would not like the Empire to exist today. 20% don't know.
Migrations
Further information: Settler colonialism and Greater Europe
"Areas of European settlement". Censuses, articles quoted in description..)
Nations and regions outside Europe with significant populations of European ancestry
Boer family in South Africa, 1886
Africa (see Europeans in Africa)
South Africa (European South African): 5.8% of the population
Namibia (European Namibians): 6.5% of the population, of which most are Afrikaans-speaking, in addition to a German-speaking minority.
Réunion: estimated to be approx. 25% of the population
Zimbabwe (Europeans in Zimbabwe)
Algeria (Pied-noir)
Botswana: 3% of the population
Kenya (Europeans in Kenya)
Mauritius (Franco-Mauritian)
Morocco (European Moroccans)
Ivory Coast (French people)
Senegal
Canary Islands (Spaniards), known as Canarians.
Seychelles (Franco-Seychellois)
Somalia (Italian Somalis)
Eritrea (Italian Eritreans)
Saint Helena (UK) including Tristan da Cunha (UK): predominantly European.
Eswatini: 3% of the population
Tunisia (European Tunisians)
Russian settlers in Central Asia, present-day Kazakhstan, 1911
Asia
Siberia (Russians, Germans and Ukrainians)
Kazakhstan (Russians in Kazakhstan, Germans of Kazakhstan): 30% of the population
Uzbekistan (Russians and other Slavs): 6% of the population
Kyrgyzstan (Russians and other Slavs): 14% of the population
Turkmenistan (Russians and other Slavs): 4% of the population
Tajikistan (Russians and other Slavs): 1% of the population
Hong Kong
Philippines (Spanish Ancestry): 3% of the population
China (Russians in China)
Indian subcontinent (Anglo-Indians)
Latin America (see White Latin American)  Italian immigrants arriving in São Paulo, Brazil, c. 1890
Argentina (European Immigration to Argentina): 97% european and mestizo of the population
Bolivia: 15% of the population
Brazil (White Brazilian): 47% of the population
Chile (White Chilean): 60–70% of the population.
Colombia (White Colombian): 37% of the population
Costa Rica: 83% of the population
Cuba (White Cuban): 65% of the population
Dominican Republic: 16% of the population
Ecuador: 7% of the population
Honduras: 1% of the population
El Salvador: 12% of the population
Mexico (White Mexican): 9% or ~17% of the population. and 70–80% more as Mestizos.
Nicaragua: 17% of the population
Panama: 10% of the population
Puerto Rico: approx. 80% of the population
Peru (European Peruvian): 15% of the population
Paraguay: approx. 20% of the population
Uruguay (White Uruguayan): 88% of the population Mennonites of German descent in Belize
Venezuela (White Venezuelan): 42% of the population
Rest of the Americas
Bahamas: 12% of the population
Barbados (White Barbadian): 4% of the population
Bermuda: 34% of the population
Canada (European Canadians): 80% of the population
Falkland Islands: mostly of British descent.
French Guiana: 12% of the population
Greenland: 12% of the population
Martinique: 5% of the population
Saint Barthélemy
Trinidad and Tobago: 1% of the population Portuguese immigrant family in Hawaii during the 19th century
United States (European American): 72% of the population, including Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Whites.
Oceania (see Europeans in Oceania)
Australia (European Australians): 90% of the population
New Zealand (European New Zealanders): 78% of the population
New Caledonia (Caldoche): 35% of the population
French Polynesia: (Zoreilles) 10% of the population
Hawaii: 25% of the population
Christmas Island: approx. 20% of the population.
Guam: 7% of the population
Norfolk Island: 95% of the population
Numbers of European settlers in the colonies (1500–1914)
Irish leaving Ireland, many in response to the Great Famine in the 1840s
Further information: Settler colonialism
By 1914, Europeans had migrated to the colonies in the millions.
Some intended to remain in the colonies as temporary settlers, mainly as military personnel or on business.
Others went to the colonies as immigrants.
British people were by far the most numerous population to migrate to the colonies: 2.5 million settled in Canada; 1.5 million in Australia; 750,000 in New Zealand; 450,000 in the Union of South Africa; and 200,000 in India.
French citizens also migrated in large numbers, mainly to the colonies in the north African Maghreb region: 1.3 million settled in Algeria; 200,000 in Morocco; 100,000 in Tunisia; while only 20,000 migrated to French Indochina.
Dutch and German colonies saw relatively scarce European migration, since Dutch and German colonial expansion focused on commercial goals rather than settlement.
Portugal sent 150,000 settlers to Angola, 80,000 to Mozambique, and 20,000 to Goa.
During the Spanish Empire, approximately 550,000 Spanish settlers migrated to Latin America.
See also
History portal
African independence movements
Age of Discovery
Anti-imperialism
Chartered company
Chinese imperialism
Christianity and colonialism
Civilising mission
Colonial Empire
Colonialism and the Olympic Games
Coloniality of power
Colonial war
Decoloniality
Decolonization of the Americas
Direct colonial rule
Empire of Liberty
European colonization of Africa
European colonization of the Americas
European colonization of Micronesia
European colonisation of Southeast Asia
French law on colonialism
German eastward expansion
Global Empire
Historiography of the British Empire
Impact of Western European colonialism and colonisation
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)
Muslim conquests
Orientalism
Pluricontinental
Protectorate
Satellite state
Soviet Empire
Stranger King (Concept)
Western imperialism in Asia
References
a b c Margaret Kohn (29 August 2017). "Colonialism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanford University.
Retrieved 5 May 2018.
a b "Colonialism". Collins English Dictionary.
HarperCollins. 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2012.
a b Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language, 1989, p. 291.
a b Tignor, Roger (2005). Preface to Colonialism: a theoretical overview.
Markus Weiner Publishers. p. x.
ISBN 978-1-55876-340-1. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
Rodney, Walter (2018). How Europe underdeveloped Africa.
ISBN 978-1-78873-119-5. OCLC 1048081465.
Veracini, Lorenzo (2010). Settler Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 5. ISBN 978-0-230-22097-3.
Philip T. Hoffman (2015). Why Did Europe Conquer the World?. Princeton University Press. pp. 2–3. ISBN 978-1-4008-6584-0.
"Colonialism". Merriam-Webster.
Merriam-Webster. 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
Osterhammel, Jürgen (2005). Colonialism: a theoretical overview. trans.
Shelley Frisch.
Markus Weiner Publishers. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-55876-340-1. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
Osterhammel, Jürgen (2005). Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview. trans.
Shelley Frisch.
Markus Weiner Publishers. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-55876-340-1. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
Olusoga, David (2010). The Kaiser's Holocaust: Germany's Forgotten Genocide and the Colonial Roots of Nazism.
Faber & Faber.
a b Healy, Roisin; Dal Lago, Enrico (2014). The Shadow of Colonialism on Europe's Modern Past.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 126. ISBN 978-1-137-45075-3.
Barker, Adam J. (2009). "The Contemporary Reality of Canadian Imperialism: Settler Colonialism and the Hybrid Colonial State". American Indian Quarterly. 33 (3): 325–351. doi:10.1353/aiq.0.0054. JSTOR 40388468. S2CID 162692337.
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano (2015). "Settler Colonialism as Structure: A Framework for Comparative Studies of U.S. Race and Gender Formation" (PDF). Sociology of Race and Ethnicity. 1 (1): 52–72. doi:10.1177/2332649214560440. S2CID 147875813. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-02-23. Retrieved 2019-04-16.
Veracini, Lorenzo (2007). "Historylessness: Australia as a settler colonial collective". Postcolonial Studies. 10 (3): 271–285. doi:10.1080/13688790701488155. hdl:1885/27945. S2CID 144872634.
Gold, Dore. (2011). "The Myth of Israel as a Colonialist Entity: An Instrument of Political Warfare to Delegitimize the Jewish State". Jewish Political Studies Review. 23 (3/4): 84–90. JSTOR 41575861.
Murray, Martin J. (1980). The Development of Capitalism in Colonial Indochina (1870–1940). Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 0-520-04000-7.
Atran, Scott (November 1989). "The Surrogate Colonization of Palestine 1917–1939" (PDF). American Ethnologist. 16 (4): 719–744. doi:10.1525/ae.1989.16.4.02a00070. S2CID 130148053.
Gabbidon, Shaun (2010). Race, Ethnicity, Crime, and Justice: An International Dilemma.
Los Angeles, CA: SAGE. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4129-4988-0.
Wong, Ting-Hong (May 2020). "Education and National Colonialism in Postwar Taiwan: The Paradoxical Use of Private Schools to Extend State Power, 1944–1966". History of Education Quarterly. 60 (2): 156–184. doi:10.1017/heq.2020.25. S2CID 225917190.
"A Typology of Colonialism | Perspectives on History | AHA". 
Auslin, Michael R., Negotiating with Imperialism: The Unequal Treaties and the Culture of Japanese Diplomacy.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-674-01521-0; OCLC 56493769
Bosma, U.; Raben, R. (2008). Being "Dutch" in the Indies: A History of Creolisation and Empire, 1500–1920. Singapore: NUS Press. p. 223. ISBN 978-9971-69-373-2.
Gouda, Frances (2008). "Gender, Race, and Sexuality". Dutch Culture Overseas: Colonial Practice in the Netherlands Indies 1900–1942. Equinox. p. 163. ISBN 978-979-3780-62-7.
"The 6 killer apps of prosperity". Ted.com. 11 August 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2017.
Peter N. Stearns, ed., An Encyclopedia of World History (2001) pp 21–238
"1600 to 1609 | Virginia Records Timeline: 1553 to 1743 | Articles and Essays | Thomas Jefferson Papers, 1606-1827 | Digital Collections". Library of Congress.
Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415–1825 (1969)
Thomas Benjamin, ed.
Encyclopedia of Western Colonialism Since 1450 (3 vol 2006)
See David Cody, "The British Empire" The Victorians Web (1988)
Melvin E. Page, ed., Colonialism: An International Social, Cultural, and Political Encyclopedia (2003).
Benjamin,  ed.
Encyclopedia of Western Colonialism Since 1450 (3 vol 2006)
These statistics exclude the Russian Empire, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, Spain and Denmark. U.S. Tariff Commission.
Colonial tariff policies (1922), p. 5 online
Raymond Leslie Buell, "Do Colonies Pay?" The Saturday Review, August 1, 1936 p 6 ]
Rönnbäck & Broberg (2019) Capital and Colonialism.
The Return on British Investments in Africa 1869–1969 (Palgrave Studies in Economic History)
G.M. Gathorne-Hardy, A Short History of International Affairs, 1920–1939 (4th ed. 1950), online
White, Nicholas (17 July 2014). "Economics and the end of Empire". Decolonisation: The British Experience since 1945. Seminar Studies (2 ed.). Abingdon: Routledge (published 2014). ISBN 9781317701798. Retrieved 12 February 2021.
Sartre, Jean-Paul (2001). Colonialism and Neocolonialism.
Psychology Press.
Uzoigw, Godfrey N. (2019). "Neocolonialism Is Dead: Long Live Neocolonialism". Journal of Global South Studies. 36 (1): 59–87. doi:10.1353/gss.2019.0004. S2CID 166252688.
"Records of U.S. Occupation Headquarters, World War II". 15 August 2016.
See Walter Sauer, "Habsburg Colonial: Austria-Hungary's Role in European Overseas Expansion Reconsidered,” Austrian Studies (2012) 20:5–23 online
In the early years of the Qing Dynasty, the Chinese were prohibited from entering Mongolia to prevent the assimilation of the Mongols loss of combat effectiveness.
The prohibition was abolished after the Late Qing reforms, and then Mongolia declared its independence from the Manchu Qing.
Oman Country Profile.
Oman Country Profile.
British Library Partnership.
Qatar Digital Library. 2014.
Naomi Porat (1992). "An Egyptian Colony in Southern Palestine During the Late Predynastic to Early Dynastic".  In Edwin C. M. van den Brink (ed.). The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th.-3rd.
Millennium B.C. : Proceedings of the Seminar Held in Cairo, 21.-24. October 1990, at the Netherlands Institute of Archaeology and Arabic Studies.
Van den Brink. pp. 433–440. ISBN 978-965-221-015-9. Retrieved 24 February 2013.
"Ancient Tomb Sheds New Light on Egyptian Colonialism".
Siegbert Uhlig (2005). Encyclopaedia Aethiopica: D-Ha.
Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 951. ISBN 978-3-447-05238-2. Retrieved 2013-06-01.
a b Safi, Khaled M. (2008), "Territorial Awareness in the 1834 Palestinian Revolt",  in Roger Heacock (ed.), Of Times and Spaces in Palestine: The Flows and Resistances of Identity, Beirut: Presses de l'Ifpo, ISBN 9782351592656
Perry, Alex (2008-02-14). "Come Back, Colonialism, All Is Forgiven". Time.
ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 2019-09-29.
a b Lovejoy, Paul E. (2012). Transformations of Slavery: A History of Slavery in Africa.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Ferguson, Niall (2003). Empire: How Britain Made the Modern World.
London: Allen Lane.
Thong, Tezenlo (2012). "Civilised Colonisers and Barbaric Colonised: Reclaiming Naga Identity by Demythologising Colonial Portraits". History and Anthropology. 23 (3): 375–97. doi:10.1080/02757206.2012.697060. S2CID 162411962.
Mercy, Olumide, Yetunde (2016-10-06). The Vanishing Black African Woman: Volume Two: A Compendium of the Global Skin-Lightening Practice.
Langaa RPCIG. ISBN 978-9956-763-68-9.
"Strabo's Geography Book II Chapter 5 "
Pagden, Anthony (2003). Peoples and Empires.
New York: Modern Library. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-8129-6761-6.
Pagden, Anthony (2003). Peoples and Empires.
New York: Modern Library. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-8129-6761-6.
a b c Acemoglu, Daron; Johnson, Simon; Robinson, James A. (2005). "Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth". Handbook of Economic Growth.
Vol. 1A. pp. 385–472. doi:10.1016/S1574-0684(05)01006-3. ISBN 9780444520418.
Freedman, Estelle (2002). No Turning Back: The History of Feminism and The Future of Women.
Random House Publishing Group. pp. 25–26. ISBN 978-0-345-45053-1.
Freedman, Estelle (2002). No Turning Back: The History of Feminism and The Future of Women.
Random House Publishing. pp. 113. ISBN 978-0-345-45053-1.
Dell, Melissa; Olken, Benjamin A. (2020). "The Development Effects of the Extractive Colonial Economy: The Dutch Cultivation System in Java". The Review of Economic Studies. 87: 164–203. doi:10.1093/restud/rdz017.
Mattingly, Daniel C. (2017). "Colonial Legacies and State Institutions in China: Evidence From a Natural Experiment" (PDF). Comparative Political Studies. 50 (4): 434–463. doi:10.1177/0010414015600465. S2CID 156822667.
"White Servitude Archived 2014-10-09 at the Wayback Machine", by Richard Hofstadter, Montgomery College
a b King, Russell (2010). People on the Move: An Atlas of Migration.
Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-520-26124-2.
Hannah-Jones, Nikole (August 14, 2019). "Our democracy's founding ideals were false when they were written.
Black Americans have fought to make them true". The New York Times Magazine.
The wealth and prominence that allowed Jefferson, at just 33, and the other founding fathers to believe they could successfully break off from one of the mightiest empires in the world came from the dizzying profits generated by chattel slavery.
In other words, we may never have revolted against Britain if the founders had not understood that slavery empowered them to do so; nor if they had not believed that independence was required in order to ensure that slavery would continue.
It is not incidental that 10 of this nation's first 12 presidents were enslavers, and some might argue that this nation was founded not as a democracy but as a slavocracy.
Petrie, Hazel (2015). Outcasts of the Gods? The Struggle over Slavery in Maori New Zealand.
Auckland University Press.
ISBN 9781775587859. Retrieved 17 June 2020. Trade with the early explorers, whalers, sealers, and shore-based traders; interaction with missionaries; the availability of muskets; unprecedented warfare; new methods of dispute resolution; and English law all played their part in influencing the increase or decline of Maori captive-taking.
Firth, Raymond (1929). Primitive Economics of the New Zealand Maori.
Routledge Revivals (reprint ed.). Abingdon: Routledge (published 2011). p. 203. ISBN 9780415694728. Retrieved 17 June 2020. The economic value of the slave to the community was considerable. [...] Slavery among the Maori is certainly not comparable to the system as it existed among the ancient civilized states of Europe, but relative to the culture of this native people, it played an important part [...].
Lowe, Joshua (2014). To what extent was the Great Trek undertaken to preserve Afrikaner Culture?. GRIN. p. 2. ISBN 9783656715245. Retrieved 17 June 2020. There were also threats to what the Afrikaner perceived as tradition, and slavery was included in this perception.  The abolition of slavery had an effect on why the Great Trek was undertaken and has links to the Afrikaner cultural preservation theory.
Slavery was an integral part of Afrikaner society, and there was a sense of discontent when it was called to an end.
King, Russell (2010). People on the Move: An Atlas of Migration.
Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp. 26–27. ISBN 978-0-520-26124-2.
Pagden, Anthony (2003). Peoples and Empires.
New York: Modern Library. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-8129-6761-6.
King, Russell (2010). People on the Move: An Atlas of Migration.
Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-520-26124-2.
Willems, Wim "De uittocht uit Indie (1945–1995), De geschiedenis van Indische Nederlanders" (Publisher: Bert Bakker, Amsterdam, 2001). ISBN 90-351-2361-1
Crul, Lindo and Lin Pang.
Culture, Structure and Beyond, Changing identities and social positions of immigrants and their children (Het Spinhuis Publishers, 1999). ISBN 90-5589-173-8
"British Nationality Act 1981". The National Archives, United Kingdom.
Retrieved February 24, 2012.
Seljuq, Affan (1997). "Cultural Conflicts: North African Immigrants in France". International Journal of Peace Studies. 2 (2): 67–75. JSTOR 45038321.
Randall Hansen (2000). Citizenship and Immigration in Postwar Britain.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 9780191583018.
a b Césaire, Aimé (1955). Discourse on colonialism.
New York and London: Monthly Review Press. p. 2. OCLC 849914517.
Césaire, Aimé (1955). Discourse on colonialism.
New York and London: Monthly Review Press. p. 3. OCLC 849914517.
Kenneth F. Kiple, ed.
The Cambridge Historical Dictionary of Disease (2003).
Alfred W. Crosby, Jr., The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (1974)
Smallpox – The Fight to Eradicate a Global Scourge Archived 2008-09-07 at the Wayback Machine, David A. Koplow.
Houston, C.S.; Houston, S. (2000). "The first smallpox epidemic on the Canadian Plains: In the fur-traders' words". The Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases. 11 (2): 112–15. doi:10.1155/2000/782978. PMC 2094753. PMID 18159275.
"Guns Germs & Steel: Variables.
Smallpox | PBS". 
"Stacy Goodling, "Effects of European Diseases on the Inhabitants of the New World"". Archived from the original on May 10, 2008.
"Smallpox Through History". Archived from the original on 2009-10-29.
"New Zealand Historical Perspective". Archived from the original on June 12, 2010.
How did Easter Island's ancient statues lead to the destruction of an entire ecosystem?, The Independent.
Fiji School of Medicine Archived October 20, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
Meeting the First Inhabitants Archived June 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, TIMEasia.com, 21 August 2000.
Genetic Study Bolsters Columbus Link to Syphilis, The New York Times, January 15, 2008.
"Columbus May Have Brought Syphilis to Europe". LiveScience. 15 January 2008.
Cholera's seven pandemics.
CBC News.
December 2, 2008.
"Sahib: The British Soldier in India, 1750–1914 by Richard Holmes [Asi…". archive.fo. 2012-05-30. Archived from the original on 2012-05-30. Retrieved 2019-09-29.
Baten, Joerg; Maravall, Laura (2021). "The Influence of Colonialism on Africa's Welfare: An Anthropometric Study". Journal of Comparative Economics. 49 (3): 751–775. doi:10.1016/j.jce.2021.01.001.
Dr.
Francisco de Balmis and his Mission of Mercy, Society of Philippine Health History.
Archived 2004-12-23 at the Wayback Machine
"Lewis Cass and the Politics of Disease: The Indian Vaccination Act of 1832". Archived from the original on 2008-02-05. Retrieved 2022-02-12.
Smallpox History – Other histories of smallpox in South Asia.
Archived 2012-04-16 at the Wayback Machine
Conquest and Disease or Colonialism and Health? Archived 2008-12-07 at the Wayback Machine, Gresham College | Lectures and Events.
"Fact sheet N°259: African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness". WHO Media centre. 2001.
Iliffe, John (1989). "The Origins of African Population Growth". The Journal of African History. 30 (1): 165–69. doi:10.1017/s0021853700030942. JSTOR 182701. S2CID 59931797.
Londa Schiebinger; Claudia Swan, eds. (2007). Colonial Botany: Science, Commerce, and Politics in the Early Modern World.
University of Pennsylvania Press.
a b c "Painter, J. & Jeffrey, A., 2009. Political Geography, 2nd ed., Sage. "Imperialism" p. 23 (GIC).
a b Nayak, Anoop; Jeffrey, Alex (2011). Geographical thought : an introduction to ideas in human geography.
Harlow, England: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0-13-222824-4.
Arnold, David (March 2000). ""Illusory Riches": Representations of the Tropical World, 1840–1950". Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography. 21 (1): 6–18. doi:10.1111/1467-9493.00060.
Gallaher, Carolyn; Dahlman, Carl T.; Gilmartin, Mary; Mountz, Alison; Shirlow, Peter (2009). Key Concepts in Political Geography.
London: Sage. p. 392. ISBN 978-1-4129-4672-8. Retrieved July 31, 2014.
Bassett, Thomas J. (1994). "Cartography and Empire Building in Nineteenth-Century West Africa". Geographical Review. 84 (3): 316–335. doi:10.2307/215456. JSTOR 215456. S2CID 161167051.
Harley, J. B. (1989). "Deconstructing the Map" (PDF). Cartographica. 26 (2): 1–20. doi:10.3138/E635-7827-1757-9T53.
Bassett, Thomas J. (1994). "Cartography and Empire Building in Nineteenth-Century West Africa". Geographical Review. 84 (3): 322, 324–25. doi:10.2307/215456. JSTOR 215456. S2CID 161167051.
Gregory, Derek; Johnston, Ron; Pratt, Geraldine; Watts, Michael; Whatmore, Sarah, eds. (2009). The dictionary of human geography (5th ed.). Chichester (UK): Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 96–97. ISBN 978-1-4051-3288-6.
Menadue, Christopher Benjamin (2018-09-04). "Cities in Flight: A Descriptive Examination of the Tropical City Imagined in Twentieth Century Science Fiction Cover Art". ETropic: Electronic Journal of Studies in the Tropics. 17 (2). doi:10.25120/etropic.17.2.2018.3658. ISSN 1448-2940.
Watts, Michael (2005). "colonialism, history of".  In Forsyth, Tim (ed.). Encyclopedia of International Development.
Routledge.
ISBN 9781136952913.
Sunga, Lyal S. (1997). The Emerging System of International Criminal Law: Developments in Codification and Implementation.
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp. 90ff.
ISBN 9789041104724. Sunga traces the origin of the international movement against colonialism, and relates it to the rise of the right to self-determination in international law.
Walter Rodney (1972). How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.
East African Publishers. pp. 149, 224. ISBN 978-9966-25-113-8.
Henry Schwarz; Sangeeta Ray (2004). A Companion To Postcolonial Studies.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 271. ISBN 978-0-470-99833-5.
Boahen, A. Adu.
Africa under Colonial Domination 1880–1935. London: Heinemann, 1985. 11. Print.
a b Liberal Anti-Imperialism Archived 2011-09-22 at the Wayback Machine, professor Daniel Klein, 1.7.2004
Hidalgo, Dennis (2007). "Anticolonialism".  In Benjamin, Thomas (ed.). Encyclopedia of Western Colonialism since 1450 (Gale Virtual Reference Library ed.). Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA. pp. 57–65. Retrieved May 22, 2015.
Smith, Adam (1811). The nature and causes of the wealth of nations ("Of Colonies"). London: T. Cadell. pp. 343–84.
Stoler, Ann L. (Nov 1989). "Making Empire Respectable: The Politics of Race and Sexual Morality in 20th-Century Colonical Cultures" (PDF). American Ethnologist. 16 (4): 634–60. doi:10.1525/ae.1989.16.4.02a00030. hdl:2027.42/136501.
a b c d Fee, E. (1979). "Nineteenth-century craniology: The study of the female skull". Bulletin of the History of Medicine. 53 (3): 415–33. PMID 394780.
a b c d e Fausto-Sterling, Anne (2001). "Gender, Race, and Nation: The Comparative Anatomy of "Hottentot" women in Europe, 1815–1817".  In Muriel Lederman and Ingrid Bartsch (ed.). The Gender and Science Reader.
Routledge.
Stepan, Nancy (1993).  Sandra Harding (ed.). The "Racial" Economy of Science (3 ed.). Indiana University press. pp. 359–76. ISBN 978-0-253-20810-1.
Male and female brains: the REAL differences 10 February 2016, by Dean Burnett, The Guardian
a b c d e Mountz, Alison.
The Other, Key Concepts in Human Geography. p. 2.
Maunier, René (1949). The Sociology of the Colonies [Part 1]: An Introduction to the Study of Race Contact.
International Library of Sociology.
Translated by Lorimer, E.-O. Routledge (published 2013). p. 137. ISBN 978-1-136-24522-0. Retrieved 7 December 2018. There are thus three elements in Colonistics or colonial study: Colonial Economics, Colonial Sociology and Colonial Psychology.
"Colonial nostalgia is back in fashion, blinding us to the horrors of empire". The Guardian. 24 August 2016.
Dahlgreen, Will (26 July 2014). "The British Empire is 'something to be proud of'". YouGov.
Ethnic groups by country.
Archived 2019-01-06 at the Wayback Machine Statistics (where available) from CIA Factbook.
"South Africa § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Naimbia § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Tarnus, Evelyne; Bourdon, Emmanuel (2006). "Anthropometric evaluations of body composition of undergraduate students at the University of La Réunion". Advances in Physiology Education. 30 (4): 248–53. doi:10.1152/advan.00069.2005. PMID 17108254. S2CID 19474655.
Laurenson, John (July 29, 2006). "Former settlers return to Algeria". BBC News.
"Botswana § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
De Azevedo, Raimondo Cagiano (1994) Migration and development co-operation.. Council of Europe. p. 25. ISBN 92-871-2611-9.
"Ivory Coast – The Economy". Library of Congress Country Studies.
Senegal, About 50,000 Europeans (mostly French) and Lebanese reside in Senegal, mainly in the cities.
"Eswatini § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Tunisia, Worldmark Encyclopedia of the Nations.
Thomson Gale. 2007. Encyclopedia.com.
Fiona Hill, Russia — Coming In From the Cold? Archived 2011-07-15 at the Wayback Machine, The Globalist, 23 February 2004
"Siberian Germans".
"Migrant resettlement in the Russian federation: reconstructing 'homes' and 'homelands'". Moya Flynn. (1994). p. 15.
ISBN 1-84331-117-8}
a b c d e Robert Greenall, "Russians left behind in Central Asia", BBC News, 23 November 2005.
"Kyrgyzstan § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"The Kyrgyz – Children of Manas.". Petr Kokaisl, Pavla Kokaislova (2009). p. 125. ISBN 80-254-6365-6.
"Turkemistan § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Tajikistan – Ethnic Groups.
Source: U.S. Library of Congress.
HK Census. "
HK Census Archived 2007-12-08 at the Wayback Machine". Statistical Table.
Retrieved on 2007-03-08.
"Argentina § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Bolivia § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Brazil § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Fernández, Francisco Lizcano (2007). Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI. UAEM. ISBN 978-970-757-052-8.
Informe Latinobarómetro 2011, Latinobarómetro (p. 58).
Cruz-Coke, R.; Moreno, R. S. (1994). "Genetic epidemiology of single gene defects in Chile". Journal of Medical Genetics. 31 (9): 702–706. doi:10.1136/jmg.31.9.702. PMC 1050080. PMID 7815439.
"Columbia § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Costa Rica § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2007-11-21. (Archived 2007 edition) = 3.9 million whites and mestizos
"Tabla II.3 Población por color de la piel y grupos de edades, según zona de residencia y sexo". Censo de Población y Viviendas (in Spanish). Oficina Nacional de Estadísticas. 2002. Archived from the original on 2011-04-14. Retrieved 2008-10-13.
"Dominican Republic § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Ecuador § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2007-11-26. (Archived 2007 edition)
"Honduras". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. 19 October 2021.
"El Salvador § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
a b "Mexico § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2010-01-24. (Archived 2010 edition)
a b "Mexico: Ethnic Groups". Encyclopædia Britannica.
"Nicaragua § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2007-11-15. (Archived 2007 edition)
"Panama § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 2007-11-21. (Archived 2007 edition)
"Puerto Rico § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Peru § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Francisco Lizcano Fernández (May–August 2005). "Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI" (PDF). Convergencia.
UAEM, México (38). ISSN 1405-1435. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2013.
"Uruguay § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
Resultado Basico del XIV Censo Nacional de Población y Vivienda 2011 (p. 14).
"Bahamas The § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Barbados § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Bermuda § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"Canadian Census 2006". Archived from the original on 2017-10-19. Retrieved 2012-08-23.
"French Guiana § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. (Archived 2006 edition)
"Greenland".
Martinique: People: Ethnic Groups.
World Factbook of CIA
"Fact Sheet on St.
Barthélemy".
"Trinidad French Creole".
"French Polynesia § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
"American FactFinder – Results". Archived from the original on 21 May 2019.
"Guam § People and Society". The World Factbook (2022 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
King, Russell (2010). People on the Move: An Atlas of Migration.
Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp. 34–35. ISBN 978-0-520-26151-8.
Further reading
Albertini, Rudolf von.
European Colonial Rule, 1880–1940: The Impact of the West on India, Southeast Asia, and Africa (1982) 581 pp
Benjamin, Thomas, ed.
Encyclopedia of Western Colonialism Since 1450 (2006)
Cooper, Frederick.
Colonialism in Question: Theory, Knowledge, History (2005)
Cotterell, Arthur.
Western Power in Asia: Its Slow Rise and Swift Fall, 1415 – 1999 (2009) popular history; excerpt
Getz, Trevor R. and Heather Streets-Salter, eds.: Modern Imperialism and Colonialism: A Global Perspective (2010)
Jensen, Niklas Thode; Simonsen, Gunvor (2016). "Introduction: The historiography of slavery in the Danish-Norwegian West Indies, c. 1950–2016". Scandinavian Journal of History. 41 (4–5): 475–494. doi:10.1080/03468755.2016.1210880.
LeCour Grandmaison, Olivier: Coloniser, Exterminer – Sur la guerre et l'Etat colonial, Fayard, 2005, ISBN 2-213-62316-3
Lindqvist, Sven: Exterminate All The Brutes, 1992, New Press; Reprint edition (June 1997), ISBN 978-1-56584-359-2
Morris, Richard B. and Graham W. Irwin, eds.
Harper Encyclopedia of the Modern World: A Concise Reference History from 1760 to the Present (1970) online
Ness, Immanuel and Zak Cope, eds.
The Palgrave Encyclopedia of Imperialism and Anti-Imperialism (2 vol 2015), 1456 pp
Nuzzo, Luigi: Colonial Law, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2010, retrieved: December 17, 2012.
Osterhammel, Jürgen: Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview, Princeton, NJ: M. Wiener, 1997.
Page, Melvin E. et al. eds.
Colonialism: An International Social, Cultural, and Political Encyclopedia (3 vol 2003)
Petringa, Maria, Brazza, A Life for Africa (2006), ISBN 978-1-4259-1198-0.
Prashad, Vijay: The Darker Nations: A People's History of the Third World, The New Press, 2007. ISBN 978-1-56584-785-9
Resendez, Andres (2016). The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 448. ISBN 978-0544602670.
Rönnbäck, K. & Broberg, O. (2019) Capital and Colonialism.
The Return on British Investments in Africa 1869–1969 (Palgrave Studies in Economic History)
Schill, Pierre : Réveiller l'archive d'une guerre coloniale.
Photographies et écrits de Gaston Chérau, correspondant de guerre lors du conflit italo-turc pour la Libye (1911–1912), Créaphis, 480 p., 2018 (ISBN 978-2-35428-141-0). Awaken the archive of a colonial war.
Photographs and writings of a French war correspondent during the Italo-Turkish war in Libya (1911–1912). With contributions from art historian Caroline Recher, critic Smaranda Olcèse, writer Mathieu Larnaudie and historian Quentin Deluermoz.
Stuchtey, Benedikt: Colonialism and Imperialism, 1450–1950, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: July 13, 2011.
Townsend, Mary Evelyn.
European colonial expansion since 1871 (1941).
U.S. Tariff Commission.
Colonial tariff policies (1922), worldwide; 922pp survey online
Velychenko, Stephen (2002). "The Issue of Russian Colonialism in Ukrainian Thought.
Dependency Identity and Development". Ab Imperio. 2002 (1): 323–367. doi:10.1353/imp.2002.0070. S2CID 155635060. Ab Imperio E
Wendt, Reinhard: European Overseas Rule, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: June 13, 2012.
Primary sources
Conrad, Joseph, Heart of Darkness, 1899
Fanon, Frantz, The Wretched of the Earth, Preface by Jean-Paul Sartre.
Translated by Constance Farrington.
London: Penguin Book, 2001
Las Casas, Bartolomé de, A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies (1542, published in 1552).
External links
Quotations related to colonialism at Wikiquote
Kohn, Margaret. "Colonialism".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
International Indigenous and minority rightsRights
Ancestral domain
Free, prior and informed consent
Intellectual property
Land rights
Language
Self-determination
in Australia
in Canada
in the United States
Traditional knowledge
ecological
medical
Treaty rights
Governmental organizations
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Arctic Council
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Council of Indigenous Peoples (Taiwan)
Fundação Nacional do Índio
Government of Bashkortostan
Government of the Sakha Republic
Government of Tatarstan
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada
Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East and Arctic
National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (Mexico)
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (Philippines)
Te Puni Kōkiri (New Zealand)
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
Non-governmental and political organizations
Amazon Watch
Assembly of First Nations
Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador
Congress of Aboriginal Peoples
Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin
Cultural Survival
Indigenous Environmental Network
Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism
International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs
National Indigenous Organization of Colombia
Native American Rights Fund
Survival International
Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
Zapatista Army of National Liberation
(more ...)
Issues
Civilizing mission
Colonialism
Internal colonialism
Settler colonialism
Cultural appropriation
Sports mascots
Redface
Dakota Access Pipeline protests
Discovery doctrine
Fortress conservation
Green grabbing
Homeland
Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples
Bantustan
Autonomous okrugs
American Indian reservation
Indian colony
Indian reserve
Ranchería
Rancherie
Russian republics
Urban Indian reserve
Manifest destiny
Plastic shaman
Rainbow Warriors
Two-Spirit
Legal representation
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 2007
Historical cases
Chechen–Russian conflict
Sri Lankan Civil War
Alta controversy
Chiapas conflict
Expulsion of the Chagossians
High Arctic relocation
Human rights in Tibet
Indian removal
Little Danes experiment
Mapuche conflict
Oka Crisis
Residential schools
Canada
New Zealand
South Africa
United States
Rubber boom
San controversy
Stolen Generations
Uyghur genocide
Indigenous rights • Minority rights
International relationsOrganizations
BRICS
Collective Security Treaty Organization
International Criminal Court
League of Nations
Non-Aligned Movement
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
United Nations
Warsaw Pact
History
Diplomatic history of World War II
Cold War
International relations since 1989
Concepts
Appeasement
Collective security
Colonialism
Grey-zone
Hegemony
Idealism
International community
Internationalism
Liberal institutionalism
Imperialism
Peace
Power
Sovereignty
Suzerainty
Treaty
War
Theory
Constructivism
Liberalism
Marxist international relations theory
Peace theories
Realism
Related fields
Diplomacy
Geopolitics
International law
Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 28 September 2022, at 10:25 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
