Continent - Wikipedia
Continent
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Very large landmass identified by convention
For other uses, see Continent (disambiguation).
Animated, colour-coded map showing the various continents.
Depending on the convention and model, some continents may be consolidated or subdivided.
A continent is any of several large landmasses.
Generally identified by convention rather than any strict criteria, up to seven geographical regions are commonly regarded as continents.
Ordered from largest in area to smallest, these seven regions are:  Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Antarctica, Europe, and Australia.
Variations with fewer continents may merge some of these, for example America, Eurasia, or Afro-Eurasia are sometimes treated as single continents, which can bring the total number as low as four.
Zealandia, a largely submerged mass of continental crust, has also been described as a continent.
Oceanic islands are frequently grouped with a nearby continent to divide all the world's land into geographical regions.
Under this scheme, most of the island countries and territories in the Pacific Ocean are grouped together with the continent of Australia to form a geographical region called Oceania.
In geology, a continent is defined as "one of Earth's major landmasses, including both dry land and continental shelves". The geological continents correspond to six large areas of continental crust that are found on the tectonic plates, but exclude small continental fragments such as Madagascar that are generally referred to as microcontinents.
Continental crust is only known to exist on Earth.
The idea of continental drift gained recognition in the 20th century.
It postulates that the current continents formed from the breaking up of a supercontinent Pangaea that formed hundreds of millions of years ago.
Contents
Definitions and application 
Further information: Island § Differentiation from continents
By convention, continents "are understood to be large, continuous, discrete masses of land, ideally separated by expanses of water". In modern schemes with five or more recognised continents, at least one pair of continents is joined by land in some way.
The criterion "large" leads to arbitrary classification: Greenland, with a surface area of 2,166,086 square kilometres (836,330 sq mi), is only considered the world's largest island, while Australia, at 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi), is deemed the smallest continent.
Earth's major landmasses all have coasts on a single, continuous World Ocean, which is divided into a number of principal oceanic components by the continents and various geographic criteria.
Extent
The most restricted meaning of continent is that of a continuous[non-tertiary source needed] area of land or mainland, with the coastline and any land boundaries forming the edge of the continent.
In this sense, the term continental Europe (sometimes referred to in Britain as "the Continent") is used to refer to mainland Europe, excluding islands such as Great Britain, Iceland, Ireland, and Malta while the term continent of Australia may refer to the mainland of Australia, excluding New Guinea, Tasmania, and other nearby islands.
Similarly, the continental United States refers to the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia and may include Alaska in the northwest of the continent (the two being separated by Canada), while excluding Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean.
From the perspective of geology or physical geography, continent may be extended beyond the confines of continuous dry land to include the shallow, submerged adjacent area (the continental shelf) and the islands on the shelf (continental islands), as they are structurally part of the continent.
From this perspective, the edge of the continental shelf is the true edge of the continent, as shorelines vary with changes in sea level.
In this sense the islands of Great Britain and Ireland are part of Europe, while Australia and the island of New Guinea together form a continent.
Map of island countries: these states are often grouped geographically with a neighbouring continental landmass
As a cultural construct, the concept of a continent may go beyond the continental shelf to include oceanic islands and continental fragments.
In this way, Iceland is considered part of Europe, and Madagascar part of Africa.
Extrapolating the concept to its extreme, some geographers group the Australian continental plate with other islands in the Pacific into one "quasi-continent" called Oceania.
This divides the entire land surface of Earth into continents or quasi-continents.
Separation
Main article: Boundaries between the continents of Earth
See also: List of transcontinental countries
The criterion that each continent is a discrete landmass is commonly relaxed due to historical conventions and practical use.
Of the seven most globally recognized continents, only Antarctica and Australia are completely separated from other continents by the ocean.
Several continents are defined not as absolutely distinct bodies but as "more or less discrete masses of land". Asia and Africa are joined by the Isthmus of Suez, and North and South America by the Isthmus of Panama.
In both cases, there is no complete separation of these landmasses by water (disregarding the Suez Canal and Panama Canal, which are both narrow and shallow, as well as man-made). Both of these isthmuses are very narrow compared to the bulk of the landmasses they unite.
North America and South America are treated as separate continents in the seven-continent model.
However, they may also be viewed as a single continent known as America.
This viewpoint was common in the United States until World War II, and remains prevalent in some Asian six-continent models.
The single American continent model remains the more common view in France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain, and Latin American countries.
The criterion of a discrete landmass is completely disregarded if the continuous landmass of Eurasia is classified as two separate continents (Europe and Asia). Physiographically, Europe and the Indian subcontinent are peninsulas of the Eurasian landmass.
However, Europe is widely considered a continent with its comparatively large land area of 10,180,000 square kilometres (3,930,000 sq mi), while the Indian subcontinent, with less than half that area, is considered a subcontinent.
The alternative view—in geology and geography—that Eurasia is a single continent results in a six-continent view of the world.
Some view separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country. [...]." However, for historical and cultural reasons, the view of Europe as a separate continent continues in several categorizations.
If continents are defined strictly as discrete landmasses, embracing all the contiguous land of a body, then Africa, Asia, and Europe form a single continent which may be referred to as Afro-Eurasia.
Combined with the consolidation of the Americas, this would produce a four-continent model consisting of Afro-Eurasia, America, Antarctica and Australia.
When sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene ice ages, greater areas of continental shelf were exposed as dry land, forming land bridges between Tasmania and the Australian mainland.
At those times Australia and New Guinea were a single, continuous continent known as Sahul.
Likewise, the Americas and Afro-Eurasia were joined by the Bering Land Bridge.
Other islands, such as Great Britain, were joined to the mainlands of their continents.
At that time, there were just three discrete landmasses: Afro-Eurasia-America, Antarctica, and Sahul.
Number
There are several ways of distinguishing the continents:
Color-coded map showing the various continents.
Similar shades exhibit areas that may be consolidated or subdivided.
Number
Continents
Sources
Four continents
Afro-Eurasia(the "Old World")
America(the "New World")
Antarctica
Australia
Five continents
Africa
Eurasia
America
Antarctica
Australia
Six continents
Africa
Eurasia
North America
South America
Antarctica
Australia
Africa
Asia
Europe
America
Antarctica
Australia
Seven continents
Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
South America
Antarctica
Australia
The seven-continent model is usually taught in most English-speaking countries including Canada, the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia, and also in China, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, the Philippines, and parts of Western Europe.
The six-continent combined-Eurasia model is mostly used in Russia, Eastern Europe, and Japan.
The six-continent combined-America model is taught in countries that speak Romance languages, it is also often used in Suriname, Guyana, Belize, Greece, and Indonesia.
The Olympic flag's five rings represent the five inhabited continents of the combined-America model, which excludes Antarctica.
As previously mentioned, some geographers use the name Oceania for a region including most of the island countries and territories in the Pacific Ocean as well as the continent of Australia.
Area and population
For a more detailed list of populations by continental regions and subregions, see List of continents and continental subregions by population.
The following table provides areas given by Encyclopædia Britannica for each continent in accordance with the seven-continent model, including Australia along with Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia as part of Oceania.
It also provides populations of continents according to 2021 estimates by the United Nations Statistics Division based on the UN geoscheme, which includes all of Russia (i.e., including Siberia) as part of Europe, but all of Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Turkey (i.e., including East Thrace) as part of Asia.
Areas and population estimates
Continent or Region
Area
Population
km2
sq mi
% of total land
% of total
Asia
Africa
North America
9,360,000
7.6%
South America
6,878,000
5.6%
Antarctica
5,500,000
9.5%
0%
Europe
3,900,000
6.7%
9.8%
Oceania
8,510,900
3,286,100
5.7%
Other divisions
Supercontinents
Main article: Supercontinent
Further information: Geological history of Earth
Reconstruction of the supercontinent Pangaea approximately 200 million years ago.
Apart from the current continents, the scope and meaning of the term continent includes past geological ones.
Supercontinents, largely in evidence earlier in the geological record, are landmasses that comprise most of the world's cratons or continental cores.
These have included Vaalbara, Kenorland, Columbia, Rodinia, Pannotia, and Pangaea.
Over time, these supercontinents broke apart into large landmasses which formed the present continents.
Subcontinents
Further information: Indian subcontinent and Arabian Peninsula
The Indian subcontinent
Certain parts of continents are recognized as subcontinents, especially the large peninsulas separated from the main continental landmass by geographical features.
The most widely recognized example is the Indian subcontinent.
The Arabian Peninsula, the Southern Cone of South America, and Alaska in North America might be considered further examples.
In many of these cases, the "subcontinents" concerned are on different tectonic plates from the rest of the continent, providing a geological justification for the terminology.
Greenland, generally reckoned as the world's largest island on the northeastern periphery of the North American Plate, is sometimes referred to as a subcontinent.
This is a significant departure from the more conventional view of a subcontinent as comprising a very large peninsula on the fringe of a continent.
Where the Americas are viewed as a single continent (America), it is divided into two subcontinents (North America and South America) or three (Central America being the third). When Eurasia is regarded as a single continent, Europe is treated as a subcontinent.
Submerged continents
Main article: Submerged continent
Further information: List of lost lands
See also: Zealandia
Zealandia, the largest submerged landmass or continent
Some areas of continental crust are largely covered by the ocean and may be considered submerged continents.
Notable examples are Zealandia, emerging from the ocean primarily in New Zealand and New Caledonia,[non-tertiary source needed] and the almost completely submerged Kerguelen Plateau in the southern Indian Ocean.
Microcontinents
Further information: Continental fragment
See also: Madagascar
Some islands lie on sections of continental crust that have rifted and drifted apart from a main continental landmass.
While not considered continents because of their relatively small size, they may be considered microcontinents.
Madagascar, the largest example, is usually considered an island of Africa, but its divergent evolution has caused it to be referred to as "the eighth continent" from a biological perspective.
History of the concept
Early concepts of the Old World continents
The Ancient Greek geographer Strabo holding a globe showing Europa and AsiaThe term "continent" translates the Greek word ἤπειρος, meaning "landmass, terra firma", the proper name of Epirus and later especially used for Asia (i.e.
Asia Minor).
The first distinction between continents was made by ancient Greek mariners who gave the names Europe and Asia to the lands on either side of the waterways of the Aegean Sea, the Dardanelles strait, the Sea of Marmara, the Bosporus strait and the Black Sea.
The names were first applied just to lands near the coast and only later extended to include the hinterlands.
But the division was only carried through to the end of navigable waterways and "... beyond that point the Hellenic geographers never succeeded in laying their finger on any inland feature in the physical landscape that could offer any convincing line for partitioning an indivisible Eurasia ..."
Ancient Greek thinkers subsequently debated whether Africa (then called Libya) should be considered part of Asia or a third part of the world.
Division into three parts eventually came to predominate.
From the Greek viewpoint, the Aegean Sea was the center of the world; Asia lay to the east, Europe to the north and west, and Africa to the south.
The boundaries between the continents were not fixed.
Early on, the Europe–Asia boundary was taken to run from the Black Sea along the Rioni River (known then as the Phasis) in Georgia.
Later it was viewed as running from the Black Sea through Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and along the Don River (known then as the Tanais) in Russia.
The boundary between Asia and Africa was generally taken to be the Nile River.
Herodotus in the 5th century BC objected to the whole of Egypt being split between Asia and Africa ("Libya") and took the boundary to lie along the western border of Egypt, regarding Egypt as part of Asia.
He also questioned the division into three of what is really a single landmass, a debate that continues nearly two and a half millennia later.
Eratosthenes, in the 3rd century BC, noted that some geographers divided the continents by rivers (the Nile and the Don), thus considering them "islands". Others divided the continents by isthmuses, calling the continents "peninsulas". These latter geographers set the border between Europe and Asia at the isthmus between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, and the border between Asia and Africa at the isthmus between the Red Sea and the mouth of Lake Bardawil on the Mediterranean Sea.
Medieval T and O map showing the three continents as domains of the sons of Noah—Asia to Sem (Shem), Europe to Iafeth (Japheth), and Africa to Cham (Ham).
The Roman Empire did not attach a strong identity to these continental divisions.
However, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of "Europe". Through the Roman period and the Middle Ages, a few writers took the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary between Asia and Africa, but most writers continued to consider it the Nile or the western border of Egypt (Gibbon).[citation needed] In the Middle Ages, the world was usually portrayed on T and O maps, with the T representing the waters dividing the three continents.
By the middle of the 18th century, "the fashion of dividing Asia and Africa at the Nile, or at the Great Catabathmus [the boundary between Egypt and Libya] farther west, had even then scarcely passed away".
European arrival in the Americas
Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean to the West Indies in 1492, sparking a period of European exploration of the Americas.
But despite four voyages to the Americas, Columbus never believed he had reached a new continent—he always thought it was part of Asia.
In 1501, Amerigo Vespucci and Gonçalo Coelho attempted to sail around what they considered the southern end of the Asian mainland into the Indian Ocean, passing through Fernando de Noronha.
After reaching the coast of Brazil, they sailed a long way farther south along the coast of South America, confirming that this was a land of continental proportions and that it also extended much farther south than Asia was known to.
On return to Europe, an account of the voyage, called Mundus Novus ("New World"), was published under Vespucci's name in 1502 or 1503, although it seems that it had additions or alterations by another writer.
Regardless of who penned the words, Mundus Novus credited Vespucci with saying, "I have discovered a continent in those southern regions that is inhabited by more numerous people and animals than our Europe, or Asia or Africa", the first known explicit identification of part of the Americas as a continent like the other three.
Within a few years, the name "New World" began appearing as a name for South America on world maps, such as the Oliveriana (Pesaro) map of around 1504–1505. Maps of this time, though, still showed North America connected to Asia and showed South America as a separate land.
Universalis Cosmographia, Waldseemüller's 1507 world map—the first to show the Americas separate from Asia
In 1507 Martin Waldseemüller published a world map, Universalis Cosmographia, which was the first to show North and South America as separate from Asia and surrounded by water.
A small inset map above the main map explicitly showed for the first time the Americas being east of Asia and separated from Asia by an ocean, as opposed to just placing the Americas on the left end of the map and Asia on the right end.
In the accompanying book Cosmographiae Introductio, Waldseemüller noted that the earth is divided into four parts, Europe, Asia, Africa, and the fourth part, which he named "America" after Amerigo Vespucci's first name.
On the map, the word "America" was placed on part of South America.
The word continent
From the 16th century the English noun continent was derived from the term continent land, meaning continuous or connected land and translated from the Latin terra continens.
The noun was used to mean "a connected or continuous tract of land" or mainland.
It was not applied only to very large areas of land—in the 17th century, references were made to the continents (or mainlands) of Isle of Man, Ireland and Wales and in 1745 to Sumatra.
The word continent was used in translating Greek and Latin writings about the three "parts" of the world, although in the original languages no word of exactly the same meaning as continent was used.
While continent was used on the one hand for relatively small areas of continuous land, on the other hand geographers again raised Herodotus's query about why a single large landmass should be divided into separate continents.
In the mid-17th century, Peter Heylin wrote in his Cosmographie that "A Continent is a great quantity of Land, not separated by any Sea from the rest of the World, as the whole Continent of Europe, Asia, Africa." In 1727, Ephraim Chambers wrote in his Cyclopædia, "The world is ordinarily divided into two grand continents: the old and the new." And in his 1752 atlas, Emanuel Bowen defined a continent as "a large space of dry land comprehending many countries all joined together, without any separation by water.
Thus Europe, Asia, and Africa is one great continent, as America is another." However, the old idea of Europe, Asia and Africa as "parts" of the world ultimately persisted with these being regarded as separate continents.
Beyond four continents
Hollandia Nova, 1659 map prepared by Joan Blaeu based on voyages by Abel Tasman and Willem Jansz, this image shows a French edition of 1663From the late 18th century, some geographers started to regard North America and South America as two parts of the world, making five parts in total.
Overall though, the fourfold division prevailed well into the 19th century.
Europeans discovered Australia in 1606, but for some time it was taken as part of Asia.
By the late 18th century, some geographers considered it a continent in its own right, making it the sixth (or fifth for those still taking America as a single continent). In 1813, Samuel Butler wrote of Australia as "New Holland, an immense island, which some geographers dignify with the appellation of another continent" and the Oxford English Dictionary was just as equivocal some decades later.
It was in the 1950s that the concept of Oceania as a "great division" of the world was replaced by the concept of Australia as a continent.
Antarctica was sighted in 1820 during the First Russian Antarctic Expedition and described as a continent by Charles Wilkes on the United States Exploring Expedition in 1838, the last continent identified, although a great "Antarctic" (antipodean) landmass had been anticipated for millennia.
An 1849 atlas labelled Antarctica as a continent but few atlases did so until after World War II.
Over time, the western concept of dividing the world into continents spread globally, replacing conceptions in other areas of the world.
The idea of continents continued to become imbued with cultural and political meaning.
In the 19th century during the Meiji period, Japanese leaders began to self-identify with the concept of being Asian, and renew relations with other "Asian" countries while conceiving of the idea of Asian solidarity against western countries.
This conception of an Asian identity, as well as the idea of Asian solidarity, was later taken up by others in the region, such as Republican China and Vietnam.
From the mid-19th century, atlases published in the United States more commonly treated North and South America as separate continents, while atlases published in Europe usually considered them one continent.
However, it was still not uncommon for American atlases to treat them as one continent up until World War II. From the 1950s, most U.S. geographers divided the Americas into two continents.
With the addition of Antarctica, this made the seven-continent model.
However, this division of the Americas never appealed to Latin Americans, who saw their region spanning an América as a single landmass, and there the conception of six continents remains dominant, as it does in scattered other countries.[citation needed]
Some geographers regard Europe and Asia together as a single continent, dubbed Eurasia.
In this model, the world is divided into six continents, with North America and South America considered separate continents.
Geology
Further information: Continental crust and Plate tectonicsGeologists use the term continent in a different manner from geographers.
In geology, a continent is defined by continental crust, which is a platform of metamorphic and igneous rock, largely of granitic composition.
Continental crust is less dense and much thicker than oceanic crust, which causes it to "float" higher than oceanic crust on the dense underlying mantle.
This explains why the continents form high platforms surrounded by deep ocean basins.
Some geologists restrict the term 'continent' to portions of the crust built around stable regions called cratons.
Cratons have largely been unaffected by mountain-building events (orogenies) since the Precambrian.
A craton typically consists of a continental shield surrounded by a continental platform.
The shield is a region where ancient crystalline basement rock (typically 1.5 to 3.8 billion years old) is widely exposed at the surface.
The platform surrounding the shield is also composed of ancient basement rock, but with a cover of younger sedimentary rock.
The continents are accretionary crustal "rafts" that, unlike the denser basaltic crust of the ocean basins, are not subjected to destruction through the plate tectonic process of subduction.
This accounts for the great age of the rocks comprising the continental cratons.
The margins of geologic continents are either passive or active.
An active margin is characterised by mountain building, either through a continent-on continent collision or a subduction zone.
Continents grow by accreting lighter volcanic island chains and microcontinents along these active margins, forming orogens.
At a passive margin, the continental crust is stretched thin by extension to form a continental shelf, which tapers off with a gradual slope covered in sediment, connecting it directly to the oceanic crust beyond.
Most passive margins eventually transition into active margins: where the oceanic plate becomes too heavy due to cooling, it disconnects from the continental crust, and starts subducting below it, forming a new subduction zone.
Principal tectonic plates of the continents and the floor of the oceans
There are many microcontinents, or continental fragments, that are built of continental crust but do not contain a craton.
Some of these are fragments of Gondwana or other ancient cratonic continents: Zealandia, which includes New Zealand and New Caledonia; Madagascar; the northern Mascarene Plateau, which includes the Seychelles.
Other islands, such as several in the Caribbean Sea, are composed largely of granitic rock as well, but all continents contain both granitic and basaltic crust, and there is no clear boundary as to which islands would be considered microcontinents under such a definition.
The Kerguelen Plateau, for example, is largely volcanic, but is associated with the breakup of Gondwanaland and is considered a microcontinent, whereas volcanic Iceland and Hawaii are not.
The British Isles, Sri Lanka, Borneo, and Newfoundland were on the margins of the Laurasian continent—only separated from the main continental landmass by inland seas flooding its margins.
The movement of plates has caused the continual formation and breakup of continents, and occasionally supercontinents, in a process called the Wilson Cycle.
The supercontinent Columbia or Nuna formed during a period of 2.0–1.8 billion years ago and broke up about 1.5–1.3 billion years ago.
The supercontinent Rodinia is thought to have formed about 1 billion years ago and to have embodied most or all of Earth's continents, and broken up into eight continents around 600 million years ago.
The eight continents later reassembled into another supercontinent called Pangaea; Pangaea broke up into Laurasia (which became North America and Eurasia) and Gondwana (which became the remaining continents).
Highest and lowest points
Further information: Seven Summits
See also: Extremes on Earth
The following table lists the seven continents with their highest and lowest points on land, sorted in decreasing highest points.
Continent
Highest point
Elevation
Country or territory containing highest point
Lowest point
Elevation
Country or territory containing lowest point
(metres)
(feet)
(metres)
(feet)
Asia
Mount Everest
8,848
China and Nepal
Dead Sea
−427
−1,401
Israel, Jordan, and Palestine
South America
Aconcagua
6,960
Argentina
Laguna del Carbón
−105
−344
Argentina
North America
Denali
6,198
United States
Death Valley†
−86
−282
United States
Africa
Mount Kilimanjaro
5,895
Tanzania
Lake Assal
−155
−509
Djibouti
Europe
Mount Elbrus
5,642
Russia
Caspian Sea
−28
−92
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Russia
Antarctica
Vinson Massif
4,892
None
Deep Lake, Vestfold Hills†
−50
−160
None††
Australia
Puncak Jaya
4,884
Indonesia (Papua)
Lake Eyre
−15
−49
Australia
† The lowest exposed points are given for North America and Antarctica.
The lowest non-submarine bedrock elevations in these continents are the trough beneath Jakobshavn Glacier, at −1,512 metres (−4,961 ft) and Bentley Subglacial Trench, at −2,540 metres (−8,330 ft), but these are covered by kilometres of ice.
†† Claimed by Australia as a part of the Australian Antarctic Territory, but this claim is not widely recognised by the international community.
Some sources list the Kuma–Manych Depression (a remnant of the Paratethys) as the geological border between Europe and Asia.[non-tertiary source needed] This would place the Caucasus outside of Europe, thus making Mont Blanc (elevation 4810 m) in the Graian Alps the highest point in Europe – the lowest point would still be the shore of the Caspian Sea.
See also
Geography portal
Ecology portal
Environment portal
World portal
Boundaries between the continents of Earth
Dvipa
Forgotten continent
List of continent name etymologies
List of continents and continental subregions by population
List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent
List of transcontinental countries
Lists of cities
Mainland Australia
Subregion
References
Notes
"Continents: What is a Continent?". National Geographic. 20 September 2011. "Most people recognize seven continents—Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Antarctica, Europe, and Australia, from largest to smallest—although sometimes Asia and Europe are considered a single continent, Eurasia."
Murray, Warwick E. (2016). "Changing Rural Worlds – A Global View".  In Daniels, Peter; Bradshaw, Michael; Shaw, Denis; Sidaway, James; Hall, Tim (eds.). An Introduction To Human Geography (5th ed.). Pearson. p. 231. ISBN 978-1-292-12939-6.
a b Neuendorf, K.K.E.; Mehl, J.P. Jr.; Jackson, J.A., eds. (2005). Glossary of Geology (5th ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: American Geological Institute. p. 139. ISBN 978-0922152896.
Choi, Charles Q. (16 July 2015). "Did Ancient Mars Have Continents?". Space.com.
Retrieved 6 December 2020.
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 21.
"Ocean". answers.com. 2006. Archived from the original on 3 March 2007. Retrieved 20 February 2007.
"Distribution of land and water on the planet Archived 31 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine." UN Atlas of the Oceans Archived 15 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine (2004). Retrieved 20 February 2007.
"continent n. 5. a." (1989) Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition.
Oxford University Press; "continent1 n." (2006) The Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 11th edition revised. (Ed.) Catherine Soanes and Angus Stevenson.
Oxford University Press; "continent1 n." (2005) The New Oxford American Dictionary, 2nd edition. (Ed.) Erin McKean.
Oxford University Press; "continent [2, n] 4 a" (1996) Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged.
ProQuest Information and Learning; "continent" (2007) Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved 14 January 2007, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
"continent [2, n] 6" (1996) Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged.
ProQuest Information and Learning. "a large segment of the earth's outer shell including a terrestrial continent and the adjacent continental shelf"
Monkhouse, F. J.; Small, John (1978). A Dictionary of the Natural Environment.
London: Edward Arnold. pp. 67–68. structurally it includes shallowly submerged adjacent areas (continental shelf) and neighbouring islands
Ollier, Cliff D. (1996). Planet Earth.
In Ian Douglas (Ed.), Companion Encyclopedia of Geography: The Environment and Humankind.
London: Routledge, p. 30. "Ocean waters extend onto continental rocks at continental shelves, and the true edges of the continents are the steeper continental slopes.
The actual shorelines are rather accidental, depending on the height of sea-level on the sloping shelves."
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 40: "The joining of Australia with various Pacific islands to form the quasi continent of Oceania ... "
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 35.
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), Chapter 1: "While it might seem surprising to find North and South America still joined into a single continent in a book published in the United States in 1937, such a notion remained fairly common until World War II. [...] By the 1950s, however, virtually all American geographers had come to insist that the visually distinct landmasses of North and South America deserved separate designations."
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), pp. 104–123.
a b McColl, R.W., ed. (2005). "continents". Encyclopedia of World Geography.
Vol. 1. Facts on File, Inc. p. 215. ISBN 978-0-8160-7229-3. Retrieved 26 June 2012 – via Google Books.
And since Africa and Asia are connected at the Suez Peninsula, Europe, Africa, and Asia are sometimes combined as Afro-Eurasia or Eurafrasia.
The International Olympic Committee's official flag, containing [...] the single continent of America (North and South America being connected as the Isthmus of Panama).
Chopping, Richard; Blewett, Richard; Kennett, Brian (2018). The Australian Continent.
Canberra: Australia National University Press. p. 4. doi:10.22459/ac.08.2018. ISBN 978-1-76046-247-5. S2CID 135195553.
Dempsey, Caitlin (15 October 2013). "Geography Facts about the World's Continents". Geography Realm.
Retrieved 26 August 2022.
"4 Continents
This would probably be the correct subdivision if we adopted a strict definition of continents, ideally defined as large landmasses separated by water.
Furthermore, we should consider "separated" only what is naturally separated, excluding therefore the separations resulting from the artificially made Panama Canal (which separates North and South America) and Suez Canal (which separates Africa from Eurasia).
Under this model, the four continents of the world are: Afro-Eurasia (or Eurafrasia), America, and Australia (not Oceania, which combines Australia with smaller countries in the Pacific Ocean which are separated by water), and Antarctica.
An alternative four-continent model, introduced at the beginning of the 20th century, included Europe, Asia, Africa, and America."worldometers
"How many continents are there?". Wonderopolis.
If you count Europe and Asia as one continent (often known as Eurasia), then there are six continents.
Some people also count North America and South America as one continent (called simply America), since the two land masses are separated only by the human-made Panama Canal.
This would allow for a model with only five continents.wonderopolis
Strobel, Christoph (11 February 2015). The Global Atlantic: 1400 to 1900. Routledge. pp. 13–. ISBN 978-1-317-52552-3.
Manual of Modern Geography: 2. William Blackwood. 1870. pp. 18– – via Google Books.
Dunn, Ross E.; Mitchell, Laura J.; Ward, Kerry (23 August 2016). The New World History: A Field Guide for Teachers and Researchers.
University of California Press. pp. 232–. ISBN 978-0-520-28989-5 – via Google Books.
Chatterjee, Sankar (13 March 2015). The Rise of Birds: 225 Million Years of Evolution.
Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 204–. ISBN 978-1-4214-1614-4 – via Google Books.
Mackay, Alexander (1861). Manual of Modern Geography: Mathematical, Physical, and Political : on a New Plan : Embracing a Complete Development of the River Systems of the Globe. W. Blackwood and Sons. pp. 15–.
Kermack, D. M. (9 March 2013). The Evolution of Mammalian Characters.
Springer Science+Business Media. pp. 141–. ISBN 978-1-4684-7817-4 – via Google Books.
"In some textbooks, North and South America are combined into "America" and/or Europe and Asia are combined into "Eurasia", for a grant total of 6 or even 5."scienceline
Martin W. Lewis and Kären E. Wigen, The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997)Wigen
"5 Continents
This model adopts the criteria of both the six-continent models, resulting in the following 5 continents: Africa, Eurasia, America, Oceania (or Australia), and Antarctica.
An alternative five-continent model is the one adopted, among others, by the Olympic Charter, which excludes Antarctica as uninhabited and lists the following five: Africa, Europe, Asia, America, and Oceania (or Australia)."worldometers2
"There are even geographical views that prefer the presence of both a Eurasian as well as one American continent.
These geographers therefore contend that there should only be 5 continents."universetoday
a b "Continent". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
"Continent". The Columbia Encyclopedia.
New York: Columbia University Press. 2001. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007 – via Bartleby.
a b  Older/previous official Greek Paedagogical Institute 6th grade Geography textbook (at the Wayback Machine), 5+1 continents combined-America model; Pankosmios Enyklopaidikos Atlas, CIL Hellas Publications, ISBN 84-407-0470-4, p. 30, 5+1 combined-America continents model; Neos Eikonographemenos Geographikos Atlas, Siola-Alexiou, 6 continents combined-America model; Lexico tes Hellenikes Glossas, Papyros Publications, ISBN 978-960-6715-47-1, lemma continent (epeiros), 5 continents model; Lexico Triantaphyllide online dictionary, Greek Language Center (Kentro Hellenikes Glossas), lemma continent (epeiros), 6 continents combined-America model; Lexico tes Neas Hellenikes Glossas, G.Babiniotes, Kentro Lexikologias (Legicology Center) LTD Publications, ISBN 960-86190-1-7, lemma continent (epeiros), 6 continents combined-America model
World, National Geographic - Xpeditions Atlas. 2006. Washington, DC: National Geographic Society.
The World - Continents Archived 21 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine, Atlas of Canada
The New Oxford Dictionary of English. 2001. New York: Oxford University Press.
"Continent Archived 28 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine". MSN Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2006.. 31 October 2009.
"Continent". McArthur, Tom, ed. 1992. The Oxford Companion to the English Language.
New York: Oxford University Press; p. 260.
"National curriculum in England: geography programmes of study". UK Department for Education.
"F-10 Curriculum Geograph". Australian Curriculum, Assessment, and Reporting Authority.
Archived from the original on 24 March 2014.
"Preamble" (PDF). Olympic Charter.
International Olympic Committee. 17 July 2020. p. 10. Retrieved 3 August 2021. the five interlaced rings, which represent the union of the five continents
"Asia". Encyclopædia Britannica. 16 November 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"Africa". Encyclopædia Britannica. 30 October 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"North America". Encyclopædia Britannica. 12 February 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"South America". Encyclopædia Britannica. 7 February 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"Antarctica". Encyclopædia Britannica. 10 March 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"Europe". Encyclopædia Britannica. 26 November 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"Australia". Encyclopædia Britannica. 19 July 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
"Oceania". Encyclopædia Britannica. 30 January 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2021.
""World Population Prospects 2022"". population.un.org.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved 17 July 2022.
"World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX). population.un.org ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved 17 July 2022.
Evans, D.A.D. (2013). "Reconstructing pre-Pangean supercontinents" (PDF). GSA Bulletin. 125 (11–12): 1736. Bibcode:2013GSAB..125.1735E. doi:10.1130/B30950.1.
a b c d Baldwin, James A. (2014), "Continents",  in R.W. McColl (ed.), Encyclopedia of World Geography, Infobase Publishing, pp. 214–216, ISBN 978-0-8160-7229-3 – via Google Books
Molnar, Peter (2015). Plate Tectonics: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-104396-3 – via Google Books.
p. 98: Thus, we can calculate past positions of the Indian Plate, with the Indian Subcontinent as its passenger, with respect to the Eurasian Plate.
p. 116: The Arabian Subcontinent later, approximately 35 million years ago, collided with southern Eurasia to form the Zagros Mountains of southwestern Iran.
Nares Strait and the drift of Greenland: a conflict in plate tectonics.
Museum Tusculanum Press. 1982. pp. 32–. ISBN 978-87-635-1150-6 – via Google Books.
Farmer, G. Thomas; Cook, John (2013), Climate Change Science: A Modern Synthesis: Volume 1 - The Physical Climate, Springer Science+Business Media, pp. 281–, ISBN 978-94-007-5757-8 – via Google Books
Gallay, Alan (2015). Colonial Wars of North America, 1512–1763 (Routledge Revivals): An Encyclopedia.
Routledge. pp. 204–. ISBN 978-1-317-48719-7 – via Google Books.
Innes, John L.; Haron, Abu Hassan (2000). Air Pollution and the Forests of Developing and Rapidly Industrializing Regions.
CABI. pp. 36–. ISBN 978-0-85199-932-6 – via Google Books.
Vivares, Ernesto (2014). Exploring the New South American Regionalism (NSAR). Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 40–. ISBN 978-1-4094-6961-2 – via Google Books.
Leonard, Thomas M. (2005). Encyclopedia of the Developing World.
Psychology Press. pp. 1637–. ISBN 978-1-57958-388-0 – via Google Books.
In Ibero-America, North America usually designates a region (subcontinente in Spanish) of the Americas containing Canada, the United States, and Mexico, and often Greenland, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and Bermuda; the land bridge of Central America is generally considered a subregion of North America.Norteamérica (Mexican version) Archived 30 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine/(Spaniard version) Archived 29 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Encarta Online Encyclopedia.. 31 October 2009.
Rafferty, John P. "A Tale of Two Submerged Continents". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 26 December 2020.
Cassimaly, Khalil a (5 March 2013). "The Violent History Of Mauritia: Birth, Oblivion, Renaissance | Labcoat Life | Learn Science at Scitable". Nature.
Retrieved 31 December 2020.
Hillstrom, Kevin; Collier Hillstrom, Laurie (2003). Africa and the Middle East: a continental overview of environmental issues.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-57607-688-0 – via Google Books.
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, Henry Stuart Jones, A Greek-English Lexicon (1940), s.v. ἤπειρος. The English noun was introduced in the mid-16th century, shortened from continent land (15th century), adapted from Latin terra continens "continuous landmass".
a b Toynbee, Arnold J. (1954). A Study of History.
London: Oxford University Press, v. 8, pp. 711–712.
Tozer, H. F. (1897). A History of Ancient Geography.
Cambridge: University Press. p. 69.
a b Pocock, J. G. A. (2002). "Some Europes in Their History".  In Pagden, Anthony (ed.). The Idea of Europe From Antiquity to the European Union.
Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–61. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511496813.003. ISBN 9780511496813.
Tozer, H. F. (1897). A History of Ancient Geography.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 67.
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), pp. 21–22.
Tozer, H. F. (1897). A History of Ancient Geography.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 68.
Herodotus.
Translated by George Rawlinson (2000). The Histories of Herodotus of Halicarnassus . Ames, Iowa: Omphaloskepsis, book 2, p. 18. Archived 19 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine
Herodotus.
Translated by George Rawlinson (2000). The Histories of Herodotus of Halicarnassus "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2006. Retrieved 8 February 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link). Ames, Iowa: Omphaloskepsis, book 4, p. 38. "I cannot conceive why three names ... should ever have been given to a tract which is in reality one,"
Strabo.
Translated by Horace Leonard Jones (1917). Geography.
Harvard University Press, book 1, ch. 4.
Goddard, Farley Brewer (1884). "Researches in the Cyrenaica". The American Journal of Philology, 5 (1) p. 38.
O'Gorman, Edmundo (1961). The Invention of America.
Indiana University Press. pp. 106–112.
Formisano, Luciano (Ed.) (1992). Letters from a New World: Amerigo Vespucci's Discovery of America.
New York: Marsilio, pp. xx–xxi.
ISBN 0-941419-62-2.
a b Zerubavel, Eviatar (2003). Terra Cognita: The Mental Discovery of America.
New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, pp. 77–79. ISBN 0-7658-0987-7.
Formisano, Luciano (Ed.) (1992). Letters from a New World: Amerigo Vespucci's Discovery of America.
New York: Marsilio, p. 45. ISBN 0-941419-62-2.
Zerubavel, Eviatar (2003). Terra Cognita: The Mental Discovery of America.
New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, pp. 80–82. ISBN 0-7658-0987-7.
a b c "continent n." (1989) Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition.
Oxford University Press.
"continent1 n." (2006) The Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 11th edition revised. (Ed.) Catherine Soanes and Angus Stevenson.
Oxford University Press.
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 29.
Bowen, Emanuel. (1752). A Complete Atlas, or Distinct View of the Known World.
London, p. 3.
a b Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 30
"continent n. 5. a." (1989) Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition.
Oxford University Press. "the great island of Australia is sometimes reckoned as another [continent]"
Lewis & Wigen, The Myth of Continents (1997), p. 32: "...the 1950s... was also the period when... Oceania as a "great division" was replaced by Australia as a continent along with a series of isolated and continentally attached islands. [Footnote 78: When Southeast Asia was conceptualized as a world region during World War II..., Indonesia and the Philippines were perforce added to Asia, which reduced the extent of Oceania, leading to a reconceptualization of Australia as a continent in its own right.
This maneuver is apparent in postwar atlases]"
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären E. (1997). The Myth of Continents: a Critique of Metageography.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1.
Mitani, Hiroshi (Fall 2006). "The Concept of Asia: From Geography to Ideology". New Perspectives on Turkey. 35: 21–34. doi:10.1017/S0896634600004465. S2CID 130570425.
a b Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären E. (1997). The Myth of Continents: a Critique of Metageography.
Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-520-20742-4.
Some geographers list only six continents, combining Europe and Asia into Eurasia.
In parts of the world, students learn that there are just five continents: Eurasia, Australia, Africa, Antarctica, and the Americas."How many continents are there?". National Geographic Society.
Retrieved 26 September 2010.
Levin, Harold L. (2010). The earth through time (9th ed.). Hoboken, N.J.: J. Wiley. pp. 173–174. ISBN 9780470387740.
Levin 2010, p. 83.
Levin 2010, p. 194.
Grotzinger, John P. (2014). "10". Understanding Earth.
Thomas H. Jordan (7t ed.). New York.
ISBN 978-1-4641-3874-4. OCLC 884299180.
Mortimer, N.; Campbell, H.J.; Tulloch, A.J.; King, P.R.; Stagpoole, V.M.; Wood, R.A.; Rattenbury, M.S.; Sutherland, R.; Adams, C.J.; Collot, J.; Seton, M. (2017). "Zealandia: Earth's Hidden Continent". GSA Today. 27 (3): 27–35. doi:10.1130/GSATG321A.1.
"UT Austin scientist plays major rule in study of underwater "micro-continent"". Utexas.edu.
Archived from the original on 3 November 2007. Retrieved 26 August 2012.
"Sci/Tech | 'Lost continent' discovered". BBC News. 27 May 1999. Retrieved 26 August 2012.
Zhao, Guochun; Cawood, Peter A.; Wilde, Simon A.; Sun, M. (November 2002). "Review of global 2.1–1.8 Ga orogens: implications for a pre-Rodinia supercontinent". Earth-Science Reviews. 59 (1): 125–162. Bibcode:2002ESRv...59..125Z. doi:10.1016/S0012-8252(02)00073-9.
Zhao, Guochun; Sun, M.; Wilde, Simon A.; Li, S.Z. (November 2004). "A Paleo-Mesoproterozoic supercontinent: assembly, growth and breakup". Earth-Science Reviews. 67 (1): 91–123. Bibcode:2004ESRv...67...91Z. doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2004.02.003.
Grotzinger, John P. (2014). Understanding Earth.
Thomas H. Jordan (7 ed.). New York.
ISBN 978-1-4641-3874-4. OCLC 884299180.
Plummer, Joel.
Jakobshavn Bed Elevation Archived 27 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Center for the Remote Sensing of the Ice Sheets, Dept of Geography, University of Kansas.
"'Kuma-Manych Depression'. Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online". Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2015.
"3. The continent - Extent and boundaries". Europe's Environment - The Dobris Assessment.
European Environmental Agency. 2011.
Bibliography
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kären E. (1997). The Myth of Continents: a Critique of Metageography.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1 – via Google Books.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Continents (category)
"What are continents?" YouTube video by CGP Grey
"Continent" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
Lost continent revealed in new reconstruction of geologic history
Continents of Earth   
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
South America
Afro-Eurasia (Old World)
Americas (New World)
Eurasia
Oceania
Prehistoric supercontinentsColumbia
Gondwana
Kenorland
Laurasia
Nena
Pangaea
Pannotia
Rodinia
Ur
Vaalbara
Other prehistoric continentsAmazonia
Arctica
Asiamerica
Atlantica
Avalonia
Baltica
Chilenia
Cimmeria
Congo Craton
Cuyania
East Antarctica
Euramerica
Kalaharia
Kazakhstania
Laramidia
Laurentia
North China
Pampia
Sahul
Siberia
South China
Submerged continent/land and microcontinentsBeringia
Doggerland
Jan Mayen
Kerguelen Plateau
Madagascar
Mauritia
Sahul
Seychelles
Sunda
Zealandia
Possible future supercontinentsAmasia
Aurica
Novopangaea
Pangaea Proxima
Mythical, lost, and hypothesised continentsAtlantis
Hyperborea
Kumari Kandam
Lemuria
Meropis
Mu
Terra Australis
SubcontinentsAlaska
Arabia
Central America
Greenland
Indian Subcontinent
Southern Cone
See also:  World portalRegions of the worldContinental fragment Category
EarthContinents
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
South America
Oceans
Arctic Ocean
Atlantic Ocean
Indian Ocean
Pacific Ocean
Southern Ocean
Oceanography
Geology
Age of Earth
Geology
Earth science
Erosion
Extremes on Earth
Future
Geological history
time scale
Geologic record
Geophysics
Gravity
History of Earth
Magnetic field
Plate tectonics
Structure
Atmosphere
Atmosphere of Earth
Prebiotic atmosphere
Troposphere
Stratosphere
Mesosphere
Thermosphere
Exosphere
Weather
Climate
Climate system
Energy balance
Climate change
Climate variability and change
Climatology
Paleoclimatology
Environment
Biome
Biosphere
Biogeochemical cycles
Ecology
Ecosystem
Human impact on the environment
Evolutionary history of life
Nature
Cartography
Digital mapping
Satellite imagery
Virtual globe
World map
Culture and society
List of sovereign states
dependent territories
In culture
Earth Day
Flag
Symbol
World economy
Etymology
World history
Time zones
World
Planetary science
Earth's orbit
Evolution of the Solar System
Geology of solar terrestrial planets
Location in the Universe
The Moon
Solar System
Category
Commons
Outline
World portal
Earth sciences portal
Geology portal
Solar System portal
Earth's primary regions and subregionsRegions of AfricaCentral
Guinea region
Gulf of Guinea
Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland
Mbaise
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Cameroonian Highlands forests
East Sudanian savanna
Congolian rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau
East
African Great Lakes
Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Virunga Mountains
Kavirondo
Zanj
East African montane forests
Eastern Arc Mountains
Serengeti
Horn of Africa
Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbaria
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Dahlak Archipelago
Hanish Islands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura
Red Sea
Indian Ocean islands
Comoro Islands
Lamu Archipelago
Madagascar
Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands
Zanzibar Archipelago
Swahili coast
North
Eastern Desert
Maghreb
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains
Barbary Coast
Gibraltar Arc
Ifriqiya
Nile Valley
Nile Delta
Bashmur
Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt
Tibesti Mountains
Western Sahara
South
Rhodesia
North
South
Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Maputaland
Highveld
Fynbos
Indian Ocean coastal belt
Albany thickets
Cape Floristic Region
Skeleton Coast
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
Cape Peninsula
False Bay
West
Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Upper Guinean forests
Lower Guinean forests
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic
Guinea Highlands
Gulf of Guinea
Dahomey Gap
Niger Basin
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta
West Sudanian savanna
Yorubaland
Macro-regions
Aethiopia
Afromontane
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Greater Middle East
Guineo-Congolian region
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Miombo woodlands
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Southeast Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian savanna
Tropical Africa
Zambezian region
Regions of AsiaCentral(The 'stans)
Roof of the World
Greater  Middle  East
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee
Tartary
Transoxiana
Turan
Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Arachosia
Khwarazm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Kazakh Steppe
Betpak-Dala
Eurasian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Siachen Glacier
Tibetan Plateau
East(Northeast)
Orient
Japanese Archipelago
Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc
Korea
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria
Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
North China Plain
Yan Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
High-mountain Asia
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau
Karakoram
Kunlun Mountains
Qilian Mountains
Hengduan Mountains
Tarim Basin
Qinling Mountains
Sichuan Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop
Loess Plateau
Shaanbei
Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze
Yangtze Delta
Yellow River
Pearl River Delta
Yenisey Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
North(Siberia)
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Inner Asia
Northeast
Ural
Ural Mountains
Far East
Russian Far East
Okhotsk–Manchurian taiga
Beringia
Chukchi Peninsula
Kamchatka Peninsula
Extreme North
Tartary
Siberia
Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Baraba steppe
Khatanga Gulf
Transbaikal
West
Amur Basin
Yenisey Gulf
Yenisey Basin
Sikhote-Alin
Kolyma
Bering Strait
Ring of Fire
Outer Manchuria
Asia-Pacific
Southeast(East Indies)
Orient
Sundaland
Mainland/Indochina
Northern Triangle temperate forests
Maritime/Malay Archipelago
Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands
Indonesian Archipelago/Nusantara
Wallacea
Timor
Philippine Archipelago
Luzon
Mindanao
Visayas
Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
South(IndianSubcontinent)
Orient
Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Kangchenjunga
Nanda Devi
Hindu Kush
Bactria
Carnatic region
Tamilakam
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Guzgan
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Gedrosia
Makran
Marathwada
Kashmir
Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range
Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern Coastal Plains
Kalinga
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
Lower Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan
Baltistan
Shigar Valley
High-mountain Asia
Karakoram
Saltoro Mountains
Siachen Glacier
Bengal
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Halar
Gulf of Mannar
Palk Strait
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Laccadive Islands
Aminidivi
Paropamisadae
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands
Maldives
Alpide belt
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Tibetan Plateau
West(Middle East)
Greater Middle East
MENA
Middle East
Red Sea
Hanish Islands
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Elam
Persian Gulf
Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs
Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula
Najd
Al-Yamama
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia
Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert
Al-Sharat
Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia
Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh Plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Eber-Nari
Kurdistan
Levant (Syria region)
Palestine region
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley
Philistia
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Galilee
Canaan
Gilead
Syrian Desert
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Aram
Aram-Naharaim
Negev
Phoenicia
Retjenu
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Bekaa valley
Levantine Sea
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Hauran
Iranian Plateau
Dasht-e Kavir
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus
Caucasus Mountains
Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus
North Caucasus
South Caucasus
Shirvan
Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula
Kartli
Anatolia
Taurus Mountains
Aeolis
Paphlagonia
Phasiane
Isauria
Ionia
Bithynia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Caria
Corduene
Chaldia
Doris
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Galatia
Pisidia
Pontus
Mysia
Arzawa
Speri 
Sophene
Biga Peninsula
Troad
Tuwana
Alpide belt
Regions of EuropeNorth
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Jutland
Gotland
Sápmi
Ingria
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Livonia
Curonian Spit
Nemunas Delta
Cap of the North
East
Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Wallachia
Transylvania
Moldavia
Bukovina
Bessarabia
Livonia
Ruthenia
Carpathian Ruthenia
Donbas
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula
Amber Coast
Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia
East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus
Lokhaniemi
Southeastern
Balkans
Crimea
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Taman Peninsula
Southern Russia
Kola Peninsula
East European Plain
Ryn Desert
Cap of the North
Central
North European Plain
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Rhineland
Eastphalia
Westphalia
Prussia
Lusatia
Bohemia
Moravia
Silesia
Czech Silesia
Pomerania
Pomerelia
Kashubia
Bukovina
Istria
Transdanubia
Polesia
Germania
Germania Slavica
West
Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Doggerland
Upper Rhine Plain
Upper Rhine
Gaul
Gascony
Normandy
Brittany
Septimania
Batavia
Gulf of Lion
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Pyrenees
Alpide belt
South
Italy
Po Valley (Padania)
Italian Peninsula
Tuscan Archipelago
Insular Italy
Aegadian Islands
Occitania
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Epirus
Rumelia
Balkans
Aegean Sea
Aegean Islands
Attica
Boeotia
Opuntian Locris
Phocis
Megaris
Peloponnese
Chalkidiki
Aetolia
Gulf of Chania
Istria
Mediterranean
Alpide belt
Germanic
Romance
Celtic
Slavic countries
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin
Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland
Regions of North AmericaUpper Northern(i.e.
Canada and Alaska (US))Eastern
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
Central Canada
Great Lakes
Northern (Canada and Alaska)
North American Arctic
Arctic Circle
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Alaska
Aleutian Arc
Aleutian Islands
Aleutian Range
Alaska Peninsula
Bering Strait
Gulf of Alaska
Greenland
Western
Pacific Northwest
Cascadia
Prairie Pothole Region
Acadia
Acadian Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula
Bay de Verde Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Brodeur Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Canadian Prairies
Canadian Shield
Cook Peninsula
Cypress Hills
English Canada
French Canada
Gaspé Peninsula
Georgian Bay
Gulf Islands
Gulf of Boothia
Hudson Bay
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
James Bay
Kodiak Island
Labrador Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Newfoundland Island
Palliser's Triangle
Peace River Country
Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Strait of Georgia
The Maritimes
Vancouver Island
Lower Northern(i.e.
United States)Central
Midwest
Upper Midwest
Old Southwest
Tallgrass prairie
Eastern
Appalachia
East Coast
Northeast
Atlantic Northeast
Mid-Atlantic
New England
Southeast
Thirteen Colonies
Northern
East North Central states
Great Lakes
Southern
Deep South
Old South
South Central
Gulf Coast
Upland South
Southwestern
Four Corners
Great Basin
Llano Estacado
West Texas
Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Southern Rocky Mountains
Western
Basin and Range Province
Northwest
Cascadia
Inland Northwest
Pacific Northwest
West Coast
Pacific Coast Ranges
Oregon Trail
Mormon corridor
Calumet Region
Llano Estacado
Third Coast
Backcountry
Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Basin
Great Basin Desert
Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mountain states
Intermountain West
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area
San Francisco Bay
North Bay
East Bay
Silicon Valley
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
"Belt" regions
Bible Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt
MexicoCentral
Bajío
Huasteca
Islas Marías
La Mixteca
Mezquital Valley
Revillagigedo Islands
Sierra Gorda
Tierra Caliente
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine–oak forests
Valley of Mexico
Northern
Baja California peninsula
Basin and Range Province
Comarca Lagunera
Gulf of California
Colorado River Delta
Isla Llave
Lerdo Landing
Pimería Alta
Salton Trough
Sierra de San Francisco
Southern
Chiapas Highlands
Isthmus of Tehuantepec
Ku-Maloob-Zaap
Petén Basin
Puuc
Sierra Madre de Chiapas
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Sierra Madre del Sur
Soconusco
Triangle of the Sun
Yucatán Peninsula
Gulf of Mexico
Sierra Madre Occidental
Sierra Madre Oriental
Central
Darién Gap
Isthmus of Panama
Lake Nicaragua
Panama Canal
Western Caribbean zone
West Indies
Caribbean
Antilles
Greater Antilles
Hispaniola
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Saint Martin Island
Virgin Islands
Southern Caribbean
Leeward Antilles
ABC islands
Windward Islands
Bajo Nuevo Bank
San Andrés and Providencia
Serranilla Bank
Lucayan Archipelago
American Cordillera
Anglo
Aridoamerica
Latin America
French
Hispanic
Latin America and the Caribbean
Mesoamerica
Middle America
Oasisamerica
Ring of Fire
North America portal
Regions of Oceania
Australia-New Guinea
Near Oceania
Pacific Islands
Pacific Plate
Remote Oceania
Zealandia
AustralasiaAustraliaAustralian Capital Territory
Canberra
Jervis Bay Territory
Jervis Bay Village
Wreck Bay Village
New South Wales
Central Coast
Central Tablelands
Central West
Far West
Greater Blue Mountains Area
Hunter
Illawarra
Mid North Coast
Monaro
New England
North West Slopes
Northern Rivers
Northern Tablelands
Orana
Riverina
South Coast
South West Slopes
Southern Highlands
Southern Tablelands
Northern Territory
Arnhem Land
Barkly Tableland
Central Australia
Darwin
Katherine
Top End
Queensland
Central West
Central
Darling Downs
Far North
Gulf Country
North
South East
South West
Wide Bay–Burnett
South Australia
Adelaide Hills
Barossa Light and Lower North
Eastern Adelaide
Eyre Western
Far North
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island
Limestone Coast
Murray and Mallee
Northern Adelaide
Southern Adelaide
Western Adelaide
Yorke and Mid North
Tasmania
Central Highlands
East Coast
Midlands
North East
North West
Northern
South West
Southern
West Coast
Victoria
Barwon South West
Gippsland
Grampians
Greater Melbourne
Hume
Loddon Mallee
Western Australia
Gascoyne
Goldfields–Esperance
Great Southern
Greater Perth
Perth Metropolitan Area
Kimberley
Mid West
Peel
Pilbara
South West
Wheatbelt
Australian External Territories
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Norfolk Island
Australian Indian Ocean Territories
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
New ZealandNorth Island
Northland
Auckland
Waikato
Bay of Plenty
Gisborne
Hawke's Bay
Taranaki
Manawatū-Whanganui
Wellington
South Island
Tasman
Nelson
Marlborough
West Coast
Canterbury
Otago
Southland
Stewart Island
NZ Outlying Islands
Chatham Islands
Kermadec Islands
Solander Islands
Three Kings Islands
NZ Subantarctic Islands
Antipodes Islands
Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Campbell Islands
Snares Islands
MelanesiaIsland Melanesia
Fiji
New Caledonia
East Melanesian Islands
Bismarck Archipelago
Gazelle Peninsula
Santa Cruz Islands
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands Archipelago
Bougainville
Bonis Peninsula
Solomon Islands
New Guinea
Aru Islands
Papua New Guinea
Highlands Region
Momase Region
Huon Gulf
Huon Peninsula
Southern Region
Western New Guinea
Papua
West Papua
Bird's Head Peninsula
Micronesia
Caroline Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Palau
Kiribati
Banaba
Gilbert Islands
Mariana Islands
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Wake Island
PolynesiaPolynesian Triangle
Easter Island
Salas and Gómez Island
Cook Islands
French Polynesia
Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Mangareva Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu Islands
Johnston Atoll
Line Islands
Jarvis Island
Kingman Reef
Kiritimati
Palmyra Atoll
Tabuaeran
Teraina
Niue
Pitcairn Islands
Pitcairn Island
Henderson Island
Ducie Island
Oeno Island
Samoan Islands
American Samoa
Independent State of Samoa
Southeastern Hawaiian Islands
Tokelau Islands
Atafu
Fakaofo
Nukunonu
Swains Island
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna
Hoorn Islands
Wallis Islands
Phoenix Islands
Canton Island
Howland and Baker Islands
Baker Island
Howland Island
Polynesian Outliers
Clipperton Island
Desventuradas Islands
Galápagos Islands
Juan Fernández Islands
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
Midway Atoll
Asia-Pacific
Indo-Australian Plate
Indo-Pacific
Islands Region
Papuan Peninsula
Ring of Fire
Regions of South AmericaEast
Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado
North
Caribbean South America
West Indies
Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin
Amazon rainforest
Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta
South
Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula
Triple Frontier
Río de la Plata
Río de la Plata Basin
West
Andes
Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range
Altiplano
Atacama Desert
Middle
Latin
Hispanic
Bolivarian
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC
Earth's polar regionsAntarctic
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands
Arctic
Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic
Earth's oceans and seasArctic Ocean
Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean
Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean
Arafura Sea
Bali Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Java Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seram Sea
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea
Southern Ocean
Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea
Endorheic basins
Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea
Others
Ocean
Sea
Superocean
Oceans portal
Category
Hemispheres of Earth
Northern
Southern
Eastern
Western
Land
Water
Portal:Geography
Commons:Maps of Earth's hemispheres
World portal
Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikibooks
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 18:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
