Drug - Wikipedia
Drug
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Substance having effect(s) on the body of an individual
For other uses, see Drug (disambiguation).
Uncoated aspirin tablets, consisting of about 90% acetylsalicylic acid, along with a minor amount of inert fillers and binders.
Aspirin is a pharmaceutical drug often used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation.
A drug is any chemical substance that causes a change in an organism's physiology or psychology when consumed.
Drugs are typically distinguished from food and substances that provide nutritional support.
Consumption of drugs can be via inhalation, injection, smoking, ingestion, absorption via a patch on the skin, suppository, or dissolution under the tongue.
In pharmacology, a drug is a chemical substance, typically of known structure, which, when administered to a living organism, produces a biological effect.
A pharmaceutical drug, also called a medication or medicine, is a chemical substance used to treat, cure, prevent, or diagnose a disease or to promote well-being.
Traditionally drugs were obtained through extraction from medicinal plants, but more recently also by organic synthesis.
Pharmaceutical drugs may be used for a limited duration, or on a regular basis for chronic disorders.
Pharmaceutical drugs are often classified into drug classes—groups of related drugs that have similar chemical structures, the same mechanism of action (binding to the same biological target), a related mode of action, and that are used to treat the same disease.
The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC), the most widely used drug classification system, assigns drugs a unique ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it to specific drug classes within the ATC system.
Another major classification system is the Biopharmaceutics Classification System.
This classifies drugs according to their solubility and permeability or absorption properties.
Psychoactive drugs are chemical substances that affect the function of the central nervous system, altering perception, mood or consciousness.
These drugs are divided into different groups like: stimulants, depressants, antidepressants, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, and hallucinogens.
These psychoactive drugs have been proven useful in treating wide range of medical conditions including mental disorders around the world.
The most widely used drugs in the world include caffeine, nicotine and alcohol, which are also considered recreational drugs, since they are used for pleasure rather than medicinal purposes.
All drugs can have potential side effects.
Abuse of several psychoactive drugs can cause addiction and/or physical dependence.
Excessive use of stimulants can promote stimulant psychosis.
Many recreational drugs are illicit and international treaties such as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs exist for the purpose of their prohibition.
Contents
Etymology
In English, the noun "drug" is thought to originate from Old French "drogue", possibly deriving from "droge (vate)" from Middle Dutch meaning "dry (barrels)", referring to medicinal plants preserved as dry matter in barrels.
Medication
Nexium (Esomeprazole) is a proton-pump inhibitor.
It is used to reduce the production of stomach acid.
Main articles: Pharmaceutical drug, Drug class, and Medication
A medication or medicine is a drug taken to cure or ameliorate any symptoms of an illness or medical condition.
The use may also be as preventive medicine that has future benefits but does not treat any existing or pre-existing diseases or symptoms.
Dispensing of medication is often regulated by governments into three categories—over-the-counter medications, which are available in pharmacies and supermarkets without special restrictions; behind-the-counter medicines, which are dispensed by a pharmacist without needing a doctor's prescription, and prescription only medicines, which must be prescribed by a licensed medical professional, usually a physician.
In the United Kingdom, behind-the-counter medicines are called pharmacy medicines which can only be sold in registered pharmacies, by or under the supervision of a pharmacist.
These medications are designated by the letter P on the label.
The range of medicines available without a prescription varies from country to country.
Medications are typically produced by pharmaceutical companies and are often patented to give the developer exclusive rights to produce them.
Those that are not patented (or with expired patents) are called generic drugs since they can be produced by other companies without restrictions or licenses from the patent holder.
Pharmaceutical drugs are usually categorised into drug classes.
A group of drugs will share a similar chemical structure, or have the same mechanism of action, the same related mode of action or target the same illness or related illnesses.
The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC), the most widely used drug classification system, assigns drugs a unique ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it to specific drug classes within the ATC system.
Another major classification system is the Biopharmaceutics Classification System.
This groups drugs according to their solubility and permeability or absorption properties.
Spiritual and religious use
Main articles: Entheogen and Psychonaut
An Amazonian shaman
San Pedro, a psychoactive cactus.
Some religions, particularly ethnic religions, are based completely on the use of certain drugs, known as entheogens, which are mostly hallucinogens,—psychedelics, dissociatives, or deliriants.
Some drugs used as entheogens include kava which can act as a stimulant, a sedative, a euphoriant and an anesthetic.
The roots of the kava plant are used to produce a drink which is consumed throughout the cultures of the Pacific Ocean.
Some shamans from different cultures use entheogens, defined as "generating the divine within" to achieve religious ecstasy.
Amazonian shamans use ayahuasca (yagé) a hallucinogenic brew for this purpose.
Mazatec shamans have a long and continuous tradition of religious use of Salvia divinorum a psychoactive plant.
Its use is to facilitate visionary states of consciousness during spiritual healing sessions.
Silene undulata is regarded by the Xhosa people as a sacred plant and used as an entheogen.
Its roots are traditionally used to induce vivid (and according to the Xhosa, prophetic) lucid dreams during the initiation process of shamans, classifying it a naturally occurring oneirogen similar to the more well-known dream herb Calea ternifolia.
Peyote, a small spineless cactus, has been a major source of psychedelic mescaline and has probably been used by Native Americans for at least five thousand years.
Most mescaline is now obtained from a few species of columnar cacti in particular from San Pedro and not from the vulnerable peyote.
The entheogenic use of cannabis has also been widely practised for centuries.
Rastafari use marijuana (ganja) as a sacrament in their religious ceremonies.
Psychedelic mushrooms (psilocybin mushrooms), commonly called magic mushrooms or shrooms have also long been used as entheogens.
Smart drugs and designer drugs
Main articles: Nootropic, Designer drug, and Psychoactive drug
Nootropics, also commonly referred to as "smart drugs", are drugs that are claimed to improve human cognitive abilities.
Nootropics are used to improve memory, concentration, thought, mood, and learning.
An increasingly used nootropic among students, also known as a study drug,  is methylphenidate branded commonly as Ritalin and used for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy.
At high doses methylphenidate can become highly addictive.
Serious addiction can lead to psychosis, anxiety and heart problems, and the use of this drug is related to a rise in suicides, and overdoses.
Evidence for use outside of student settings is limited but suggests that it is commonplace.
Intravenous use of methylphenidate can lead to emphysematous damage to the lungs, known as Ritalin lung.
Other drugs known as designer drugs are produced.
An early example of what today would be labelled a 'designer drug' was LSD, which was synthesised from ergot.
Other examples include analogs of performance-enhancing drugs such as designer steroids taken to improve physical capabilities and these are sometimes used (legally or not) for this purpose, often by professional athletes.
Other designer drugs mimic the effects of psychoactive drugs.
Since the late 1990s there has been the identification of many of these synthesised drugs.
In Japan and the United Kingdom this has spurred the addition of many designer drugs into a newer class of controlled substances known as a temporary class drug.
Synthetic cannabinoids have been produced for a longer period of time and are used in the designer drug synthetic cannabis.
Recreational drug use
Main article: Recreational drug use
Further information: Prohibition of drugs
Cannabis is a commonly used recreational drug.
Recreational drug use is the use of a drug (legal, controlled, or illegal) with the primary intention of altering the state of consciousness through alteration of the central nervous system in order to create positive emotions and feelings.
The hallucinogen LSD is a psychoactive drug commonly used as a recreational drug.
Ketamine is a drug used for anesthesia, and is also used as a recreational drug, both in powder and liquid form, for its hallucinogenic and dissociative effects.
Some national laws prohibit the use of different recreational drugs; and medicinal drugs that have the potential for recreational use are often heavily regulated.
However, there are many recreational drugs that are legal in many jurisdictions and widely culturally accepted.
Cannabis is the most commonly consumed controlled recreational drug in the world (as of 2012). Its use in many countries is illegal but is legally used in several countries usually with the proviso that it can only be used for personal use.
It can be used in the leaf form of marijuana (grass), or in the resin form of hashish.
Marijuana is a more mild form of cannabis than hashish.
There may be an age restriction on the consumption and purchase of legal recreational drugs.
Some recreational drugs that are legal and accepted in many places include alcohol, tobacco, betel nut, and caffeine products, and in some areas of the world the legal use of drugs such as khat is common.
There are a number of legal intoxicants commonly called legal highs that are used recreationally.
The most widely used of these is alcohol.
Administration of drugs
Main article: Route of administration
All drugs, can be administered via a number of routes, and many can be administered by more than one.
Bolus is the administration of a medication, drug or other compound that is given to raise its concentration in blood to an effective level.
The administration can be given intravenously, by parenteral,by indovenous, by intramuscular, intrathecal or subcutaneous injection.
Inhaled, (breathed into the lungs), as an aerosol, inhaler, vape or dry powder (this includes smoking or vaping a substance).
Injection as a solution, suspension or emulsion either: intramuscular, intravenous, intraperitoneal, intraosseous.
Insufflation, as a nasal spray or snorting into the nose.
Orally, as a liquid or solid, that is absorbed through the intestines.
Rectally as a suppository, that is absorbed by the rectum or colon.
Sublingually, diffusing into the blood through tissues under the tongue.
Topically, usually as a cream or ointment.
A drug administered in this manner may be given to act locally or systemically.
Vaginally as a pessary, primarily to treat vaginal infections.
Control of drugs
Main articles: Prohibition of drugs and Drug policy
There are numerous governmental offices in many countries that deal with the control and oversee of drug manufacture and use, and the implementation of various drug laws.
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs is an international treaty brought about in 1961 to prohibit the use of narcotics save for those used in medical research and treatment.
In 1971, a second treaty the Convention on Psychotropic Substances had to be introduced to deal with newer recreational psychoactive and psychedelic drugs.
The legal status of Salvia divinorum varies in many countries and even in states within the United States.
Where it is legislated against the degree of prohibition also varies.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States is a federal agency responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the regulation and supervision of food safety, tobacco products, dietary supplements, prescription and over-the-counter medications, vaccines, biopharmaceuticals, blood transfusions, medical devices, electromagnetic radiation emitting devices, cosmetics, animal foods and veterinary drugs.
In India, the Narcotics Control Bureau (abbr.
NCB), an Indian federal law enforcement and intelligence agency under the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India is tasked with combating drug trafficking and assisting international use of illegal substances under the provisions of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act.
See also
Club drug
Controlled Substances Act
Drug checking
Drug development
Inverse benefit law
Lifestyle drug
Medical cannabis
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
Pharmacognosy
Placebo
Prodrug
Specialty drugs (United States)
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Lists of drugs
List of drugs
List of pharmaceutical companies
List of psychoactive plants
List of Schedule I drugs (US)
References
a b "Drug". Dictionary.com Unabridged. v 1.1. Random House. 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 14 September 2007 – via Dictionary.com.
"Drug Definition". Stedman's Medical Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 2014-05-02. Retrieved 2014-05-01 – via Drugs.com.
H.P., Rang; M.M, Dale; J.M., Ritter; R.J., Flower; G., Henderson (2011). "What is Pharmacology". Rang & Dale's pharmacology (7 ed.). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-7020-3471-8. a drug can be defined as a chemical substance of known structure, other than a nutrient of an essential dietary ingredient, which, when administered to a living organism, produces a biological effect
Atanasov AG, Waltenberger B, Pferschy-Wenzig EM, Linder T, Wawrosch C, Uhrin P, Temml V, Wang L, Schwaiger S, Heiss EH, Rollinger JM, Schuster D, Breuss JM, Bochkov V, Mihovilovic MD, Kopp B, Bauer R, Dirsch VM, Stuppner H (December 2015). "Discovery and resupply of pharmacologically active plant-derived natural products: A review". Biotechnol Adv. 33 (8): 1582–614. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.08.001. PMC 4748402. PMID 26281720.
"Drug". The American Heritage Science Dictionary.
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Archived from the original on 14 September 2007. Retrieved 20 September 2007 – via dictionary.com.
a b Mahoney A, Evans J (6 November 2008). "Comparing drug classification systems". AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings: 1039. PMID 18999016.
a b World Health Organization (2003). Introduction to drug utilization research (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. p. 33. ISBN 978-92-4-156234-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-22.
a b Bergström, CA; Andersson, SB; Fagerberg, JH; Ragnarsson, G; Lindahl, A (16 June 2014). "Is the full potential of the biopharmaceutics classification system reached?". European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 57: 224–31. doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2013.09.010. PMID 24075971.
"An overview of alcohol and other drug issues". Archived from the original on 2015-03-28. Retrieved 2015-03-16.
Crocq MA (June 2003). "Alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, and mental disorders". Dialogues Clin.
Neurosci. 5 (2): 175–185. doi:10.31887/DCNS.2003.5.2/macrocq.
PMC 3181622. PMID 22033899.
"Recreational Drug". The Free Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 15 September 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2015.
"MHRA Side Effects of Medicines." Archived 2014-05-02 at the Wayback Machine MHRA Side Effects of Medicines,
Fox, Thomas Peter; Oliver, Govind; Ellis, Sophie Marie (2013). "The Destructive Capacity of Drug Abuse: An Overview Exploring the Harmful Potential of Drug Abuse Both to the Individual and to Society". ISRN Addiction. 2013: 450348. doi:10.1155/2013/450348. PMC 4392977. PMID 25938116.
Harper, Douglas. "drug". Online Etymology Dictionary.
Tupper KW (2012). "Psychoactive substances and the English language: "Drugs," discourses, and public policy". Contemporary Drug Problems. 39 (3): 461–492. doi:10.1177/009145091203900306. S2CID 55498558.
"About Registration: Medicines and Prescribing". Health and Care Professions Council.
Archived from the original on 2016-01-13. Retrieved 22 January 2016.
"Glossary of MHRA terms – P". U.K. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency.
Archived from the original on 2008-11-14. Retrieved 2008-11-05.
""Generic Drugs", Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration" (PDF). Fda.gov.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017.
Entheogen, [dictionary.com], archived from the original on 2012-02-13, retrieved 2012-03-13
Valdés, Díaz & Paul 1983, p. 287.
Sobiecki, Jean-Francois (July 2012). "Psychoactive Spiritual Medicines and Healing Dynamics in the Initiation Process of Southern Bantu Diviners". Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. 44 (3): 216–223. doi:10.1080/02791072.2012.703101. PMID 23061321. S2CID 32876088.
El-Seedi HR, De Smet PA, Beck O, Possnert G, Bruhn JG (October 2005). "Prehistoric peyote use: alkaloid analysis and radiocarbon dating of archaeological specimens of Lophophora from Texas". J Ethnopharmacol. 101 (1–3): 238–42. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2005.04.022. PMID 15990261.
"A Brief History of the San Pedro Cactus". Mescaline.com.
Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2017.
Terry M (2013). "Lophophora williamsii". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2013. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T151962A581420.en.
Retrieved 2018-10-29.
Souza, Rafael Sampaio Octaviano de; Albuquerque, Ulysses Paulino de; Monteiro, Júlio Marcelino; Amorim, Elba Lúcia Cavalcanti de (October 2008). "Jurema-Preta (Mimosa tenuiflora [Willd.] Poir.): a review of its traditional use, phytochemistry and pharmacology". Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology. 51 (5): 937–947. doi:10.1590/S1516-89132008000500010.
Bloomquist, Edward (1971). Marijuana: The Second Trip.
California: Glencoe.
a b Abelman, D (6 October 2017). "Mitigating risks of students use of study drugs through understanding motivations for use and applying harm reduction theory: a literature review". Harm Reduct J. 14 (1): 68. doi:10.1186/s12954-017-0194-6. PMC 5639593. PMID 28985738.
a b Smith, M; Farah, M (September 2011). "Are prescription stimulants "smart pills"? The epidemiology and cognitive neuroscience of prescription stimulant use by normal healthy individuals". Psychol.
Bull. 137 (5): 717–41. doi:10.1037/a0023825. PMC 3591814. PMID 21859174.
Sharma, R. "Ritalin lung". Radiopedia.org.
Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2019.
"Discovery And Synthesis Of LSD: What You Probably Did Not Know About It - Chemistry Hall". 2017-06-13. Archived from the original on 2017-06-13. Retrieved 2017-06-13.
Teale P, Scarth J, Hudson S (2012). "Impact of the emergence of designer drugs upon sports doping testing". Bioanalysis. 4 (1): 71–88. doi:10.4155/bio.11.291. PMID 22191595.
Lingeman (1970). Drugs from A–Z: A Dictionary.
Penguin.
ISBN 978-0-7139-0136-8.
"DrugFacts: Hallucinogens - LSD, Peyote, Psilocybin, and PCP". National Institute on Drug Abuse.
December 2014. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015.
Morgan, CJ; Curran, HV; Independent Scientific Committee on, Drugs. (January 2012). "Ketamine use: a review". Addiction. 107 (1): 27–38. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2011.03576.x.
PMID 21777321.
"World Drug Report 2012" (PDF). UNODC. 2012. p. 69. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2016.
Al-Mugahed, Leen (2008). "Khat Chewing in Yemen: Turning over a New Leaf: Khat Chewing Is on the Rise in Yemen, Raising Concerns about the Health and Social Consequences". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 86 (10): 741–2. doi:10.2471/BLT.08.011008. PMC 2649518. PMID 18949206. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016.
"The administration of medicines". Nursing Times.
EMAP Publishing Limited. 19 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 June 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
"Animal Food & Feeds". Fda.gov.
Archived from the original on 22 March 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2015.
"Narcotics Control Bureau". 2009-04-10. Archived from the original on 2009-04-10. Retrieved 2020-09-12.
Further reading
Richard J. Miller (2014). Drugged: the science and culture behind psychotropic drugs.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-995797-2.
External links
DrugBank, a database of 13,400 drugs and 5,100 protein drug targets
"Drugs", BBC Radio 4 discussion with Richard Davenport-Hines, Sadie Plant and Mike Jay (In Our Time, May 23, 2002)
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drugs.
Major chemical drug groups – based upon the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification Systemgastrointestinal tract/ metabolism (A)
stomach acid
Antacids
H2 antagonists
Proton-pump inhibitors
Antiemetics
Laxatives
Antidiarrhoeals / Antipropulsives
Anti-obesity drugs
Diabetes medication
Vitamins
Dietary minerals
blood and bloodforming organs (B)
Antithrombotics
Antiplatelets
Anticoagulants
Thrombolytics / fibrinolytics
Antihemorrhagics
Platelets
Coagulants
Antifibrinolytics
cardiovascularsystem (C)
cardiac therapy / antianginals
Cardiac glycosides
Antiarrhythmics
Cardiac stimulants
Antihypertensives
Diuretics
Vasodilators
Beta blockers
Calcium channel blockers
renin–angiotensin system
ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
Renin inhibitors
Antihyperlipidemics
Statins
Fibrates
Bile acid sequestrants
skin (D)
Emollients
Cicatrizants
Antipruritics
Antipsoriatics
Medicated dressings
genitourinarysystem (G)
Hormonal contraception
Fertility agents
Selective estrogen receptor modulators
Sex hormones
endocrinesystem (H)
Hypothalamic–pituitary hormones
Corticosteroids
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Sex hormones
Thyroid hormones / Antithyroid agents
infections andinfestations (J, P, QI)
Antimicrobials: Antibacterials (Antimycobacterials)
Antifungals
Antivirals
Antiparasitics
Antiprotozoals
Anthelmintics
Ectoparasiticides
Intravenous immunoglobulin
Vaccines
malignant disease(L01–L02)
Anticancer agents
Antimetabolites
Alkylating
Spindle poisons
Antineoplastic
Topoisomerase inhibitors
immune disease(L03–L04)
Immunomodulators
Immunostimulants
Immunosuppressants
muscles, bones,and joints (M)
Anabolic steroids
Anti-inflammatories
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Antirheumatics
Corticosteroids
Muscle relaxants
Bisphosphonates
brain andnervous system (N)
Analgesics
Anesthetics
General
Local
Anorectics
Anti-ADHD agents
Antiaddictives
Anticonvulsants
Antidementia agents
Antidepressants
Antimigraine agents
Antiparkinson agents
Antipsychotics
Anxiolytics
Aphrodisiacs
Depressants
Entactogens
Entheogens
Euphoriants
Hallucinogens
Psychedelics
Dissociatives
Deliriants
Hypnotics / Sedatives
Mood stabilizers
Neuroprotectives
Nootropics
Neurotoxins
Orexigenics
Serenics
Stimulants
Wakefulness-promoting agents
respiratorysystem (R)
Decongestants
Bronchodilators
Cough medicines
H1 antagonists
sensory organs (S)
Ophthalmologicals
Otologicals
other ATC (V)
Antidotes
Contrast media
Radiopharmaceuticals
Dressings
Senotherapeutics
Drugs
Pharmacological classification systems
ATC codes
Medicine portal
Recreational drug useMajor recreational drugsDepressants
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Carbamates
Ethanol (alcohol)
Alcoholic drinks
Beer
Wine
Gabapentinoids
GHB
Inhalants
Medical
Nitrous oxide (recreational use)
Hazardous solvents
contact adhesives
Gasoline
nail polish remover
Paint thinner
Other
Freon
Kava
Nonbenzodiazepines
Quinazolinones
Opioids
Buprenorphine
Suboxone
Subutex
Codeine
Desomorphine
Krokodil
Dextropropoxyphene
Darvocet
Darvon
Fentanyl
Diamorphine
Heroin
Hydrocodone
Hydromorphone
Dilaudid
Methadone
Mitragyna speciosa
Kratom
Morphine
Opium
Oxycodone
/paracetamol
Tramadol
Stimulants
Amphetamine
Arecoline
Areca
Betel
Caffeine
Coffee
Energy drinks
Tea
Cathinone
Khat
Cocaine
Coca
Crack
Ephedrine
Ephedra
MDPV
Mephedrone
Methamphetamine
Methylone
Methylphenidate
Modafinil
Nicotine
Tobacco
Theobromine
Cocoa
Chocolate
Entactogens
6-APB
Benzofury
AMT
MDA
MDMA
Ecstasy
HallucinogensPsychedelics
Bufotenin
Psychoactive toads
Vilca
Yopo
DMT
Ayahuasca
LSA
LSD-25
Mescaline
Peruvian torch
Peyote
San Pedro
Psilocybin / Psilocin
Psilocybin mushrooms
Dissociatives
DXM (recreational use)
Glaucine
Inhalants
Nitrous oxide (recreational use)
alkyl nitrites
poppers
amyl nitrite
Ketamine
MXE
Muscimol
Amanita muscaria
PCP
Salvinorin A
Salvia divinorum
Deliriants
Atropine and Scopolamine
Atropa belladonna
Datura
Hyoscyamus niger
Mandragora officinarum
Dimenhydrinate
Diphenhydramine
Cannabinoids
THC
Cannabis (Marijuana)
Hashish
Hash oil
Neocannabinoid / synthetic cannabinoids
JWH-018
APICA
APINACA
Spice
Oneirogens
Calea zacatechichi
Silene capensis
Club drugs
Cocaine
Quaaludes
MDMA (Ecstasy)
Nitrous oxide (recreational use)
Poppers
Drug cultureCannabis culture
Cannabis consumption
Cannabis cultivation
Cannabis edible
Cannabis rights
Cannabis rights leaders
List of cannabis rights organizations
Cannabis smoking
Cannabis Social Club
Cannabis tea
Cannabis vaping
Head shop
Legal history of cannabis in the United States
Legality of cannabis
Marijuana Policy Project
Medical cannabis
NORML
Cannabis and religion
Stoner film
Coffee culture
Coffee break
Coffeehouse
Latte art
Teahouse
Drinking culture
Bartending
Beer culture
Beer festival
Binge drinking
Diethyl ether
Drinking games
Drinking song
Happy hour
Hip flask
Nightclub
Oktoberfest
Pub
Pub crawl
Sommelier
Sports bar
Tailgate party
Wine bar
Wine tasting
Psychedelia
Psychonautics
Art
Drug
Era
Experience
Literature
Music
Microdosing
Smart shop
Therapy
Smoking culture
Cigarette card
Fashion cigarettes
Cloud-chasing
Loosie
Smokeasy
Smoking fetishism
Tobacco smoking
Other
Chasing the dragon
Club drug
Counterculture of the 1960s
Dance party
Drug paraphernalia
Drug tourism
Entheogen
Hippie
Needle sharing
Nootropic
Party and play
Poly drug use
Rave
Religion and drugs
Self-medication
Sex and drugs
Whoonga
Legality of drug useInternational
International Drug Control Conventions
Other treaties addressing drugs
Law of the Sea Convention
Convention Against Doping
Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs
State level
Drug policy
Decriminalization
Prohibition
Supply reduction
Policy reform
Demand reduction
Drug Policy Alliance
Harm reduction
Law Enforcement Action Partnership
Liberalization
Latin America
Students for Sensible Drug Policy
Transform Drug Policy Foundation
Drug policy by country
Australia
Canada
Germany
India
Netherlands
Portugal
Slovakia
Soviet Union
Sweden
Switzerland
United States
Just Say No
Office of National Drug Control Policy
School district drug policies
California
Colorado
Maryland
Virginia
Other
Arguments for and against drug prohibition
Capital punishment for drug trafficking
Cognitive liberty
Designer drug
Drug court
Drug possession
Drug test
Narc
Politics of drug abuse
War on drugs
Mexican drug war
Plan Colombia
Philippine drug war
Zero tolerance
OtherDrug production and tradeDrug production
Coca production in Colombia
Drug precursors
Opium production in Afghanistan
Rolling meth lab
Drug trade
Illegal drug trade
Colombia
Darknet market
Pharmaceutical distribution
Beer shop
Cannabis shop
Liquor store
Liquor license
Issues withdrug use
Abuse
Addiction
Date rape drug
Dependence
Driving impaired
Drug harmfulness
Effects of cannabis
Drug-related crime
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
Long-term effects of cannabis
Neurotoxicity
Overdose
Passive smoking
of tobacco or other substances
Harm reduction
Drug checking
Drug legalization
Drug rehabilitation
Needle and syringe programmes
Opioid replacement therapy
Pharmacovigilance
Reagent testing
Regulation of therapeutic goods
Responsible drug use
Substance abuse prevention
Supervised injection site
Lists of countries by...
Alcohol legality
Alcohol consumption
Anabolic steroid legality
Cannabis legality
Annual use
Lifetime use
Tobacco consumption
Cocaine legality
Cocaine use
Methamphetamine legality
Opiates use
Psilocybin mushrooms legality
Salvia legality
Receptor/signaling modulatorsAmino acids andsimilar/related
Amino acids and related: GABA receptor modulators
GABAA receptor positive modulators
GABA metabolism and transport modulators
GHB receptor modulators
Glutamate metabolism and transport modulators
Glycine receptor modulators
Ionotropic glutamate receptor modulators
Metabotropic glutamate receptor modulators
Monoamines: Adrenergic receptor modulators
Dopamine receptor modulators
Histamine receptor modulators
Melatonin receptor modulators
Monoamine metabolism modulators
Monoamine neurotoxins
Monoamine releasing agents
Monoamine reuptake inhibitors
Serotonin receptor modulators
hTAAR modulators
Acetylcholine: Acetylcholine metabolism and transport modulators
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor modulators
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor modulators
Others: Imidazoline receptor modulators
Purine receptor modulators
Sigma receptor modulators
Thyroid hormone receptor modulators
Lipids
Eicosanoids: Cannabinoid receptor modulators
Leukotriene signaling modulators
Prostanoid signaling modulators
Phospholipids: Lysophospholipid signaling modulators
PAF receptor modulators
Steroids: Androgen receptor modulators
Estrogen receptor modulators
Glucocorticoid receptor modulators
Mineralocorticoid receptor modulators
Progesterone receptor modulators
Steroid metabolism modulators
Other nuclear receptors: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor modulators
Estrogen-related receptor modulators
FXR and LXR modulators
PPAR modulators
Retinoid receptor modulators
Vitamin D receptor modulators
Xenobiotic-sensing receptor modulators
Peptides/proteins
Peptides: Angiotensin receptor modulators
GH/IGF-1 axis signaling modulators
GnRH and gonadotropin receptor modulators
Melanocortin receptor modulators
Neurokinin receptor modulators
Opioid receptor modulators
Oxytocin and vasopressin receptor modulators
Cytokines: Cytokine receptor modulators
Chemokine receptor modulators
Interleukin receptor modulators
TNF receptor superfamily modulators
Growth factors: Growth factor receptor modulators
TGFβ receptor superfamily modulators
Others andnon-receptor
Enzymes: Cytochrome P450 modulators
Histone deacetylase inhibitors
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors
Ion channels: Ion channel modulators
TRP channel modulators
Transporters: Sodium-glucose transporter modulators
Symporter inhibitors
Others: Nitric oxide signaling modulators
PharmacomodulationTypes
♦ Enzyme: Inducer
Inhibitor
♦ Ion channel: Opener
Blocker
♦ Receptor: Agonist
Partial agonist
Antagonist
Inverse agonist
Positive allosteric modulator (PAM)
Negative allosteric modulator (NAM)
♦ Transporter [Reuptake vs Efflux]: Enhancer (RE)
Inhibitor (RI)
Releaser (RA)
♦ Miscellaneous: Precursor
Cofactor
ClassesEnzymesee Enzyme inhibitionIon channelSee Ion channel modulatorsReceptor &transporterBA/MAdrenergic
Adrenergic receptor agonist (α
β (1
2))
Adrenergic receptor antagonist (α (1
2)
β)
Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI)
Dopaminergic
Dopamine receptor agonist
Dopamine receptor antagonist
Dopamine reuptake inhibitor (DRI)
Histaminergic
Histamine receptor agonist
Histamine receptor antagonist (H1
H2
H3)
Serotonergic
Serotonin receptor agonist
Serotonin receptor antagonist (5-HT3)
Serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI)
AAGABAergic
GABA receptor agonist
GABA receptor antagonist
GABA reuptake inhibitor (GRI)
Glutamatergic
Glutamate receptor agonist (AMPA)
Glutamate receptor antagonist (NMDA)
Glutamate reuptake inhibitor
Cholinergic
Acetylcholine receptor agonist (Muscarinic
Nicotinic)
Cholinesterase inhibitor
Acetylcholine receptor antagonist (Muscarinic
Nicotinic (Ganglionic
Muscular))
Cannabinoidergic
Cannabinoid receptor agonist
Cannabinoid receptor antagonist
Endocannabinoid enhancer (eCBE)
Endocannabinoid reuptake inhibitor (eCBRI)
Opioidergic
Opioid modulator
Opioid receptor agonist
Opioid receptor antagonist
Enkephalinase inhibitor
Other
Adenosine reuptake inhibitor (AdoRI)
Angiotensin II receptor antagonist
Endothelin receptor antagonist
NK1 receptor antagonist
Vasopressin receptor antagonist
Miscellaneous
Cofactor (see Enzyme cofactors)
Precursor (see Amino acids)
Authority control National libraries
Germany
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 23 August 2022, at 05:00 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
