Ecosystem - Wikipedia
Ecosystem
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Community of living organisms together with the nonliving components of their environment
Not to be confused with Digital ecosystem.
"Biosystem" redirects here.
For the journal, see BioSystems.
Left: Coral reef ecosystems are highly productive marine systems.
Right: Temperate rainforest, a terrestrial ecosystem.
Part of a series onBiologyScience of life
Index
Outline
Glossary
History (timeline)
Key components
Cell theory
Ecosystem
Evolution
Phylogeny
Properties of life
Adaptation
Energy processing
Growth
Order
Regulation
Reproduction
Response to environment
Domains and Kingdoms of life
Archaea
Bacteria
Eukarya (Animals, Fungi, Plants, Protists)
Branches
Anatomy
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Ecology
Evolutionary biology
Genetics
Marine biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Phycology
Physiology
Protistology
Virology
Zoology
Research
Biologist (list)
List of biology awards
List of journals
List of research methods
List of unsolved problems
Applications
Agricultural science
Biomedical sciences
Health technology
Pharming
Biology portal
Category
An ecosystem (or ecological system) consists of all the organisms and the physical environment with which they interact.: 458  These biotic and abiotic components are linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows.
Energy enters the system through photosynthesis and is incorporated into plant tissue.
By feeding on plants and on one another, animals play an important role in the movement of matter and energy through the system.
They also influence the quantity of plant and microbial biomass present.
By breaking down dead organic matter, decomposers release carbon back to the atmosphere and facilitate nutrient cycling by converting nutrients stored in dead biomass back to a form that can be readily used by plants and microbes.
Ecosystems are controlled by external and internal factors.
External factors such as climate, parent material which forms the soil and topography, control the overall structure of an ecosystem but are not themselves influenced by the ecosystem.
Internal factors are controlled, for example, by decomposition, root competition, shading, disturbance, succession, and the types of species present.
While the resource inputs are generally controlled by external processes, the availability of these resources within the ecosystem is controlled by internal factors.
Therefore, internal factors not only control ecosystem processes but are also controlled by them.
Ecosystems are dynamic entities—they are subject to periodic disturbances and are always in the process of recovering from some past disturbance.
The tendency of an ecosystem to remain close to its equilibrium state, despite that disturbance, is termed its resistance.
The capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks is termed its ecological resilience.
Ecosystems can be studied through a variety of approaches—theoretical studies, studies monitoring specific ecosystems over long periods of time, those that look at differences between ecosystems to elucidate how they work and direct manipulative experimentation.
Biomes are general classes or categories of ecosystems.
However, there is no clear distinction between biomes and ecosystems.
Ecosystem classifications are specific kinds of ecological classifications that consider all four elements of the definition of ecosystems: a biotic component, an abiotic complex, the interactions between and within them, and the physical space they occupy.
Ecosystems provide a variety of goods and services upon which people depend.
Ecosystem goods include the "tangible, material products" of ecosystem processes such as water, food, fuel, construction material, and medicinal plants.
Ecosystem services, on the other hand, are generally "improvements in the condition or location of things of value". These include things like the maintenance of hydrological cycles, cleaning air and water, the maintenance of oxygen in the atmosphere, crop pollination and even things like beauty, inspiration and opportunities for research.
Many ecosystems become degraded through human impacts, such as soil loss, air and water pollution, habitat fragmentation, water diversion, fire suppression, and introduced species and invasive species.
These threats can lead to abrupt transformation of the ecosystem or to gradual disruption of biotic processes and degradation of abiotic conditions of the ecosystem.
Once the original ecosystem has lost its defining features, it is considered "collapsed". Ecosystem restoration can contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Contents
Definition
An ecosystem (or ecological system) consists of all the organisms and the abiotic pools (or physical environment) with which they interact.: 5 : 458   The biotic and abiotic components are linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows.
"Ecosystem processes" are the transfers of energy and materials from one pool to another.: 458  Ecosystem processes are known to "take place at a wide range of scales". Therefore, the correct scale of study depends on the question asked.: 5 
Origin and development of the term
The term "ecosystem" was first used in 1935 in a publication by British ecologist Arthur Tansley.
The term was coined by Arthur Roy Clapham, who came up with the word at Tansley's request.
Tansley devised the concept to draw attention to the importance of transfers of materials between organisms and their environment.: 9  He later refined the term, describing it as "The whole system, ... including not only the organism-complex, but also the whole complex of physical factors forming what we call the environment". Tansley regarded ecosystems not simply as natural units, but as "mental isolates".  Tansley later defined the spatial extent of ecosystems using the term "ecotope".
G. Evelyn Hutchinson, a limnologist who was a contemporary of Tansley's, combined Charles Elton's ideas about trophic ecology with those of Russian geochemist Vladimir Vernadsky.
As a result, he suggested that mineral nutrient availability in a lake limited algal production.
This would, in turn, limit the abundance of animals that feed on algae.
Raymond Lindeman took these ideas further to suggest that the flow of energy through a lake was the primary driver of the ecosystem.
Hutchinson's students, brothers Howard T. Odum and Eugene P. Odum, further developed a "systems approach" to the study of ecosystems.
This allowed them to study the flow of energy and material through ecological systems.: 9 
Processes
Rainforest ecosystems are rich in biodiversity.
This is the Gambia River in Senegal's Niokolo-Koba National Park.
Flora of Baja California Desert, Cataviña region, Mexico
External and internal factors
Ecosystems are controlled by both external and internal factors.
External factors, also called state factors, control the overall structure of an ecosystem and the way things work within it, but are not themselves influenced by the ecosystem.
On broad geographic scales, climate is the factor that "most strongly determines ecosystem processes and structure".: 14  Climate determines the biome in which the ecosystem is embedded.
Rainfall patterns and seasonal temperatures influence photosynthesis and thereby determine the amount of energy available to the ecosystem.: 145 
Parent material determines the nature of the soil in an ecosystem, and influences the supply of mineral nutrients.
Topography also controls ecosystem processes by affecting things like microclimate, soil development and the movement of water through a system.
For example, ecosystems can be quite different if situated in a small depression on the landscape, versus one present on an adjacent steep hillside.: 39 : 66 
Other external factors that play an important role in ecosystem functioning include time and potential biota, the organisms that are present in a region and could potentially occupy a particular site.
Ecosystems in similar environments that are located in different parts of the world can end up doing things very differently simply because they have different pools of species present.: 321  The introduction of non-native species can cause substantial shifts in ecosystem function.
Unlike external factors, internal factors in ecosystems not only control ecosystem processes but are also controlled by them.: 16  While the resource inputs are generally controlled by external processes like climate and parent material, the availability of these resources within the ecosystem is controlled by internal factors like decomposition, root competition or shading.
Other factors like disturbance, succession or the types of species present are also internal factors.
Primary production
Global oceanic and terrestrial phototroph abundance, from September 1997 to August 2000. As an estimate of autotroph biomass, it is only a rough indicator of primary production potential and not an actual estimate of it.
Main article: Primary production
Primary production is the production of organic matter from inorganic carbon sources.
This mainly occurs through photosynthesis.
The energy incorporated through this process supports life on earth, while the carbon makes up much of the organic matter in living and dead biomass, soil carbon and fossil fuels.
It also drives the carbon cycle, which influences global climate via the greenhouse effect.
Through the process of photosynthesis, plants capture energy from light and use it to combine carbon dioxide and water to produce carbohydrates and oxygen.
The photosynthesis carried out by all the plants in an ecosystem is called the gross primary production (GPP).: 124  About half of the gross GPP is respired by plants in order to provide the energy that supports their growth and maintenance.: 157  The remainder, that portion of GPP that is not used up by respiration, is known as the net primary production (NPP).: 157  Total photosynthesis is limited by a range of environmental factors.
These include the amount of light available, the amount of leaf area a plant has to capture light (shading by other plants is a major limitation of photosynthesis), the rate at which carbon dioxide can be supplied to the chloroplasts to support photosynthesis, the availability of water, and the availability of suitable temperatures for carrying out photosynthesis.: 155 
Energy flow
Main article: Energy flow (ecology)
See also: Food web and Trophic level
Energy and carbon enter ecosystems through photosynthesis, are incorporated into living tissue, transferred to other organisms that feed on the living and dead plant matter, and eventually released through respiration.: 157  The carbon and energy incorporated into plant tissues (net primary production) is either consumed by animals while the plant is alive, or it remains uneaten when the plant tissue dies and becomes detritus.
In terrestrial ecosystems, the vast majority of the net primary production ends up being broken down by decomposers.
The remainder is consumed by animals while still alive and enters the plant-based trophic system.
After plants and animals die, the organic matter contained in them enters the detritus-based trophic system.
Ecosystem respiration is the sum of respiration by all living organisms (plants, animals, and decomposers) in the ecosystem.
Net ecosystem production is the difference between gross primary production (GPP) and ecosystem respiration.
In the absence of disturbance, net ecosystem production is equivalent to the net carbon accumulation in the ecosystem.
Energy can also be released from an ecosystem through disturbances such as wildfire or transferred to other ecosystems (e.g., from a forest to a stream to a lake) by erosion.
In aquatic systems, the proportion of plant biomass that gets consumed by herbivores is much higher than in terrestrial systems.
In trophic systems, photosynthetic organisms are the primary producers.
The organisms that consume their tissues are called primary consumers or secondary producers—herbivores.
Organisms which feed on microbes (bacteria and fungi) are termed microbivores.
Animals that feed on primary consumers—carnivores—are secondary consumers.
Each of these constitutes a trophic level.
The sequence of consumption—from plant to herbivore, to carnivore—forms a food chain.
Real systems are much more complex than this—organisms will generally feed on more than one form of food, and may feed at more than one trophic level.
Carnivores may capture some prey that is part of a plant-based trophic system and others that are part of a detritus-based trophic system (a bird that feeds both on herbivorous grasshoppers and earthworms, which consume detritus). Real systems, with all these complexities, form food webs rather than food chains.
Decomposition
See also: Decomposition
Sequence of a decomposing pig carcass over time
The carbon and nutrients in dead organic matter are broken down by a group of processes known as decomposition.
This releases nutrients that can then be re-used for plant and microbial production and returns carbon dioxide to the atmosphere (or water) where it can be used for photosynthesis.
In the absence of decomposition, the dead organic matter would accumulate in an ecosystem, and nutrients and atmospheric carbon dioxide would be depleted.: 183 
Decomposition processes can be separated into three categories—leaching, fragmentation and chemical alteration of dead material.
As water moves through dead organic matter, it dissolves and carries with it the water-soluble components.
These are then taken up by organisms in the soil, react with mineral soil, or are transported beyond the confines of the ecosystem (and are considered lost to it).: 271–280  Newly shed leaves and newly dead animals have high concentrations of water-soluble components and include sugars, amino acids and mineral nutrients.
Leaching is more important in wet environments and less important in dry ones.: 69–77 
Fragmentation processes break organic material into smaller pieces, exposing new surfaces for colonization by microbes.
Freshly shed leaf litter may be inaccessible due to an outer layer of cuticle or bark, and cell contents are protected by a cell wall.
Newly dead animals may be covered by an exoskeleton.
Fragmentation processes, which break through these protective layers, accelerate the rate of microbial decomposition.: 184  Animals fragment detritus as they hunt for food, as does passage through the gut.
Freeze-thaw cycles and cycles of wetting and drying also fragment dead material.: 186 
The chemical alteration of the dead organic matter is primarily achieved through bacterial and fungal action.
Fungal hyphae produce enzymes that can break through the tough outer structures surrounding dead plant material.
They also produce enzymes that break down lignin, which allows them access to both cell contents and the nitrogen in the lignin.
Fungi can transfer carbon and nitrogen through their hyphal networks and thus, unlike bacteria, are not dependent solely on locally available resources.: 186 
Decomposition rates
Decomposition rates vary among ecosystems.
The rate of decomposition is governed by three sets of factors—the physical environment (temperature, moisture, and soil properties), the quantity and quality of the dead material available to decomposers, and the nature of the microbial community itself.: 194  Temperature controls the rate of microbial respiration; the higher the temperature, the faster the microbial decomposition occurs.
Temperature also affects soil moisture, which affects decomposition.
Freeze-thaw cycles also affect decomposition—freezing temperatures kill soil microorganisms, which allows leaching to play a more important role in moving nutrients around.
This can be especially important as the soil thaws in the spring, creating a pulse of nutrients that become available.: 280 
Decomposition rates are low under very wet or very dry conditions.
Decomposition rates are highest in wet, moist conditions with adequate levels of oxygen.
Wet soils tend to become deficient in oxygen (this is especially true in wetlands), which slows microbial growth.
In dry soils, decomposition slows as well, but bacteria continue to grow (albeit at a slower rate) even after soils become too dry to support plant growth.: 200 
Dynamics and resilience
Further information: Resistance (ecology) and Ecological resilience
Ecosystems are dynamic entities.
They are subject to periodic disturbances and are always in the process of recovering from past disturbances.: 347  When a perturbation occurs, an ecosystem responds by moving away from its initial state.
The tendency of an ecosystem to remain close to its equilibrium state, despite that disturbance, is termed its resistance.
The capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks is termed its ecological resilience.
Resilience thinking also includes humanity as an integral part of the biosphere where we are dependent on ecosystem services for our survival and must build and maintain their natural capacities to withstand shocks and disturbances.
Time plays a central role over a wide range, for example, in the slow development of soil from bare rock and the faster recovery of a community from disturbance.: 67 
Disturbance also plays an important role in ecological processes. F. Stuart Chapin and coauthors define disturbance as "a relatively discrete event in time that removes plant biomass".: 346  This can range from herbivore outbreaks, treefalls, fires, hurricanes, floods, glacial advances, to volcanic eruptions.
Such disturbances can cause large changes in plant, animal and microbe populations, as well as soil organic matter content.
Disturbance is followed by succession, a "directional change in ecosystem structure and functioning resulting from biotically driven changes in resource supply.": 470 
The frequency and severity of disturbance determine the way it affects ecosystem function.
A major disturbance like a volcanic eruption or glacial advance and retreat leave behind soils that lack plants, animals or organic matter.
Ecosystems that experience such disturbances undergo primary succession.
A less severe disturbance like forest fires, hurricanes or cultivation result in secondary succession and a faster recovery.: 348  More severe and more frequent disturbance result in longer recovery times.
From one year to another, ecosystems experience variation in their biotic and abiotic environments.
A drought, a colder than usual winter, and a pest outbreak all are short-term variability in environmental conditions.
Animal populations vary from year to year, building up during resource-rich periods and crashing as they overshoot their food supply.
Longer-term changes also shape ecosystem processes.
For example, the forests of eastern North America still show legacies of cultivation which ceased in 1850 when large areas were reverted to forests.: 340  Another example is the methane production in eastern Siberian lakes that is controlled by organic matter which accumulated during the Pleistocene.
A freshwater lake in Gran Canaria, an island of the Canary Islands.
Clear boundaries make lakes convenient to study using an ecosystem approach.
Nutrient cycling
See also: Nutrient cycle, Biogeochemical cycle, and Nitrogen cycle
Biological nitrogen cycling
Ecosystems continually exchange energy and carbon with the wider environment.
Mineral nutrients, on the other hand, are mostly cycled back and forth between plants, animals, microbes and the soil.
Most nitrogen enters ecosystems through biological nitrogen fixation, is deposited through precipitation, dust, gases or is applied as fertilizer.: 266  Most terrestrial ecosystems are nitrogen-limited in the short term making nitrogen cycling an important control on ecosystem production.: 289  Over the long term, phosphorus availability can also be critical.
Macronutrients which are required by all plants in large quantities include the primary nutrients (which are most limiting as they are used in largest amounts): Nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium.: 231  Secondary major nutrients (less often limiting) include: Calcium, magnesium, sulfur.
Micronutrients required by all plants in small quantities include boron, chloride, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc.
Finally, there are also beneficial nutrients which may be required  by certain plants or by plants under specific environmental conditions: aluminum, cobalt, iodine, nickel, selenium, silicon, sodium, vanadium.: 231 
Until modern times, nitrogen fixation was the major source of nitrogen for ecosystems.
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria either live symbiotically with plants or live freely in the soil.
The energetic cost is high for plants that support nitrogen-fixing symbionts—as much as 25% of gross primary production when measured in controlled conditions.
Many members of the legume plant family support nitrogen-fixing symbionts.
Some cyanobacteria are also capable of nitrogen fixation.
These are phototrophs, which carry out photosynthesis.
Like other nitrogen-fixing bacteria, they can either be free-living or have symbiotic relationships with plants.: 360  Other sources of nitrogen include acid deposition produced through the combustion of fossil fuels, ammonia gas which evaporates from agricultural fields which have had fertilizers applied to them, and dust.: 270  Anthropogenic nitrogen inputs account for about 80% of all nitrogen fluxes in ecosystems.: 270 
When plant tissues are shed or are eaten, the nitrogen in those tissues becomes available to animals and microbes.
Microbial decomposition releases nitrogen compounds from dead organic matter in the soil, where plants, fungi, and bacteria compete for it.
Some soil bacteria use organic nitrogen-containing compounds as a source of carbon, and release ammonium ions into the soil.
This process is known as nitrogen mineralization.
Others convert ammonium to nitrite and nitrate ions, a process known as nitrification.
Nitric oxide and nitrous oxide are also produced during nitrification.: 277  Under nitrogen-rich and oxygen-poor conditions, nitrates and nitrites are converted to nitrogen gas, a process known as denitrification.: 281 
Mycorrhizal fungi which are symbiotic with plant roots, use carbohydrates supplied by the plants and in return transfer phosphorus and nitrogen compounds back to the plant roots.
This is an important pathway of organic nitrogen transfer from dead organic matter to plants.
This mechanism may contribute to more than 70 Tg of annually assimilated plant nitrogen, thereby playing a critical role in global nutrient cycling and ecosystem function.
Phosphorus enters ecosystems through weathering.
As ecosystems age this supply diminishes, making phosphorus-limitation more common in older landscapes (especially in the tropics).: 287–290  Calcium and sulfur are also produced by weathering, but acid deposition is an important source of sulfur in many ecosystems.
Although magnesium and manganese are produced by weathering, exchanges between soil organic matter and living cells account for a significant portion of ecosystem fluxes.
Potassium is primarily cycled between living cells and soil organic matter.: 291 
Function and biodiversity
Main article: BiodiversitySee also: Ecosystem diversity
Loch Lomond in Scotland forms a relatively isolated ecosystem.
The fish community of this lake has remained stable over a long period until a number of introductions in the 1970s restructured its food web.
Spiny forest at Ifaty, Madagascar, featuring various Adansonia (baobab) species, Alluaudia procera (Madagascar ocotillo) and other vegetation
Biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem functioning.: 449–453  Ecosystem processes are driven by the species in an ecosystem, the nature of the individual species, and the relative abundance of organisms among these species.
Ecosystem processes are the net effect of the actions of individual organisms as they interact with their environment.
Ecological theory suggests that in order to coexist, species must have some level of limiting similarity—they must be different from one another in some fundamental way, otherwise, one species would competitively exclude the other.
Despite this, the cumulative effect of additional species in an ecosystem is not linear: additional species may enhance nitrogen retention, for example.
However, beyond some level of species richness,: 331  additional species may have little additive effect unless they differ substantially from species already present.: 324  This is the case for example for exotic species.: 321 
The addition (or loss) of species that are ecologically similar to those already present in an ecosystem tends to only have a small effect on ecosystem function.
Ecologically distinct species, on the other hand, have a much larger effect.
Similarly, dominant species have a large effect on ecosystem function, while rare species tend to have a small effect.
Keystone species tend to have an effect on ecosystem function that is disproportionate to their abundance in an ecosystem.: 324 
An ecosystem engineer is any organism that creates, significantly modifies, maintains or destroys a habitat.
Study approaches
Ecosystem ecology
Main article: Ecosystem ecology
See also: Ecosystem model
A hydrothermal vent is an ecosystem on the ocean floor. (The scale bar is 1 m.)
Ecosystem ecology is the "study of the interactions between organisms and their environment as an integrated system".: 458  The size of ecosystems can range up to ten orders of magnitude, from the surface layers of rocks to the surface of the planet.: 6 
The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study started in 1963 to study the White Mountains in New Hampshire.
It was the first successful attempt to study an entire watershed as an ecosystem.
The study used stream chemistry as a means of monitoring ecosystem properties, and developed a detailed biogeochemical model of the ecosystem.
Long-term research at the site led to the discovery of acid rain in North America in 1972. Researchers documented the depletion of soil cations (especially calcium) over the next several decades.
Ecosystems can be studied through a variety of approaches—theoretical studies, studies monitoring specific ecosystems over long periods of time, those that look at differences between ecosystems to elucidate how they work and direct manipulative experimentation.
Studies can be carried out at a variety of scales, ranging from whole-ecosystem studies to studying microcosms or mesocosms (simplified representations of ecosystems). American ecologist Stephen R. Carpenter has argued that microcosm experiments can be "irrelevant and diversionary" if they are not carried out in conjunction with field studies done at the ecosystem scale.
In such cases, microcosm experiments may fail to accurately predict ecosystem-level dynamics.
Classifications
Further information: Ecosystem classification and Biogeoclimatic ecosystem classification
Biomes are general classes or categories of ecosystems.: 14  However, there is no clear distinction between biomes and ecosystems.
Biomes are always defined at a very general level.
Ecosystems can be described at levels that range from very general (in which case the names are sometimes the same as those of biomes) to very specific, such as "wet coastal needle-leafed forests".
Biomes vary due to global variations in climate.
Biomes are often defined by their structure: at a general level, for example, tropical forests, temperate grasslands, and arctic tundra.: 14  There can be any degree of subcategories among ecosystem types that comprise a biome, e.g., needle-leafed boreal forests or wet tropical forests.
Although ecosystems are most commonly categorized by their structure and geography, there are also other ways to categorize and classify ecosystems such as by their level of human impact (see anthropogenic biome), or by their integration with social processes or technological processes or their novelty (e.g. novel ecosystem). Each of these taxonomies of ecosystems tends to emphasize different structural or functional properties.
None of these is the “best” classification.
Ecosystem classifications are specific kinds of ecological classifications that consider all four elements of the definition of ecosystems: a biotic component, an abiotic complex, the interactions between and within them, and the physical space they occupy.
Different approaches to ecological classifications have been developed in terrestrial, freshwater and marine disciplines.
Examples
The following articles are examples of ecosystems for particular regions, zones or conditions:
Aquatic ecosystem
Boreal ecosystem
Freshwater ecosystem
Groundwater-dependent ecosystems
Lake ecosystem (lentic ecosystem)
Large marine ecosystem
Marine ecosystem
Montane ecosystem
River ecosystem (lotic ecosystem)
Terrestrial ecosystem
Urban ecosystem
Human interactions with ecosystems
Human activities are important in almost all ecosystems.
Although humans exist and operate within ecosystems, their cumulative effects are large enough to influence external factors like climate.: 14 
Ecosystem goods and services
The High Peaks Wilderness Area in the 6,000,000-acre (2,400,000 ha) Adirondack Park is an example of a diverse ecosystem.
Main articles: Ecosystem services and Ecological goods and services
See also: Ecosystem valuation and Ecological yield
Ecosystems provide a variety of goods and services upon which people depend.
Ecosystem goods include the "tangible, material products" of ecosystem processes such as water, food, fuel, construction material, and medicinal plants.
They also include less tangible items like tourism and recreation, and genes from wild plants and animals that can be used to improve domestic species.
Ecosystem services, on the other hand, are generally "improvements in the condition or location of things of value". These include things like the maintenance of hydrological cycles, cleaning air and water, the maintenance of oxygen in the atmosphere, crop pollination and even things like beauty, inspiration and opportunities for research.
While material from the ecosystem had traditionally been recognized as being the basis for things of economic value, ecosystem services tend to be taken for granted.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment is an international synthesis by over 1000 of the world's leading biological scientists that analyzes the state of the Earth's ecosystems and provides summaries and guidelines for decision-makers.
The report identified four major categories of ecosystem services: provisioning, regulating, cultural and supporting services.
It concludes that human activity is having a significant and escalating impact on the biodiversity of the world ecosystems, reducing both their resilience and biocapacity.
The report refers to natural systems as humanity's "life-support system", providing essential ecosystem services.
The assessment measures 24 ecosystem services and concludes that only four have shown improvement over the last 50 years, 15 are in serious decline, and five are in a precarious condition.: 6–19 
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) is an intergovernmental organization established to improve the interface between science and policy on issues of biodiversity and ecosystem services.
It is intended to serve a similar role to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
The conceptual framework of the IPBES includes six primary interlinked elements: nature, nature’s benefits to people, anthropogenic assets, institutions and governance systems and other indirect drivers of change, direct drivers of change, and good quality of life.
Ecosystem services are limited and also threatened by human activities.
To help inform decision-makers, many ecosystem services are being assigned economic values, often based on the cost of replacement with anthropogenic alternatives.
The ongoing challenge of prescribing economic value to nature, for example through biodiversity banking, is prompting transdisciplinary shifts in how we recognize and manage the environment, social responsibility, business opportunities, and our future as a species.
Degradation and decline
The Forest Landscape Integrity Index measures global anthropogenic modification on remaining forests annually. 0 = Most modification; 10= Least.
See also: Ecosystem collapse, Climate change and ecosystems, and Human ecology
As human population and per capita consumption grow, so do the resource demands imposed on ecosystems and the effects of the human ecological footprint.
Natural resources are vulnerable and limited.
The environmental impacts of anthropogenic actions are becoming more apparent.
Problems for all ecosystems include: environmental pollution, climate change and biodiversity loss.
For terrestrial ecosystems further threats include air pollution, soil degradation, and deforestation.
For aquatic ecosystems threats also include unsustainable exploitation of marine resources (for example overfishing), marine pollution, microplastics pollution, the effects of climate change on oceans (e.g. warming and acidification), and building on coastal areas.
Many ecosystems become degraded through human impacts, such as soil loss, air and water pollution, habitat fragmentation, water diversion, fire suppression, and introduced species and invasive species.: 437 
These threats can lead to abrupt transformation of the ecosystem or to gradual disruption of biotic processes and degradation of abiotic conditions of the ecosystem.
Once the original ecosystem has lost its defining features, it is considered collapsed (see also IUCN Red List of Ecosystems). Ecosystem collapse could be reversible and in this way differs from species extinction.
Quantitative assessments of the risk of collapse are used as measures of conservation status and trends.
Management
Main articles: Ecosystem management, Ecosystem-based management, and Ecosystem approach
When natural resource management is applied to whole ecosystems, rather than single species, it is termed ecosystem management.
Although definitions of ecosystem management abound, there is a common set of principles which underlie these definitions: A fundamental principle is the long-term sustainability of the production of goods and services by the ecosystem; "intergenerational sustainability [is] a precondition for management, not an afterthought". While ecosystem management can be used as part of a plan for wilderness conservation, it can also be used in intensively managed ecosystems (see, for example, agroecosystem and close to nature forestry).
Restoration and sustainable development
See also: Restoration ecology and UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration
Ecosystem restoration will contribute to all 17 Sustainable Development Goals, in particular to SDG 2 (Zero Hunger), SDG 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), SDG 14 (Life below water) and SDG 15 (Life on Land). Paragraph 27 of the Ministerial Declaration of the High-Level Political Forum on the SDGs held in July 2018 sets out commitments made to achieve sustainable management of all types of forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests, and substantially increase afforestation and reforestation globally by 2020.
Integrated conservation and development projects (ICDPs) aim to address conservation and human livelihood (sustainable development) concerns in developing countries together, rather than separately as was often done in the past.: 445 
See also
Earth sciences portal
Ecology portal
Environment portal
Complex system
Earth science
Ecosystem-based adaptation
Ecosystems in specific regions of the world:
Leuser Ecosystem
Longleaf pine ecosystem
Tarangire Ecosystem
Tropical salt pond ecosystem
Ecosystems grouped by condition:
Agroecosystem
Closed ecosystem
Depauperate ecosystem
Novel ecosystem
Reference ecosystem
References
Notes
Hatcher, Bruce Gordon (1990). "Coral reef primary productivity.
A hierarchy of pattern and process". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 5 (5): 149–155. doi:10.1016/0169-5347(90)90221-X. PMID 21232343.
a b c d e Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Glossary". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
a b c Tansley, A. G. (1935). "The Use and Abuse of Vegetational Concepts and Terms" (PDF). Ecology. 16 (3): 284–307. doi:10.2307/1930070. JSTOR 1930070. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-06.
a b c d e f g h i j Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 1: The Ecosystem Concept". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Odum, Eugene P (1971). Fundamentals of Ecology (third ed.). New York: Saunders.
ISBN 978-0-534-42066-6.
Willis, A.J. (1997). "The Ecosystem: An Evolving Concept Viewed Historically". Functional Ecology. 11 (2): 268–271. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2435.1997.00081.x.
Tansley, A.G. (1939). The British Islands and Their Vegetation.
Cambridge University Press.
a b c Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 5: Carbon Inputs to Ecosystems". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 2: Earth's Climate System". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
a b Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 3: Geology, Soils, and Sediments". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
a b c d e Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 11: Species Effects on Ecosystem Processes". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Simberloff, Daniel; Martin, Jean-Louis; Genovesi, Piero; Maris, Virginie; Wardle, David A.; Aronson, James; Courchamp, Franck; Galil, Bella; García-Berthou, Emili (2013). "Impacts of biological invasions: what's what and the way forward". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 28 (1): 58–66. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2012.07.013. hdl:10261/67376. ISSN 0169-5347. PMID 22889499.
"46.1A: Ecosystem Dynamics". Biology LibreTexts. 2018-07-17. Retrieved 2021-08-02. Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
a b c d Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 6: Plant Carbon Budgets". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
a b c d Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 10: Trophic Dynamics". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Yvon-Durocher, Gabriel; Caffrey, Jane M.; Cescatti, Alessandro; Dossena, Matteo; Giorgio, Paul del; Gasol, Josep M.; Montoya, José M.; Pumpanen, Jukka; Staehr, Peter A. (2012). "Reconciling the temperature dependence of respiration across timescales and ecosystem types". Nature. 487 (7408): 472–476. Bibcode:2012Natur.487..472Y. doi:10.1038/nature11205. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 22722862. S2CID 4422427.
Lovett, Gary M.; Cole, Jonathan J.; Pace, Michael L. (2006). "Is Net Ecosystem Production Equal to Ecosystem Carbon Accumulation?". Ecosystems. 9 (1): 152–155. doi:10.1007/s10021-005-0036-3. ISSN 1435-0629. S2CID 5890190.
a b c d e f Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 7: Decomposition and Ecosystem Carbon Budgets". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
a b c d e f g h i j Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 9: Nutrient cycling". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Ochoa-Hueso, R; Delgado-Baquerizo, M; King, PTA; Benham, M; Arca, V; Power, SA (February 2019). "Ecosystem type and resource quality are more important than global change drivers in regulating early stages of litter decomposition". Soil Biology and Biochemistry. 129: 144–152. doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.11.009. S2CID 92606851.
a b c d e Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 12: Temporal Dynamics". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Principles of ecosystem stewardship : resilience-based natural resource management in a changing world. F. Stuart, III Chapin, Gary P. Kofinas, Carl Folke, Melissa C. Chapin (1st ed.). New York: Springer. 2009. ISBN 978-0-387-73033-2. OCLC 432702920.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Walker, Brian; Holling, C. S.; Carpenter, Stephen R.; Kinzig, Ann P. (2004). "Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability in Social-ecological Systems". Ecology and Society. 9 (2): art5. doi:10.5751/ES-00650-090205. hdl:10535/3282. ISSN 1708-3087.
Simonsen, S.H. (2015). "Applying Resilience Thinking" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-12-15.
Walter, K. M.; Zimov, S. A.; Chanton, J. P.; Verbyla, D.; Chapin, F. S. (2006). "Methane bubbling from Siberian thaw lakes as a positive feedback to climate warming". Nature. 443 (7107): 71–75. Bibcode:2006Natur.443...71W. doi:10.1038/nature05040. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 16957728. S2CID 4415304.
Vitousek, P.; Porder, S. (2010). "Terrestrial phosphorus limitation: mechanisms, implications, and nitrogen–phosphorus interactions". Ecological Applications. 20 (1): 5–15. doi:10.1890/08-0127.1. PMID 20349827.
a b Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 8: Plant Nutrient Use". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Bolan, N.S. (1991). "A critical review on the role of mycorrhizal fungi in the uptake of phosphorus by plants". Plant and Soil. 134 (2): 189–207. doi:10.1007/BF00012037. S2CID 44215263.
a b Hestrin, R.; Hammer, E.C.; Mueller, C.W. (2019). "Synergies between mycorrhizal fungi and soil microbial communities increase plant nitrogen acquisition". Commun Biol. 2: 233. doi:10.1038/s42003-019-0481-8. PMC 6588552. PMID 31263777.
Adams, C.E. (1994). "The fish community of Loch Lomond, Scotland: its history and rapidly changing status". Hydrobiologia. 290 (1–3): 91–102. doi:10.1007/BF00008956. S2CID 6894397.
Schulze, Ernst-Detlef; Erwin Beck; Klaus Müller-Hohenstein (2005). Plant Ecology.
Berlin: Springer.
ISBN 978-3-540-20833-4.
Schoener, Thomas W. (2009). "Ecological Niche".  In Simon A. Levin (ed.). The Princeton Guide to Ecology.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 2–13. ISBN 978-0-691-12839-9.
Jones, Clive G.; Lawton, John H.; Shachak, Moshe (1994). "Organisms as Ecosystem Engineers". Oikos. 69 (3): 373–386. doi:10.2307/3545850. ISSN 0030-1299. JSTOR 3545850.
Lindenmayer, David B.; Gene E. Likens (2010). "The Problematic, the Effective and the Ugly – Some Case Studies". Effective Ecological Monitoring.
Collingwood, Australia: CSIRO Publishing. pp. 87–145. ISBN 978-1-84971-145-6.
Likens, Gene E. (2004). "Some perspectives on long-term biogeochemical research from the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study" (PDF). Ecology. 85 (9): 2355–2362. doi:10.1890/03-0243. JSTOR 3450233. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-01.
Carpenter, Stephen R.; Jonathan J. Cole; Timothy E. Essington; James R. Hodgson; Jeffrey N. Houser; James F. Kitchell; Michael L. Pace (1998). "Evaluating Alternative Explanations in Ecosystem Experiments". Ecosystems. 1 (4): 335–344. doi:10.1007/s100219900025. S2CID 33559404.
Schindler, David W. (1998). "Replication versus Realism: The Need for Ecosystem-Scale Experiments". Ecosystems. 1 (4): 323–334. doi:10.1007/s100219900026. JSTOR 3658915. S2CID 45418039.
Carpenter, Stephen R. (1996). "Microcosm Experiments have Limited Relevance for Community and Ecosystem Ecology". Ecology. 77 (3): 677–680. doi:10.2307/2265490. JSTOR 2265490.
"Differences Between the Grassland & the Tundra". Sciencing.
Retrieved 2021-07-16.
a b Keith, D.A.; Ferrer-Paris, J.R.; Nicholson, E.; Kingsford, R.T., eds. (2020). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0: Descriptive profiles for biomes and ecosystem functional groups.
Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. doi:10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en.
ISBN 978-2-8317-2077-7. S2CID 241360441.
a b c d e Christensen, Norman L.; Bartuska, Ann M.; Brown, James H.; Carpenter, Stephen; D'Antonio, Carla; Francis, Robert; Franklin, Jerry F.; MacMahon, James A.; Noss, Reed F.; Parsons, David J.; Peterson, Charles H.; Turner, Monica G.; Woodmansee, Robert G. (1996). "The Report of the Ecological Society of America Committee on the Scientific Basis for Ecosystem Management". Ecological Applications. 6 (3): 665–691. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.404.4909. doi:10.2307/2269460. JSTOR 2269460.
"Ecosystem Goods and Services" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-11-10.
a b c Brown, Thomas C.; John C. Bergstrom; John B. Loomis (2007). "Defining, valuing and providing ecosystem goods and services" (PDF). Natural Resources Journal. 47 (2): 329–376. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-25.
a b "Millennium Ecosystem Assessment". 2005. Archived from the original on 2011-05-24. Retrieved 10 November 2021.
"IPBES". Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2019.
"Biodiversity crisis is worse than climate change, experts say". ScienceDaily.
January 20, 2012. Retrieved September 11, 2019.
Díaz, Sandra; Demissew, Sebsebe; Carabias, Julia; Joly, Carlos; Lonsdale, Mark; Ash, Neville; Larigauderie, Anne; Adhikari, Jay Ram; Arico, Salvatore; Báldi, András; Bartuska, Ann (2015). "The IPBES Conceptual Framework — connecting nature and people". Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability. 14: 1–16. doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2014.11.002. S2CID 14000233.
a b Ceccato, Pietro; Fernandes, Katia; Ruiz, Daniel; Allis, Erica (17 June 2014). "Climate and environmental monitoring for decision making". Earth Perspectives. 1 (1): 16. doi:10.1186/2194-6434-1-16. S2CID 46200068. Retrieved 25 January 2022.
Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.
Alexander, David E. (1 May 1999). Encyclopedia of Environmental Science.
Springer.
ISBN 978-0-412-74050-3.
a b c Chapin, F. Stuart, III (2011). "Chapter 15: Managing and Sustaining Ecosystems". Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology. P. A. Matson, Peter Morrison Vitousek, Melissa C. Chapin (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
ISBN 978-1-4419-9504-9. OCLC 755081405.
Keith, DA; Rodríguez, J.P.; Rodríguez-Clark, K.M.; Aapala, K.; Alonso, A.; Asmussen, M.; Bachman, S.; Bassett, A.; Barrow, E.G.; Benson, J.S.; Bishop, M.J.; Bonifacio, R.; Brooks, T.M.; Burgman, M.A.; Comer, P.; Comín, F.A.; Essl, F.; Faber-Langendoen, D.; Fairweather, P.G.; Holdaway, R.J.; Jennings, M.; Kingsford, R.T.; Lester, R.E.; Mac Nally, R.; McCarthy, M.A.; Moat, J.; Nicholson, E.; Oliveira-Miranda, M.A.; Pisanu, P.; Poulin, B.; Riecken, U.; Spalding, M.D.; Zambrano-Martínez, S. (2013). "Scientific Foundations for an IUCN Red List of Ecosystems". PLOS ONE. 8 (5): e62111. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...862111K. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0062111. PMC 3648534. PMID 23667454.
Boitani, Luigi; Mace, Georgina M.; Rondinini, Carlo (2014). "Challenging the Scientific Foundations for an IUCN Red List of Ecosystems" (PDF). Conservation Letters. 8 (2): 125–131. doi:10.1111/conl.12111. hdl:11573/624610. S2CID 62790495.
Grumbine, R. Edward (1994). "What is ecosystem management?" (PDF). Conservation Biology. 8 (1): 27–38. doi:10.1046/j.1523-1739.1994.08010027.x.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-02.
"SDGs .:. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform". Sustainabledevelopment.un.org.
Martin. "Goal 2: Zero Hunger". United Nations Sustainable Development.
Retrieved 2022-06-24.
"High-Level Political Forum 2018 (HLPF 2018) .:. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform". Sustainabledevelopment.un.org.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ecosystems.
Look up ecosystem in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Scholia has a topic profile for Ecosystem.
Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Trophic componentsGeneral
Abiotic component
Abiotic stress
Behaviour
Biogeochemical cycle
Biomass
Biotic component
Biotic stress
Carrying capacity
Competition
Ecosystem
Ecosystem ecology
Ecosystem model
Keystone species
List of feeding behaviours
Metabolic theory of ecology
Productivity
Resource
Producers
Autotrophs
Chemosynthesis
Chemotrophs
Foundation species
Mixotrophs
Myco-heterotrophy
Mycotroph
Organotrophs
Photoheterotrophs
Photosynthesis
Photosynthetic efficiency
Phototrophs
Primary nutritional groups
Primary production
Consumers
Apex predator
Bacterivore
Carnivores
Chemoorganotroph
Foraging
Generalist and specialist species
Intraguild predation
Herbivores
Heterotroph
Heterotrophic nutrition
Insectivore
Mesopredators
Mesopredator release hypothesis
Omnivores
Optimal foraging theory
Planktivore
Predation
Prey switching
Decomposers
Chemoorganoheterotrophy
Decomposition
Detritivores
Detritus
Microorganisms
Archaea
Bacteriophage
Lithoautotroph
Lithotrophy
Marine microorganisms
Microbial cooperation
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial intelligence
Microbial loop
Microbial mat
Microbial metabolism
Phage ecology
Food webs
Biomagnification
Ecological efficiency
Ecological pyramid
Energy flow
Food chain
Trophic level
Example webs
Lakes
Rivers
Soil
Tritrophic interactions in plant defense
Marine food webs
cold seeps
hydrothermal vents
intertidal
kelp forests
North Pacific Gyre
San Francisco Estuary
tide pool
Processes
Ascendency
Bioaccumulation
Cascade effect
Climax community
Competitive exclusion principle
Consumer–resource interactions
Copiotrophs
Dominance
Ecological network
Ecological succession
Energy quality
Energy Systems Language
f-ratio
Feed conversion ratio
Feeding frenzy
Mesotrophic soil
Nutrient cycle
Oligotroph
Paradox of the plankton
Trophic cascade
Trophic mutualism
Trophic state index
Defense,counter
Animal coloration
Anti-predator adaptations
Camouflage
Deimatic behaviour
Herbivore adaptations to plant defense
Mimicry
Plant defense against herbivory
Predator avoidance in schooling fish
Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Other componentsPopulationecology
Abundance
Allee effect
Depensation
Ecological yield
Effective population size
Intraspecific competition
Logistic function
Malthusian growth model
Maximum sustainable yield
Overpopulation
Overexploitation
Population cycle
Population dynamics
Population modeling
Population size
Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations
Recruitment
Small population size
Stability
Resilience
Resistance
Species
Biodiversity
Density-dependent inhibition
Ecological effects of biodiversity
Ecological extinction
Endemic species
Flagship species
Gradient analysis
Indicator species
Introduced species
Invasive species
Latitudinal gradients in species diversity
Minimum viable population
Neutral theory
Occupancy–abundance relationship
Population viability analysis
Priority effect
Rapoport's rule
Relative abundance distribution
Relative species abundance
Species diversity
Species homogeneity
Species richness
Species distribution
Species-area curve
Umbrella species
Speciesinteraction
Antibiosis
Biological interaction
Commensalism
Community ecology
Ecological facilitation
Interspecific competition
Mutualism
Parasitism
Storage effect
Symbiosis
Spatialecology
Biogeography
Cross-boundary subsidy
Ecocline
Ecotone
Ecotype
Disturbance
Edge effects
Foster's rule
Habitat fragmentation
Ideal free distribution
Intermediate disturbance hypothesis
Insular biogeography
Land change modeling
Landscape ecology
Landscape epidemiology
Landscape limnology
Metapopulation
Patch dynamics
r/K selection theory
Resource selection function
Source–sink dynamics
Niche
Ecological niche
Ecological trap
Ecosystem engineer
Environmental niche modelling
Guild
Habitat
marine habitats
Limiting similarity
Niche apportionment models
Niche construction
Niche differentiation
Ontogenetic niche shift
Othernetworks
Assembly rules
Bateman's principle
Bioluminescence
Ecological collapse
Ecological debt
Ecological deficit
Ecological energetics
Ecological indicator
Ecological threshold
Ecosystem diversity
Emergence
Extinction debt
Kleiber's law
Liebig's law of the minimum
Marginal value theorem
Thorson's rule
Xerosere
Other
Allometry
Alternative stable state
Balance of nature
Biological data visualization
Ecocline
Ecological economics
Ecological footprint
Ecological forecasting
Ecological humanities
Ecological stoichiometry
Ecopath
Ecosystem based fisheries
Endolith
Evolutionary ecology
Functional ecology
Industrial ecology
Macroecology
Microecosystem
Natural environment
Regime shift
Sexecology
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Theoretical ecology
List of ecology topics
Hierarchy of life
Biosphere > Biome > Ecosystem > Biocenosis > Population > Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Macromolecule > Biomolecule
EarthContinents
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
South America
Oceans
Arctic Ocean
Atlantic Ocean
Indian Ocean
Pacific Ocean
Southern Ocean
Oceanography
Geology
Age of Earth
Geology
Earth science
Erosion
Extremes on Earth
Future
Geological history
time scale
Geologic record
Geophysics
Gravity
History of Earth
Magnetic field
Plate tectonics
Structure
Atmosphere
Atmosphere of Earth
Prebiotic atmosphere
Troposphere
Stratosphere
Mesosphere
Thermosphere
Exosphere
Weather
Climate
Climate system
Energy balance
Climate change
Climate variability and change
Climatology
Paleoclimatology
Environment
Biome
Biosphere
Biogeochemical cycles
Ecology
Ecosystem
Human impact on the environment
Evolutionary history of life
Nature
Cartography
Digital mapping
Satellite imagery
Virtual globe
World map
Culture and society
List of sovereign states
dependent territories
In culture
Earth Day
Flag
Symbol
World economy
Etymology
World history
Time zones
World
Planetary science
Earth's orbit
Evolution of the Solar System
Geology of solar terrestrial planets
Location in the Universe
The Moon
Solar System
Category
Commons
Outline
World portal
Earth sciences portal
Geology portal
Solar System portal
Elements of natureUniverse
Space
Time
Energy
Matter
particles
chemical elements
Change
Earth
Earth science
History (geological)
Structure
Geology
Plate tectonics
Oceans
Gaia hypothesis
Future
Weather
Meteorology
Atmosphere (Earth)
Climate
Clouds
Rain
Snow
Sunlight
Tides
Wind
tornado
tropical cyclone
Natural environment
Ecology
Ecosystem
Field
Radiation
Wilderness
Wildfires
Life
Origin (abiogenesis)
Evolutionary history
Biosphere
Hierarchy
Biology (astrobiology)
Biodiversity
Organism
Eukaryota
flora
plants
fauna
animals
fungi
protista
Prokaryotes
archaea
bacteria
Viruses
Category
Systems scienceSystemtypes
Anatomical
Art
Biological
Complex
Complex adaptive
Conceptual
Coupled human–environment
Database
Dynamical
Ecological
Economic
Energy
Formal
Holarchic
Information
Legal
Measurement
Metric
Multi-agent
Nervous
Nonlinear
Operating
Planetary
Political
Sensory
Social
Star
Writing
Concepts
Doubling time
Leverage points
Limiting factor
Negative feedback
Positive feedback
Theoreticalfields
Chaos theory
Complex systems
Control theory
Cybernetics
Earth system science
Living systems
Sociotechnical system
Systemics
Urban metabolism
World-systems theory
Analysis
Biology
Dynamics
Ecology
Engineering
Neuroscience
Pharmacology
Psychology
Theory (Systems thinking)
Scientists
Alexander Bogdanov
Russell L. Ackoff
William Ross Ashby
Ruzena Bajcsy
Béla H. Bánáthy
Gregory Bateson
Anthony Stafford Beer
Richard E. Bellman
Ludwig von Bertalanffy
Margaret Boden
Kenneth E. Boulding
Murray Bowen
Kathleen Carley
Mary Cartwright
C. West Churchman
Manfred Clynes
George Dantzig
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Fred Emery
Heinz von Foerster
Stephanie Forrest
Jay Wright Forrester
Barbara Grosz
Charles A. S. Hall
Mike Jackson
Lydia Kavraki
James J. Kay
Faina M. Kirillova
George Klir
Allenna Leonard
Edward Norton Lorenz
Niklas Luhmann
Humberto Maturana
Margaret Mead
Donella Meadows
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic
James Grier Miller
Radhika Nagpal
Howard T. Odum
Talcott Parsons
Ilya Prigogine
Qian Xuesen
Anatol Rapoport
John Seddon
Peter Senge
Claude Shannon
Katia Sycara
Eric Trist
Francisco Varela
Manuela M. Veloso
Kevin Warwick
Norbert Wiener
Jennifer Wilby
Anthony Wilden
Applications
Systems theory in anthropology
Systems theory in archaeology
Systems theory in political science
Organizations
List
Principia Cybernetica
Category
Portal
Commons
Authority control: National libraries 
Ukraine
Germany
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 September 2022, at 02:57 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
