Environmentalism - Wikipedia
Environmentalism
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Philosophy about Earth protection
Environmentalism on United States stamps
Environment
Human impact (on the climate)
Issues
Environmentalism
Stewardship
Environmental studies
Environment in
Consulting
Education
Engineering
Humanities
Law
Policy
Science
Social science
Article index
Lists
Portal
Category
Commons
Environmentalism or environmental rights is a broad philosophy, ideology, and social movement regarding concerns for environmental protection and improvement of the health of the environment, particularly as the measure for this health seeks to incorporate the impact of changes to the environment on humans, animals, plants and non-living matter.[circular definition] While environmentalism focuses more on the environmental and nature-related aspects of green ideology and politics, ecologism combines the ideology of social ecology and environmentalism.
Ecologism is more commonly used in continental European languages, while environmentalism is more commonly used in English but the words have slightly different connotations.
Environmentalism advocates the preservation, restoration and improvement of the natural environment and critical earth system elements or processes such as the climate, and may be referred to as a movement to control pollution or protect plant and animal diversity.
For this reason, concepts such as a land ethic, environmental ethics, biodiversity, ecology, and the biophilia hypothesis figure predominantly.
At its crux, environmentalism is an attempt to balance relations between humans and the various natural systems on which they depend in such a way that all the components are accorded a proper degree of sustainability.
The exact measures and outcomes of this balance is controversial and there are many different ways for environmental concerns to be expressed in practice.
Environmentalism and environmental concerns are often represented by the colour green, but this association has been appropriated by the marketing industries for the tactic known as greenwashing.
Environmentalism is opposed by anti-environmentalism, which says that the Earth is less fragile than some environmentalists maintain, and portrays environmentalism as overreacting to the human contribution to climate change or opposing human advancement.
Contents
Definitions
Environmentalism denotes a social movement that seeks to influence the political process by lobbying, activism, and education in order to protect natural resources and ecosystems.
An environmentalist is a person who may speak out about our natural environment and the sustainable management of its resources through changes in public policy or individual behaviour.
This may include supporting practices such as informed consumption, conservation initiatives, investment in renewable resources, improved efficiencies in the materials economy, transitioning to new accounting paradigms such as ecological economics, renewing and revitalizing our connections with non-human life or even opting to have one less child to reduce consumption and pressure on resources.
In various ways (for example, grassroots activism and protests), environmentalists and environmental organisations seek to give the natural world a stronger voice in human affairs.
In general terms, environmentalists advocate the sustainable management of resources, and the protection (and restoration, when necessary) of the natural environment through changes in public policy and individual behaviour.
In its recognition of humanity as a participant in ecosystems, the movement is centered around ecology, health, and human rights.
History
See also: Conservation movement and Timeline of history of environmentalism
Lord Mahavira, the last Jain Tirthankar, is also considered to be a great environmentalist.
A concern for environmental protection has recurred in diverse forms, in different parts of the world, throughout history.
The earliest ideas of environmental protectionism can be found in Jainism, a religion from ancient India revived by Mahavira in the 6th century BC. Jainism offers a view that is in many ways compatible with core values associated with environmental activism, such as the protection of life by nonviolence, which could form a strong ecological ethos for global protection of the environment.
Mahavira's teachings on the symbiosis between all living beings—as well as the five elements of earth, water, air, fire, and space—are core to environmental thought today.
In the Middle East, the Caliph Abu Bakr in the 630s AD commanded his army to "Bring no harm to the trees, nor burn them with fire," and to "Slay not any of the enemy's flock, save for your food." Various Arabic medical treatises during the 9th to 13th centuries dealt with environmentalism and environmental science, including the issue of pollution.
The authors of such treatises included Al-Kindi, Qusta ibn Luqa, Al-Razi, Ibn Al-Jazzar, al-Tamimi, al-Masihi, Avicenna, Ali ibn Ridwan, Ibn Jumay, Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, Abd-el-latif, Ibn al-Quff, and Ibn al-Nafis.
Their works covered a number of subjects related to pollution, such as air pollution, water pollution, soil contamination, and the mishandling of municipal solid waste.
They also included asessments of certain localities' environmental impact.
In Europe, King Edward I of England banned the burning and sale of "sea-coal" in 1272 by proclamation in London, after its smoke had become a prevalent annoyance throughout the city.
This fuel, common in London due to the local scarcity of wood, was given this early name because it could be found washed up on some shores, from where it was carted away on a wheelbarrow.
Early environmental legislation
Levels of air pollution rose during the Industrial Revolution, sparking the first modern environmental laws to be passed in the mid-19th century.
At the advent of steam and electricity the muse of history holds her nose and shuts her eyes (H. G. Wells 1918).
The origins of the environmental movement lay in the response to increasing levels of smoke pollution in the atmosphere during the Industrial Revolution.
The emergence of great factories and the concomitant immense growth in coal consumption gave rise to an unprecedented level of air pollution in industrial centers; after 1900 the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste.
The first large-scale, modern environmental laws came in the form of Britain's Alkali Acts, passed in 1863, to regulate the deleterious air pollution (gaseous hydrochloric acid) given off by the Leblanc process, used to produce soda ash.
An Alkali inspector and four sub-inspectors were appointed to curb this pollution.
The inspectorate's responsibilities were gradually expanded, culminating in the Alkali Order 1958 which placed all major heavy industries that emitted smoke, grit, dust and fumes under supervision.
In industrial cities, local experts and reformers, especially after 1890, took the lead in identifying environmental degradation and pollution, and initiating grass-roots movements to demand and achieve reforms.
Typically the highest priority went to water and air pollution.
The Coal Smoke Abatement Society was formed in 1898 making it one of the oldest environmental NGOs.
It was founded by artist Sir William Blake Richmond, frustrated with the pall cast by coal smoke.
Although there were earlier pieces of legislation, the Public Health Act 1875 required all furnaces and fireplaces to consume their own smoke.
It also provided for sanctions against factories that emitted large amounts of black smoke.
This law's provisions were extended in 1926 with the Smoke Abatement Act to include other emissions, such as soot, ash, and gritty particles, and to empower local authorities to impose their own regulations.
During the Spanish Revolution, anarchist-controlled territories undertook several environmental reforms, which were possibly the largest in the world at the time.
Daniel Guerin notes that anarchist territories would diversify crops, extend irrigation, initiate reforestation, start tree nurseries and help to establish naturist communities.
Once there was a link discovered between air pollution and tuberculosis, the CNT shut down several metal factories.
It was only under the impetus of the Great Smog of 1952 in London, which almost brought the city to a standstill and may have caused upward of 6,000 deaths, that the Clean Air Act 1956 was passed and airborne pollution in the city was first tackled.
Financial incentives were offered to householders to replace open coal fires with alternatives (such as installing gas fires) or those who preferred, to burn coke instead (a byproduct of town gas production) which produces minimal smoke. 'Smoke control areas' were introduced in some towns and cities where only smokeless fuels could be burnt and power stations were relocated away from cities.
The act formed an important impetus to modern environmentalism and caused a rethinking of the dangers of environmental degradation to people's quality of life.
The late 19th century also saw the passage of the first wildlife conservation laws.
The zoologist Alfred Newton published a series of investigations into the Desirability of establishing a 'Close-time' for the preservation of indigenous animals between 1872 and 1903. His advocacy for legislation to protect animals from hunting during the mating season led to the formation of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and influenced the passage of the Sea Birds Preservation Act in 1869 as the first nature protection law in the world.
First environmental movements
Early interest in the environment was a feature of the Romantic movement in the early 19th century.
One of the earliest modern pronouncements on thinking about human industrial advancement and its influence on the environment was written by Japanese geographer, educator, philosopher and author Tsunesaburo Makiguchi in his 1903 publication Jinsei Chirigaku (A Geography of Human Life). In Britain the poet William Wordsworth travelled extensively in the Lake District and wrote that it is a "sort of national property in which every man has a right and interest who has an eye to perceive and a heart to enjoy".
John Ruskin, an influential thinker who articulated the Romantic ideal of environmental protection and conservation
Systematic efforts on behalf of the environment only began in the late 19th century; it grew out of the amenity movement in Britain in the 1870s, which was a reaction to industrialisation, the growth of cities, and worsening air and water pollution.
Starting with the formation of the Commons Preservation Society in 1865, the movement championed rural preservation against the encroachments of industrialisation.
Robert Hunter, solicitor for the society, worked with Hardwicke Rawnsley, Octavia Hill, and John Ruskin to lead a successful campaign to prevent the construction of railways to carry slate from the quarries, which would have ruined the unspoiled valleys of Newlands and Ennerdale.
This success led to the formation of the Lake District Defence Society (later to become The Friends of the Lake District).
Peter Kropotkin wrote about ecology in economics, agricultural science, conservation, ethology, criminology, urban planning, geography, geology and biology.
He observed in Swiss and Siberian glaciers that they had been slowly melting since the dawn of the industrial revolution, possibly making him one of the first predictors for climate change.
He also observed the damage done from deforestation and hunting.
Kropotkin's writings would become influential in the 1970s and became a major inspiration for the intentional community movement as well as his ideas becoming the basis for the theory of social ecology.
In 1893 Hill, Hunter and Rawnsley agreed to set up a national body to coordinate environmental conservation efforts across the country; the "National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" was formally inaugurated in 1894. The organisation obtained secure footing through the 1907 National Trust Bill, which gave the trust the status of a statutory corporation. and the bill was passed in August 1907.
An early "Back-to-Nature" movement, which anticipated the romantic ideal of modern environmentalism, was advocated by intellectuals such as John Ruskin, William Morris, George Bernard Shaw and Edward Carpenter, who were all against consumerism, pollution and other activities that were harmful to the natural world.
The movement was a reaction to the urban conditions of the industrial towns, where sanitation was awful, pollution levels intolerable and housing terribly cramped.
Idealists championed the rural life as a mythical utopia and advocated a return to it.
John Ruskin argued that people should return to a "small piece of English ground, beautiful, peaceful, and fruitful.
We will have no steam engines upon it ... we will have plenty of flowers and vegetables ... we will have some music and poetry; the children will learn to dance to it and sing it."
Practical ventures in the establishment of small cooperative farms were even attempted and old rural traditions, without the "taint of manufacture or the canker of artificiality", were enthusiastically revived, including the Morris dance and the maypole.
These ideas also inspired various environmental groups in the UK, such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, established in 1889 by Emily Williamson as a protest group to campaign for greater protection for the indigenous birds of the island.
The Society attracted growing support from the suburban middle-classes as well as support from many other influential figures, such as the ornithologist Professor Alfred Newton.
By 1900, public support for the organisation had grown, and it had over 25,000 members.
The garden city movement incorporated many environmental concerns into its urban planning manifesto; the Socialist League and The Clarion movement also began to advocate measures of nature conservation.
Original title page of Walden by Henry David Thoreau
The movement in the United States began in the late 19th century, out of concerns for protecting the natural resources of the West, with individuals such as John Muir and Henry David Thoreau making key philosophical contributions.
Thoreau was interested in peoples' relationship with nature and studied this by living close to nature in a simple life.
He published his experiences in the book Walden, which argues that people should become intimately close with nature.
Muir came to believe in nature's inherent right, especially after spending time hiking in Yosemite Valley and studying both the ecology and geology.
He successfully lobbied congress to form Yosemite National Park and went on to set up the Sierra Club in 1892. The conservationist principles as well as the belief in an inherent right of nature were to become the bedrock of modern environmentalism.
In the 20th century, environmental ideas continued to grow in popularity and recognition.
Efforts were starting to be made to save some wildlife, particularly the American bison.
The death of the last passenger pigeon as well as the endangerment of the American bison helped to focus the minds of conservationists and to popularise their concerns.
In 1916, the National Park Service was founded by US President Woodrow Wilson.
The Forestry Commission was set up in 1919 in Britain to increase the amount of woodland in Britain by buying land for afforestation and reforestation.
The commission was also tasked with promoting forestry and the production of timber for trade.
During the 1920s the Commission focused on acquiring land to begin planting out new forests; much of the land was previously used for agricultural purposes.
By 1939 the Forestry Commission was the largest landowner in Britain.
During the 1930s the Nazis had elements that were supportive of animal rights, zoos and wildlife, and took several measures to ensure their protection.
In 1933 the government created a stringent animal-protection law and in 1934, Das Reichsjagdgesetz (The Reich Hunting Law) was enacted which limited hunting.
Several Nazis were environmentalists (notably Rudolf Hess), and species protection and animal welfare were significant issues in the regime.
In 1935, the regime enacted the "Reich Nature Protection Act" (Reichsnaturschutzgesetz). The concept of the Dauerwald (best translated as the "perpetual forest") which included concepts such as forest management and protection was promoted and efforts were also made to curb air pollution.
In 1949, A Sand County Almanac by Aldo Leopold was published.
It explained Leopold's belief that humankind should have moral respect for the environment and that it is unethical to harm it.
The book is sometimes called the most influential book on conservation.
Throughout the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and beyond, photography was used to enhance public awareness of the need for protecting land and recruiting members to environmental organisations.
David Brower, Ansel Adams and Nancy Newhall created the Sierra Club Exhibit Format Series, which helped raise public environmental awareness and brought a rapidly increasing flood of new members to the Sierra Club and to the environmental movement in general.
This Is Dinosaur, edited by Wallace Stegner with photographs by Martin Litton and Philip Hyde, prevented the building of dams within Dinosaur National Monument by becoming part of a new kind of activism called environmentalism that combined the conservationist ideals of Thoreau, Leopold and Muir with hard-hitting advertising, lobbying, book distribution, letter writing campaigns, and more.
The powerful use of photography in addition to the written word for conservation dated back to the creation of Yosemite National Park, when photographs persuaded Abraham Lincoln to preserve the beautiful glacier carved landscape for all time.
The Sierra Club Exhibit Format Series galvanised public opposition to building dams in the Grand Canyon and protected many other national treasures.
The Sierra Club often led a coalition of many environmental groups including the Wilderness Society and many others.
After a focus on preserving wilderness in the 1950s and 1960s, the Sierra Club and other groups broadened their focus to include such issues as air and water pollution, population concern, and curbing the exploitation of natural resources.
Post-war expansion
See also: Steady-state economy  § Post-war economic expansion and emerging ecological concerns
In the United States and several other countries, the boom was manifested in suburban development and urban sprawl, aided by automobile ownership.
In 1962, Silent Spring by American biologist Rachel Carson was published.
The book cataloged the environmental impacts of the indiscriminate spraying of DDT in the US and questioned the logic of releasing large amounts of chemicals into the environment without fully understanding their effects on human health and ecology.
The book suggested that DDT and other pesticides may cause cancer and that their agricultural use was a threat to wildlife, particularly birds.
The resulting public concern led to the creation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 which subsequently banned the agricultural use of DDT in the US in 1972. The limited use of DDT in disease vector control continues to this day in certain parts of the world and remains controversial.
The book's legacy was to produce a far greater awareness of environmental issues and interest into how people affect the environment.
With this new interest in environment came interest in problems such as air pollution and petroleum spills, and environmental interest grew.
New pressure groups formed, notably Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth (US), as well as notable local organisations such as the Wyoming Outdoor Council, which was founded in 1967.
In the 1970s, the environmental movement gained rapid speed around the world as a productive outgrowth of the counterculture movement.
The world's first political parties to campaign on a predominantly environmental platform were the United Tasmania Group of Tasmania, Australia, and the Values Party of New Zealand.
The first green party in Europe was the Popular Movement for the Environment, founded in 1972 in the Swiss canton of Neuchâtel.
The first national green party in Europe was PEOPLE, founded in Britain in February 1973, which eventually turned into the Ecology Party, and then the Green Party.
Protection of the environment also became important in the developing world; the Chipko movement was formed in India under the influence of Mhatmas Gandhi and they set up peaceful resistance to deforestation by literally hugging trees (leading to the term "tree huggers"). Their peaceful methods of protest and slogan "ecology is permanent economy" were very influential.
Another milestone in the movement was the creation of Earth Day.
Earth Day was first observed in San Francisco and other cities on 21 March 1970, the first day of spring.
It was created to give awareness to environmental issues.
On 21 March 1971, United Nations Secretary-General U Thant spoke of a spaceship Earth on Earth Day, hereby referring to the ecosystem services the earth supplies to us, and hence our obligation to protect it (and with it, ourselves). Earth Day is now coordinated globally by the Earth Day Network, and is celebrated in more than 192 countries every year.
The UN's first major conference on international environmental issues, the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (also known as the Stockholm Conference), was held on 5–16 June 1972. It marked a turning point in the development of international environmental politics.
By the mid-1970s, many felt that people were on the edge of environmental catastrophe.
The back-to-the-land movement started to form and ideas of environmental ethics joined with anti-Vietnam War sentiments and other political issues.
These individuals lived outside normal society and started to take on some of the more radical environmental theories such as deep ecology.
Around this time more mainstream environmentalism was starting to show force with the signing of the Endangered Species Act in 1973 and the formation of CITES in 1975. Significant amendments were also enacted to the United States Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act.
In 1979, James Lovelock, a British scientist, published Gaia: A new look at life on Earth, which put forth the Gaia hypothesis; it proposes that life on earth can be understood as a single organism.
This became an important part of the Deep Green ideology.
Throughout the rest of the history of environmentalism there has been debate and argument between more radical followers of this Deep Green ideology and more mainstream environmentalists.
Environmentalism continues to evolve to face up to new issues such as global warming, overpopulation, genetic engineering, and plastic pollution.
Research demonstrates a precipitous decline in the US public's interest in 19 different areas of environmental concern.
Americans are less likely to be actively participating in an environmental movement or organisation and more likely to identify as "unsympathetic" to an environmental movement than in 2000. This is likely a lingering factor of the Great Recession in 2008. Since 2005, the percentage of Americans agreeing that the environment should be given priority over economic growth has dropped 10 points; in contrast, those feeling that growth should be given priority "even if the environment suffers to some extent" has risen 12 percent.
Nevertheless, a recent National Geographic survey indicated strong desire for commitment across a dozen countries, indicating a majority were in favour of more than half of the Earth's land surface being protected.
New forms of ecoactivism
Demonstrators in a tree at the Berkeley oak grove protest in 2008
Tree sitting is a form of activism in which the protester sits in a tree in an attempt to stop the removal of a tree or to impede the demolition of an area with the longest and most famous tree-sitter being Julia Butterfly Hill, who spent 738 days in a California Redwood, saving a three-acre tract of forest.
Also notable is the Yellow Finch tree sit, which was a 932-day blockade of the Mountain Valley Pipeline from 2018-2021.
Sit-ins can be used to encourage social change, such as the Greensboro sit-ins, a series of protests in 1960 to stop racial segregation, but can also be used in ecoactivism, as in the Dakota Access Pipeline Protest.
Before the Syrian Civil War, Rojava had been ecologically damaged by monoculture, oil extraction, damming of rivers, deforestation, drought, topsoil loss and general pollution.
The DFNS launched a campaign titled 'Make Rojava Green Again' (a parody of Make America Great Again) which is attempting to provide renewable energy to communities (especially solar energy), reforestation, protecting water sources, planting gardens, promoting urban agriculture, creating wildlife reserves, water recycling, beekeeping, expanding public transportation and promoting environmental awareness within their communities.
The Rebel Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities are firmly environmentalist and have stopped the extraction of oil, uranium, timber and metal from the Lacandon Jungle and stopped the use of pesticides and chemical fertilisers in farming.
The CIPO-RFM has engaged in sabotage and direct action against wind farms, shrimp farms, eucalyptus plantations and the timber industry.
They have also set up corn and coffee worker cooperatives and built schools and hospitals to help the local populations.
They have also created a network of autonomous community radio stations to educate people about dangers to the environment and inform the surrounding communities about new industrial projects that would destroy more land.
In 2001, the CIPO-RFM defeated the construction of a highway that was part of Plan Puebla Panama.
Environmental movement
Main article: Environmental movement
Before flue-gas desulfurization was installed, the air-polluting emissions from this power plant in New Mexico contained excessive amounts of sulfur dioxide.
The environmental movement (a term that sometimes includes the conservation and green movements) is a diverse scientific, social, and political movement.
Though the movement is represented by a range of organisations, because of the inclusion of environmentalism in the classroom curriculum, the environmental movement has a younger demographic than is common in other social movements (see green seniors).
Environmentalism as a movement covers broad areas of institutional oppression, including for example: consumption of ecosystems and natural resources into waste, dumping waste into disadvantaged communities, air pollution, water pollution, weak infrastructure, exposure of organic life to toxins, mono-culture, anti-polythene drive (jhola movement) and various other focuses.
Because of these divisions, the environmental movement can be categorized into these primary focuses: environmental science, environmental activism, environmental advocacy, and environmental justice.
Free market environmentalism
Main article: Free-market environmentalism
Free market environmentalism is a theory that argues that the free market, property rights, and tort law provide the best tools to preserve the health and sustainability of the environment.
It considers environmental stewardship to be natural, as well as the expulsion of polluters and other aggressors through individual and class action.
Evangelical environmentalism
Main article: Evangelical environmentalism
Evangelical environmentalism is an environmental movement in the United States in which some Evangelicals have emphasized biblical mandates concerning humanity's role as steward and subsequent responsibility for the care taking of Creation.
While the movement has focused on different environmental issues, it is best known for its focus of addressing climate action from a biblically grounded theological perspective.
This movement is controversial among some non-Christian environmentalists due to its rooting in a specific religion.
Preservation and conservation
Federal Register documents and literature related to US environmental regulations, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 1987
Main articles: Conservation movement and Conservation in the United States
Environmental preservation in the United States and other parts of the world, including Australia, is viewed as the setting aside of natural resources to prevent damage caused by contact with humans or by certain human activities, such as logging, mining, hunting, and fishing, often to replace them with new human activities such as tourism and recreation.
Regulations and laws may be enacted for the preservation of natural resources.
Organisations and conferences
Main article: List of environmental organizations
Reef doctor work station in Ifaty, Madagascar
Environmental organisations can be global, regional, national or local; they can be government-run or private (NGO). Environmentalist activity exists in almost every country.
Moreover, groups dedicated to community development and social justice also focus on environmental concerns.
Some US environmental organisations, among them the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Environmental Defense Fund, specialise in bringing lawsuits (a tactic seen as particularly useful in that country). Other groups, such as the US-based National Wildlife Federation, Earth Day, National Cleanup Day, the Nature Conservancy, and The Wilderness Society, and global groups like the World Wide Fund for Nature and Friends of the Earth, disseminate information, participate in public hearings, lobby, stage demonstrations, and may purchase land for preservation.
Statewide nonprofit organisations such as the Wyoming Outdoor Council often collaborate with these national organisations and employ similar strategies.
Smaller groups, including Wildlife Conservation International, conduct research on endangered species and ecosystems.
More radical organisations, such as Greenpeace, Earth First!, and the Earth Liberation Front, have more directly opposed actions they regard as environmentally harmful.
While Greenpeace is devoted to nonviolent confrontation as a means of bearing witness to environmental wrongs and bringing issues into the public realm for debate, the underground Earth Liberation Front engages in the clandestine destruction of property, the release of caged or penned animals, and other criminal acts.
Such tactics are regarded as unusual within the movement, however.
On an international level, concern for the environment was the subject of a United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in 1972, attended by 114 nations.
Out of this meeting developed the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the follow-up United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992. Other international organisations in support of environmental policies development include the Commission for Environmental Cooperation (as part of NAFTA), the European Environment Agency (EEA), and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Environmental protests
Climate activists blockade British Airports Authority's headquarters for day of action.
"March Against Monsanto", Vancouver, Canada, 25 May 2013
Main article: List of environmental protests
Notable environmental protests and campaigns include:
Anti-WAAhnsinns Festival
Car-Free Days
Camp for Climate Action
Campaign against Climate Change
Climate Rush
Cofán people oil drilling protest (Ecuador)
Earth Day
Earth First!
Earthlife Africa
Global Climate Strikes
Global Day of Action
Gurindji Strike
Hands off our Forest
Homes before Roads
Kupa Piti Kungka Tjuta
Love Canal protests
March Against Monsanto
Nevada Desert Experience
Plane Mad
Plane Stupid
Qidong protest
Save Manapouri Campaign
Say Yes demonstrations
Shifang protest
Stop Climate Chaos
Environmentalists
Main article: Environmentalist
Notable advocates for environmental protection and sustainability include:
Edward Abbey (author)
David Attenborough (broadcaster, naturalist)
John James Audubon (naturalist)
Judi Bari (environmentalist)
Frances Beinecke (environmentalist and former president of the Natural Resources Defense Council)
David Bellamy (botanist)
Wendell Berry (farmer, philosopher)
Murray Bookchin (anarchist, philosopher, social ecologist)
Erin Brockovich (environmental lawyer and activist)
David Brower (writer, activist)
Lester Brown (environmental analyst, author)
Carol Browner (lawyer and activist)
Kevin Buzzacott (Aboriginal activist)
Berta Caceres (environmental and indigenous rights activist)
Helen Caldicott (medical doctor)
Rachel Carson (biologist, writer)
Majora Carter (urban revitalization strategist)
Prince Charles (British Royal Family member)
Barry Commoner (biologist, politician)
Jacques-Yves Cousteau (explorer, ecologist)
Herman Daly (ecological economist and steady-state theorist)
Peter Dauvergne (political scientist)
Laurie David (activist and producer)
Marina DeBris (environmental artist)
Leonardo DiCaprio (actor and environmentalist)
Sylvia Earle (marine biologist)
Paul R. Ehrlich (population biologist)
Hans-Josef Fell (German Green Party member)
Jane Fonda (actor)
Josh Fox (filmmaker, environmental activist)
Mizuho Fukushima (politician, activist)
Peter Garrett (musician, politician)
Jane Goodall (primatologist, anthropologist, and UN Messenger of Peace)
Lois Gibbs (Founder of the Center for Health, Environment and Justice)
Al Gore (former Vice President of the United States)
Daryl Hannah (activist)
James Hansen (scientist)
Garrett Hardin (ecologist, ecophilosopher)
Denis Hayes (environmentalist and solar power advocate)
Julia Butterfly Hill (activist)
Robert Hunter (journalist, co-founder and first president of Greenpeace)
Tetsunari Iida (sustainable energy advocate)
Lisa P. Jackson (chemical engineer and former administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency)
Naomi Klein (writer, activist)
Winona LaDuke (environmentalist)
Aldo Leopold (ecologist)
A. Carl Leopold (plant physiologist)
James Lovelock (scientist)
Amory Lovins (energy policy analyst)
Hunter Lovins (environmentalist)
Caroline Lucas (politician)
Wangari Maathai (activist and Nobel laureate)
Jarid Manos (CEO of the Great Plains Restoration Council)
Xiuhtezcatl Martinez (environmental activist, hip-hop artist)
Bill McKibben (writer, activist)
David McTaggart (activist)
Chico Mendes (activist)
Joni Mitchell (musician, environmental activist)
George Monbiot (journalist)
John Muir (naturalist, activist)
Ralph Nader (activist)
Gaylord Nelson (politician)
Alan Pears (environmental consultant and energy efficiency pioneer)
Gifford Pinchot (first chief of the USFS)
Jonathon Porritt (politician)
John Wesley Powell (second director of the USGS)
Barbara Pyle (documentarian and executive producer of Captain Planet and the Planeteers)
Phil Radford (environmental, clean energy and democracy advocate, Greenpeace Executive Director)
Bonnie Raitt (musician)
Theodore Roosevelt (former President of the United States)
Habiba Sarobi (politician and activist)
E. F. Schumacher (author of Small Is Beautiful)
Vandana Shiva (ecofeminist and activist)
Marina Silva (politician and activist)
Alicia Silverstone (activist and author of The Kind Diet)
Lauren Singer (activist and entrepreneur)
Swami Sundaranand (Yogi, photographer, and mountaineer)
Cass Sunstein (environmental lawyer)
David Suzuki (scientist, broadcaster)
Henry David Thoreau (writer, philosopher)
Greta Thunberg (environmentalist)
Stewart Udall (former United States Secretary of the Interior)
Jo Valentine (politician and activist)
Dominique Voynet (politician and environmentalist)
Christopher O. Ward (water infrastructure expert)
Alice Waters (activist and restaurateur)
Gabriel Willow (environmental educator, naturalist)
Howard Zahniser (author of the 1964 Wilderness Act)
Assassinations
Early American game warden Guy Bradley, who was killed in 1905 while attempting to stop a bird poacher near Flamingo, Florida
See also: List of environmental activists assassinated
Every year, more than 100 environmental activists are murdered throughout the world.
Most recent deaths are in Brazil, where activists combat logging in the Amazon rainforest.
Occurrences like this are relatively common, and account for a large number of deaths.
In popular culture
Further information: Climate change in popular culture and Environmentalism in music
The U.S. Forest Service created Smokey the Bear in 1944; he appeared in countless posters, radio and television programs, movies, press releases, and other guises to warn about forest fires.
The comic strip Mark Trail, by environmentalist Ed Dodd, began in 1946; it still appears weekly in 175 newspapers.
The children's animated show Captain Planet and the Planeteers, created by Ted Turner and Barbara Pyle in 1989 to inform children about environmental issues.
The show aired for six seasons and 113 episodes, in 100 countries worldwide from 1990 to 1996.
In 1974, Spokane, Washington, became the smallest city ever to host a World's Fair.
From Saturday, 4 May, to Sunday, 3 November 1974, Spokane hosted Expo 74, the first world's fair to focus on the environment.
The theme of Expo 74 was "Celebrating Tomorrow's Fresh New Environment".
FernGully: The Last Rainforest is an animated motion picture released in 1992, which focuses exclusively on the environment.
The movie is based on a book under the same title by Diana Young.
In 1998, a sequel, FernGully 2: The Magical Rescue, was introduced.
Miss Earth is one of the Big Four international beauty pageants. (The other three are Miss Universe, Miss International, and Miss World.) Out of these four beauty pageants, Miss Earth is the only international beauty pageant that promotes "environmental awareness". The reigning titleholders dedicate their year to promote specific projects and often address issues concerning the environment and other global issues through school tours, tree planting activities, street campaigns, coastal clean ups, speaking engagements, shopping mall tours, media guesting, environmental fair, storytelling programs, eco-fashion shows, and other environmental activities.
The Miss Earth winner is the spokesperson for the Miss Earth Foundation, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and other environmental organizations.
The Miss Earth Foundation also works with the environmental departments and ministries of participating countries, various private sectors and corporations, as well as Greenpeace and the World Wildlife Foundation (WWF).
Another area of environmentalism is to use art to raise awareness about misuse of the environment.
One example is trashion, using trash to create clothes, jewelry, and other objects for the home.
Marina DeBris is one trashion artist, who focuses on ocean and beach trash to design clothes and for fund raising, education.
Criticism and alternative views
When environmentalism first became popular during the early 20th century, the focus was wilderness protection and wildlife preservation.
These goals reflected the interests of the movement's initial, primarily white middle and upper class supporters, including through viewing preservation and protection via a lens that failed to appreciate the centuries-long work of indigenous communities who had lived without ushering in the types of environmental devastation these settler colonial "environmentalists" now sought to mitigate.
The actions of many mainstream environmental organizations still reflect these early principles.
Numerous low-income minorities felt isolated or negatively impacted by the movement, exemplified by the Southwest Organizing Project's (SWOP) Letter to the Group of 10, a letter sent to major environmental organizations by several local environmental justice activists.
The letter argued that the environmental movement was so concerned about cleaning up and preserving nature that it ignored the negative side-effects that doing so caused communities nearby, namely less job growth.
In addition, the NIMBY movement has transferred locally unwanted land uses (LULUs) from middle-class neighborhoods to poor communities with large minority populations.
Therefore, vulnerable communities with fewer political opportunities are more often exposed to hazardous waste and toxins.
This has resulted in the PIBBY principle, or at least the PIMBY (Place-in-minorities'-backyard), as supported by the United Church of Christ's study in 1987.
As a result, some minorities have viewed the environmental movement as elitist.
Environmental elitism manifested itself in three different forms:
Compositional – Environmentalists are from the middle and upper class.
Ideological – The reforms benefit the movement's supporters but impose costs on nonparticipants.
Impact – The reforms have "regressive social impacts". They disproportionately benefit environmentalists and harm underrepresented populations.
Many environmentalists believe that human interference with 'nature' should be restricted or minimised as a matter of urgency (for the sake of life, or the planet, or just for the benefit of the human species), whereas environmental skeptics and anti-environmentalists do not believe that there is such a need.
One can also regard oneself as an environmentalist and believe that human 'interference' with 'nature' should be increased.
Nevertheless, there is a risk that the shift from emotional environmentalism into the technical management of natural resources and hazards could decrease the touch of humans with nature, leading to less concern with environment preservation.
Increasingly, typical conservation rhetoric is being replaced with restoration approaches and larger landscape initiatives that seek to create more holistic impacts.
In the 2000s, American author and filmmaker Michael Crichton criticized environmentalism as being religiously motivated rather than grounded in empirical evidence, arguing that climate change was a natural part of Earth's history and had been occurring long before humans dominated the planet.
Also claiming to argue from his minor education in anthropology, he stated that religion was a part of human social make-up and that if it was suppressed, it would simply re-emerge in another form.
With the decline of Christianity and Church attendance in the Western world, environmentalism has become more popular according to him, which he termed as "the religion of urban atheists".
Others seek a balance that involves both caring deeply for the environment while letting science guide human actions affecting it.
Such an approach would avoid the emotionalism which, for example, anti-GMO activism has been criticized for, and protect the integrity of science.
Planting trees, for another example, can be emotionally satisfying but should also involve being conscious of scientific concerns such as the effect on water cycles and the use of nonnative, potentially invasive species.
See also
Outline of environmentalism
Anti-environmentalism
Climate movement
Conservation movement
Ecomodernism
Human impact on the environment
Nature conservation
Radical environmentalism
Religion and environmentalism
Sustainability
List of climate scientists
List of women climate scientists and activists
References
"Environmentalism – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 13 August 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2012.
Cat Lincoln (Spring 2009). "Light, Dark and Bright Green Environmentalism". Green Daily.
Archived from the original on 25 April 2009. Retrieved 2 November 2009.
Bowen, Frances, and J. Alberto Aragon-Correa. "Greenwashing in corporate environmentalism research and practice: The importance of what we say and do." (2014): 107-112.
Rowell, Andrew (1996). Green Backlash.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-12828-5.
Robert Gottlieb, Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American Environmental Movement (2005)
PTI (20 April 2016). "Lord Mahavir was a great environmentalist: Fadnavis". Times of India.
Retrieved 29 April 2019.
Long, Jeffery D. (2013). Jainism: An Introduction. I.B.Tauris.
ISBN 978-0-85773-656-7 – via Google Books.
"Jainism Introduction". fore.yale.edu.
Yale Forum on Religion and Ecology.
Aboul-Enein, H. Yousuf; Zuhur, Sherifa (2004), Islamic Rulings on Warfare, Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College, p. 22, ISBN 978-1-58487-177-4
Gari, L. (November 2002), "Arabic Treatises on Environmental Pollution up to the End of the Thirteenth Century", Environment and History, 8 (4): 475–88, doi:10.3197/096734002129342747, S2CID 85197649
David Urbinato (Summer 1994). "London's Historic 'Pea-Soupers'". U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Archived from the original on 2 October 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2006.
"Deadly Smog". PBS. 17 January 2003. Retrieved 2 August 2006.
In the Fourth Year: Anticipations of a World Peace, (London: Chatto & Windus), p. 100.
Fleming, James R.; Bethany R. Knorr. "History of the Clean Air Act". American Meteorological Society.
Retrieved 14 February 2006.
Harold L. Platt, Shock cities: the environmental transformation and reform of Manchester and Chicago (2005) excerpt.
Guerin, Daniel (1970). Anarchism: From Theory to Practice.
New York: Monthly Review Press. p. 134.
Iain McKay, "Objectivity and Right-Libertarian Scholarship," 20 January 2009, 
"London's Great Smog, 60 Years On". 10 December 2012. Retrieved 17 December 2012.
G. Baeyens; M. L. Martinez (2007). Coastal Dunes: Ecology and Conservation.
Springer. p. 282.
Makel, Jo (2 February 2011). "Protecting seabirds at Bempton Cliffs". BBC News.
Odata, Toshihiro (1994).  牧口常三郎 『人生地理学』 の地理学史上の再評価 [A Reappraisal of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi's 'Jinsei Chirigaku' in the History of Geography in Japan]. Chiri-Kagaku [Geographical Sciences] (in Japanese). 49 (4): 197–212. doi:10.20630/chirikagaku.49.4_197.
"Nature conservation in Britain, ca. 1870–1945". Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 17 December 2012.
"Canon Hardwicke Drummond Rawnsley" Archived 6 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Visitcumbria.com, accessed 17 May 2009
Purchase, Graham (4 December 2013). "Green Flame: Kropotkin and the Birth of Ecology". zabalazabooks.net.
"A Proposed National Trust", The Times, 17 July 1894, p. 12
"Parliamentary Committees", The Times, 26 July 1907. p. 4
"An Act to incorporate and confer powers upon the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" Archived 2 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The National Trust, accessed 4 June 2012
Gould, Peter C. (1988). Early Green Politics, Brighton, Harvester Press, pp. 15–19, and Wall, Derek, (1994) Green History: A Reader.
London, Routledge, pp. 9–14.
Jan Marsh (1982). Back to the Land: The Pastoral Impulse in England, 1880–1914. Quartet Books.
ISBN 978-0-7043-2276-9.
"'Back to nature' movement nothing new – dates back to 1880". Christian Science Monitor. 15 December 1983. Retrieved 17 December 2012.
"Our History". RSPB. Retrieved 28 August 2020.
Gould, (1988) pp. 16, 23–24, 36–38, 84–86.
"Forestry Commission – a brief history" (PDF). Woodland Trust.
Retrieved 11 April 2012.[permanent dead link]
Sylvie Nail (2008). Forest Policies and Social Change in England.
Springer. p. 332. ISBN 978-1-4020-8364-8.
Thomas R. DeGregori (2002). Bountiful Harvest: Technology, Food Safety, and the Environment.
Cato Institute. p. 153. ISBN 978-1-930865-31-0.
a b Martin Kitchen (2006). A History of Modern Germany, 1800-2000. Blackwell Publishing. p. 278. ISBN 978-1-4051-0040-3.
Hartmut M. Hanauske-Abel, Not a slippery slope or sudden subversion: German medicine and National Socialism in 1933, BMJ 1996; pp. 1453–1463 (7 December)
"kaltio.fi". Retrieved 15 August 2007.
Jonathan Olsen "How Green Were the Nazis? Nature, Environment, and Nation in the Third Reich (review)" Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Technology and Culture – Volume 48, Number 1, January 2007, pp. 207–08
Carson, Rachel (1962). Silent Spring.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN 978-0-8093-2218-3.[page needed]
/
Dann, Christine. "The development of the first two Green parties New Zealand and Tasmania". From Earth's last islands.
The global origins of Green politics.
Global Greens.
Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 4 August 2011.
Bevan, RA (2001), Petra Kelly: The Other Green, New Political Science, vol. 23, no. 2, November, pp. 181–202
"Resource temporarily unavailable". Earthday.net.
Retrieved 22 April 2011.
"Earth Day 2019: Everything you need to know". abcnews.go.com. 22 April 2019.
John Baylis, Steve Smith. 2005. The Globalization of World Politics (3rd ed). Oxford.
Oxford University Press. pp. 454–55
Clean Air Act Extension of 1970, 84 Stat. 1676, Pub.L. 91–604, 31 December 1970.
Pub.L. 95-217 Archived 29 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 27 December 1977.
McCallum, M.L. & G.W. Bury (2013). "Google search patterns suggest declining interest in the environment". Biodiversity and Conservation. 22 (6): 1355–1367. doi:10.1007/s10531-013-0476-6. S2CID 15593201.
a b "Environment | Gallup Historical Trends". Gallup.com. 20 April 2007. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
"Many people want to set aside half of Earth as nature". Animals. 17 September 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2020.
Fountain, Henry (18 June 2006). "Rising Above the Environmental Debate". The New York Times.
Hammack, Laurence (12 November 2020). "Judge orders tree-sitters down after more than 2 years". The Roanoke Times.
Dhillon, Matt (16 April 2021). "Last Tree-sitters Removed from Path of Mountain Valley Pipeline". The Appalachian Voice.
Mele, Christopher (2016). "Veterans To Serve as 'Human Shields' for Dakota Pipeline Protestors". The New York Times.
"Building Autonomy Through Ecology in Rojava". unicornriot.ninja. 28 February 2018.
Gobierno Autónomo I: Cuaderno de texto de primer grado del curso de "La Libertad según l@s Zapatistas", 19.
Denham, Diana (2008). Teaching Rebellion: Stories from the Grassroots Mobilisation in Oaxaca.
Craig Kridel (2010). Encyclopedia of Curriculum Studies.
Sage Publications, Inc. p. 341. ISBN 978-1-4129-5883-7. Retrieved 16 April 2010.
Jennifer Sinsel (15 April 2010). "Earth Day Activities". Lesson Planet.
Retrieved 16 April 2010.
"American Environmental Justice Movement". 
Cunningham, William P.;  et al. (1998). Environmental encyclopedia.
Gale Research.
ISBN 978-0-8103-9314-1.
"Climate crisis: 6 million people join latest wave of global protests". TheGuardian.com. 27 September 2019.
"Greta Thunberg is leading kids and adults from 150 countries in a massive Friday climate strike". 17 September 2019.
"Leonardo DiCaprio". World Wildlife Fund.
Retrieved 31 January 2016.
a b Holmes, Oliver (20 June 2016). "Environmental activist murders set record as 2015 became deadliest year". the Guardian.
Retrieved 15 April 2018.
Ulmanu, Monica; Evans, Alan; Brown, Georgia (May 2018). "37 environmental defenders have been killed so far in 2018". The Guardian.
Retrieved 26 May 2018.
"Map: 116 environmental activists were killed in just one year". Grist.org. 5 March 2016. Retrieved 25 September 2016.
Stout, David (20 April 2015). "Environmental Activists Killed in Record Numbers in 2014". Time.com.
"On Dangerous Ground: Killings of land and environmental defenders in 2015". Global Witness. 20 June 2016.
"Cambodian forest defenders killed after confronting illegal loggers". The Guardian. 31 January 2018. Retrieved 2 February 2018.
Dahir, Abdi Latif (25 April 2020). "12 Rangers Among 17 Killed in Congo Park Ambush". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 29 May 2020.
Ellen Earnhardt Morrison, Guardian of the Forest: A History of Smokey Bear and the Cooperative Forest Fire Prevention Program (1995)
"Barbara Pyle, with Ted Turner created the animated action series Captain Planet and the Planeteers". 
"'Washed Up' Art Exhibition Raises Awareness of Plastic Pollution". Wilson College. 4 April 2016. Retrieved 2 October 2017.
"Unmasking Pollution with Climate Art". UN Climate Change: Climate Action.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Retrieved 2 October 2017.
Cerini, Marianna (7 December 2016). "How limited edition sneakers designed by Kanye West are helping people breathe in China". CNN. CNN. Retrieved 2 October 2017.
a b Sandler, R., & Phaedra, P. (2007). Environmental justice and environmentalism. (pp. 27-55).
"SWOP Letter to the Group of 10 ." Southwest Organizing Project. N.p.. Web. 7 May 2013. <>. Archived 14 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine
Gerrard, Michael B. (1993–1994). "The Victims of NIMBY". Fordham Urban Law Journal.
New York, NY.
Roberts, R. Gregory (October 1998). "Environmental Justice and Community Empowerment: Learning from the Civil Rights Movement" (PDF). American University Law Review.
Washington D.C. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009.
Morrison, Denton (September 1986). "Environmentalism and elitism: a conceptual and empirical analysis". Environmental Management.
New York. 10 (5): 581–589. Bibcode:1986EnMan..10..581M. doi:10.1007/BF01866762. S2CID 153561660.
Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011). Technofix: Why Technology Won't Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia ISBN 0-86571-704-4, 464 pp.
Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel. "Globalization and Sustainable Development: False Twins?." New Global Studies 7.3: 23–56.
Neil Paul Cummins "An Evolutionary Perspective on the Relationship Between Humans and Their Surroundings: Geoengineering, the Purpose of Life & the Nature of the Universe", Cranmore Publications, 2012.
Vasconcelos, Vitor Vieira (2011). "The Environment Professional and the Touch with Nature". Qualit@s. pp. 1–10 – via Pt.scribd.com.
Mason, Matthew. "Conservation: History and Future". EnvironmentalScience.org.
Crichton, Michael. "Environmentalism as religion." speech to the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco, CA (2003).
Berry, Evan. "Religious environmentalism and environmental religion in America." Religion Compass 7.10 (2013): 454-466.
Garreau, Joel. "Environmentalism as Religion." The New Atlantis 28 (2010): 61-74.
Nelson, Robert H. "Environmental religion: a theological critique." Case W. Res. L. Rev. 55 (2004): 51.
Das, Dibakar (September–October 2020). "When Environmentalism Clashes with Science". Skeptical Inquirer.
Vol. 44, no. 5. Amherst, New York: Center for Inquiry. pp. 54–55.
Further reading
Borowy, Iris. "Before UNEP: who was in charge of the global environment? The struggle for institutional responsibility 1968–72." Journal of Global History 14.1 (2019): 87-106.
Daynes, Byron W., and Glen Sussman, eds.
White House Politics and the Environment: Franklin D. Roosevelt to George W. Bush (Texas A&M University Press; 2010) 300 pages; evaluates how 12 presidents helped or hindered the cause of environmental protection.
Johnson, Erik W., and Scott Frickel, (2011). "Ecological Threat and the Founding of U.S. National Environmental Movement Organizations, 1962–1998," Social Problems 58 (Aug. 2011), 305–29.
Lear, Linda (1997). Rachel Carson: Witness for Nature.
New York: Henry Holt and Company.
ISBN 978-0-8050-3428-8.
Martell, Luke. "Ecology and Society: An Introduction". Polity Press, 1994.
John McCormick. 1995. The Global Environmental Movement.
John Wiley.
London. 312 pp.ISBN 9780471949404 OCLC 33832322
de Steiguer, J. Edward. 2006.  The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought.
University of Arizona Press.
Tucson. 246 pp.[ISBN missing]
Tooze, Adam, "Democracy and Its Discontents", The New York Review of Books, vol.
LXVI, no. 10 (6 June 2019), pp. 52–53, 56–57.  "Democracy has no clear answer for the mindless operation of bureaucratic and technological power.  We may indeed be witnessing its extension in the form of artificial intelligence and robotics.  Likewise, after decades of dire warning, the environmental problem remains fundamentally unaddressed.... Bureaucratic overreach and environmental catastrophe are precisely the kinds of slow-moving existential challenges that democracies deal with very badly.... Finally, there is the threat du jour:  corporations and the technologies they promote."  (pp. 56–57.)
Verweij, Marco; Thompson, Michael (eds), 2006, Clumsy Solutions for a Complex World: Governance, Politics and Plural Perceptions, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-230-00230-2
Vogel, David.
California Greenin': How the Golden State Became an Environmental Leader (2018) 280 pp  online review
Woodhouse, Keith M. "The Politics of Ecology: Environmentalism and Liberalism in the 1960s," Journal for the Study of Radicalism, Volume 2, Number 2, 2009, pp. 53–84
World Bank, 2003, "Sustainable Development in a Dynamic World: Transforming Institutions, Growth, and Quality of Life", World Development Report 2003, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and Oxford University Press.
External links
Quotations related to Environmentalism at Wikiquote
Media related to Environmentalism at Wikimedia Commons
Environment at Curlie
Westland – A Canadian television series (1984–2007) on a broad range of environmental issues, from the UBC Library Digital Collections
The Directory of Environmental Websites
Environmentalism
Outline of environmentalism
Key topics
Environmental movement
History
Organizations
Human impact on the environment
Disciplines
Communication
Ecology
Education
Ethics
Health
History
Humanities
Law
Philosophy
Psychology
Religion
Science
Sociology
ViewsPhilosophical
Biocentrism
Deep ecology
Ecocentrism
Resacralization of nature
Social ecology
Political
Bioconservatism
Bright green environmentalism
Eco-capitalism
Ecofascism
Ecofeminism
Eco-nationalism
Eco-socialism
Eco-terrorism
Ecomodernism
Free-market environmentalism
Green anarchism
Green left
Green liberalism
Green libertarianism
Green politics
Green syndicalism
Religious
Christianity
Evangelical
Islam
Judaism
Opposition
Anti-environmentalism
Environmental skepticism
Biophilia hypothesis
Environmentalism of the poor
Hairshirt environmentalism
Hardline
Nature conservation
Radical environmentalism
Offshoots
Anti-fracking movement
Anti-nuclear movement
Car-free movement
Climate movement
Conservation movement
Degrowth
Earth Optimism
Environmental justice
Flight shame
Slow movement
Goals
Circular economy
Climate change mitigation
Conservation community
Environmental protection
Environmental policy
Environmental, social and corporate governance
Greening
Green economy
Greenwashing
Natural resource management
Environmental resource management
Rights of nature
Short-haul flight ban
Sustainability
Vegetarianism
Protests
Tree sitting
By country
Australia
China
India
Chipko movement
New Zealand
South Africa
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
In culture
Art
Books
Film
list
festivals
horror
Journalism
The Lord of the Rings
Music
Ecomusicology
Motorsport
Sculpture
Publications
Environmentalists
Environmentalist
Environmental defender
Water protector
Environmental killings
Notable people
Sunderlal Bahuguna
Murray Bookchin
David Brower
Rachel Carson
Jacques Cousteau
Ng Cho-nam
Tim Flannery
Al Gore
Aldo Leopold
Wangari Maathai
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
Chico Mendes
John Muir
Theodore Roosevelt
Shōzō Tanaka
Greta Thunberg
Related topics
Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour
Land ethic
Lifeboat ethics
Tragedy of the commons
Environment portal
Environmental social scienceFields
Ecological anthropology
Ecological economics
Environmental anthropology
Environmental crime
Environmental economics
Environmental communication
Environmental history
Environmental politics
Environmental psychology
Environmental sociology
Human ecology
Human geography
Political ecology
Regional science
Related
Agroecology
Anthrozoology
Behavioral geography
Community studies
Demography
Design
ecological
environmental
Ecological humanities
Economics
energy
thermo
Environmental
education
ethics
law
science
studies
justice
racism
Ethnobiology
botany
ecology
zoology
Forestry
Industrial ecology
Integrated geography
Permaculture
Rural sociology
Sexecology
Science, technology and society
science studies
Sustainability
science
studies
Systems ecology
Urban
ecology
geography
metabolism
studies
Applied
Architecture
landscape
sustainable
Ecopsychology
Engineering
ecological
environmental
Green criminology
Health
environmental
epidemiology
occupational
public
Management
environmental
fisheries
forest
natural resource
waste
Planning
environmental
land use
regional
spatial
urban
Policy
energy
environmental
Environment portal
Category
Concepts
Degrees
Journals
Research institutes
Scholars
Environmental scienceMain fields
Atmospheric science
Biogeochemistry
Ecology
Environmental chemistry
Geosciences
Hydrology
Limnology
Oceanography
Soil science
Related fields
Biology
Chemistry
green
Ecological economics
Environmental design
Environmental economics
Environmental engineering
Environmental health
epidemiology
Environmental studies
Environmental toxicology
Geodesy
Physics
Radioecology
Sustainability science
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Applications
Energy conservation
Environmental technology
Natural resource management
Pollution control
Public transport encouragement
Recycling
Remediation
Renewable energy
Road ecology
Sewage treatment
Urban metabolism
Water purification
Waste management
Lists
Degrees
Journals
Research institutes
Glossary
Environment by year
See also
Human impact on the environment
Sustainability
Technogaianism
Category
scientists
Commons
Environment portal
WikiProject
Sustainability
Outline
Index
Principles
Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development
Consumption
Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Circular economy
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Micro-sustainability
Over-consumption
Simple living
Steady-state economy
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons
World population
Birth control
Demographic transition
Family planning
Control
Sustainable population
Women's education and empowerment
Technology
Appropriate
Environmental
Natural building
Biodiversity
Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species
Energy
Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Electrification
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Poverty
Rebound effect
Renewable
Food
Civic agriculture
Community-supported agriculture
Forest gardening
Foodscaping
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture
Vegetable box scheme
Water
Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed
Sanitation
Accountability
Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield
Applications
Organic movement
Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Space
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism
Management
Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Landscape
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste
Agreements and conferences
UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992)
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Lisbon Principles (1997)
Kyoto Protocol (1997)
Earth Charter (2000)
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals (2015)
Paris Agreement (2015)
UN Ocean Conference (2017)
Category
Lists
Science
Studies
Degrees
Portals: Earth sciences Ecology Environment Philosophy Politics Renewable energy Society
Authority control: National libraries 
Spain
France (data)
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 11:06 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
