Epistemology - Wikipedia
Epistemology
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Branch of philosophy concerning knowledge
"Theory of knowledge" redirects here.
For other uses, see Theory of knowledge (disambiguation).
"Epistemic" redirects here.
For the alternative name for cognitive science, see Epistemics.
For the album, see Epistemology (album).
This article needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Epistemology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onEpistemology
Category
Index
Outline
Core concepts
Belief
Justification
Knowledge
Truth
Distinctions
A priori vs.
A posteriori
Analytic vs. synthetic
Schools of thought
Empiricism
Naturalism
Pragmatism
Rationalism
Relativism
Skepticism
Topics and views
Certainty
Coherentism
Contextualism
Dogmatism
Experience
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Induction
Infallibilism
Infinitism
Perspectivism
Rationality
Reason
Solipsism
Specialized domains of inquiry
Applied epistemology
Evolutionary epistemology
Feminist epistemology
Formal epistemology
Metaepistemology
Social epistemology
Notable epistemologists
Aristotle
Sextus Empiricus
Edmund Gettier
René Descartes
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
W. V. O. Quine
more...
Related fields
Epistemic logic
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Probability
Part of a series onPhilosophyPlatoKantNietzscheBuddhaConfuciusAverroes
Branches
Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Linguistic
Logic
Mental
Metaphilosophy
Metaphysics
Political
Religious
Scientific
Social
Periods
Ancient
Ancient Egyptian
Ancient Greek
Medieval
Modern
Contemporary
Analytic
Continental
TraditionsTraditions by region
African
Ethiopia
Eastern philosophy
Chinese
Indian
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Vietnam
Indigenous American
Aztec philosophy
Middle Eastern philosophy
Iranian
Western
American
British
French
German
Italian
Russian
Traditions by religion
Buddhist
Confucian
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jain
Jewish
Taoist philosophy
Literature
Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Philosophers
Aestheticians
Epistemologists
Ethicists
Logicians
Metaphysicians
Social and political philosophers
Women in philosophy
Lists
Index
Outline
Years
Problems
Publications
Theories
Glossary
Philosophers
Philosophy portal
Epistemology (/ɪˌpɪstəˈmɒlədʒi/ (listen); from Ancient Greek  ἐπιστήμη (epistḗmē) 'knowledge', and  -logy), or the theory of knowledge, is the branch of philosophy concerned with knowledge.
Epistemology is considered a major subfield of philosophy, along with other major subfields such as ethics, logic, and metaphysics.
Epistemologists study the nature, origin, and scope of knowledge, epistemic justification, the rationality of belief, and various related issues. 
Debates in epistemology are generally clustered around four core areas:
The philosophical analysis of the nature of knowledge and the conditions required for a belief to constitute knowledge, such as truth and justification
Potential sources of knowledge and justified belief, such as perception, reason, memory, and testimony
The structure of a body of knowledge or justified belief, including whether all justified beliefs must be derived from justified foundational beliefs or whether justification requires only a coherent set of beliefs
Philosophical skepticism, which questions the possibility of knowledge, and related problems, such as whether skepticism poses a threat to our ordinary knowledge claims and whether it is possible to refute skeptical arguments
In these debates and others, epistemology aims to answer questions such as "What do we know?", "What does it mean to say that we know something?", "What makes justified beliefs justified?", and "How do we know that we know?".
Contents
Background
Etymology
The word epistemology is derived from the ancient Greek epistēmē, meaning "knowledge", and the suffix -logia, meaning "logical discourse" (derived from the Greek word logos meaning "discourse"). The word's appearance in English was predated by the German term Wissenschaftslehre (literally, theory of science), which was introduced by philosophers Johann Fichte and Bernard Bolzano in the late 18th century.
The word "epistemology" first appeared in 1847, in a review in New York's Eclectic Magazine.
It was first used as a translation of the word Wissenschaftslehre as it appears in a philosophical novel by German author Jean Paul:
The title of one of the principal works of Fichte is 'Wissenschaftslehre,' which, after the analogy of technology ... we render epistemology.
The word "epistemology" was properly introduced into Anglophone philosophical literature by Scottish philosopher James Frederick Ferrier in 1854, who used it in his Institutes of Metaphysics:
This section of the science is properly termed the Epistemology—the doctrine or theory of knowing, just as ontology is the science of being... It answers the general question, 'What is knowing and the known?'—or more shortly, 'What is knowledge?'
It is important to note that the French term épistémologie is used with a different and far narrower meaning than the English term "epistemology", being used by French philosophers to refer solely to philosophy of science.
For instance, Émile Meyerson opened his Identity and Reality, written in 1908, with the remark that the word 'is becoming current' as equivalent to 'the philosophy of the sciences.'
History of epistemology
Epistemology, as a distinct field of inquiry, predates the introduction of the term into the lexicon of philosophy.
John Locke, for instance, described his efforts in Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689) as an inquiry "into the original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge, together with the grounds and degrees of belief, opinion, and assent".
René Descartes, who is often credited as the father of modern philosophy, was often preoccupied with epistemological questions in his work.
Almost every major historical philosopher has considered questions about what we know and how we know it.
Among the Ancient Greek philosophers, Plato distinguished between inquiry regarding what we know and inquiry regarding what exists, particularly in the Republic, the Theaetetus, and the Meno.
A number of important epistemological concerns also appeared in the works of Aristotle.
During the subsequent Hellenistic period, philosophical schools began to appear which had a greater focus on epistemological questions, often in the form of philosophical skepticism.
For instance, the Pyrrhonian skepticism of Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus held that eudaimonia (flourishing, happiness, or "the good life") could be attained through the application of epoché (suspension of judgment) regarding all non-evident matters.
Pyrrhonism was particularly concerned with undermining the epistemological dogmas of Stoicism and Epicureanism.
The other major school of Hellenistic skepticism was Academic skepticism, most notably defended by Carneades and Arcesilaus, which predominated in the Platonic Academy for almost two centuries.
In ancient India the Ajñana school of ancient Indian philosophy promoted skepticism.
Ajñana was a Śramaṇa movement and a major rival of early Buddhism, Jainism and the Ājīvika school.
They held that it was impossible to obtain knowledge of metaphysical nature or ascertain the truth value of philosophical propositions; and even if knowledge was possible, it was useless and disadvantageous for final salvation.
They were specialized in refutation without propagating any positive doctrine of their own.
After the ancient philosophical era but before the modern philosophical era, a number of Medieval philosophers also engaged with epistemological questions at length.
Most notable among the Medievals for their contributions to epistemology were Thomas Aquinas, John Duns Scotus, and William of Ockham.
In the Islamic epistemology Islamic Golden Age which was booming prior to the Age of Enlightenment in Europe.
One of the most prominent and influential philosophers, theologians, jurists, logicians and mystics Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali wrote over 70 books, including his best-known work in 1107 CE, his spiritual autobiography, "Deliverance from Error" (Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal). In this book Al-Ghazali was seeking to know what we can be certain about: what is true knowledge and not just opinion? To accomplish this goal, he would first consider what kinds of things we can know.
This involves a study of epistemology, the theory of knowledge.[citation needed]
Epistemology largely came to the fore in philosophy during the early modern period, which historians of philosophy traditionally divide up into a dispute between empiricists (including Francis Bacon, John Locke, David Hume, and George Berkeley) and rationalists (including René Descartes, Baruch Spinoza, and Gottfried Leibniz). The debate between them has often been framed using the question of whether knowledge comes primarily from sensory experience (empiricism), or whether a significant portion of our knowledge is derived entirely from our faculty of reason (rationalism). According to some scholars, this dispute was resolved in the late 18th century by Immanuel Kant,[citation needed] whose transcendental idealism famously made room for the view that "though all our knowledge begins with experience, it by no means follows that all [knowledge] arises out of experience".
Contemporary historiography
The neutrality of this section is disputed.
Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page.
Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are a number of different methods that contemporary scholars use when trying to understand the relationship between past epistemology and contemporary epistemology.
One of the most contentious questions is this: "Should we assume that the problems of epistemology are perennial, and that trying to reconstruct and evaluate Plato's or Hume's or Kant's arguments is meaningful for current debates, too?" Similarly, there is also a question of whether contemporary philosophers should aim to rationally reconstruct and evaluate historical views in epistemology, or to merely describe them.
Barry Stroud claims that doing epistemology competently requires the historical study of past attempts to find philosophical understanding of the nature and scope of human knowledge.
He argues that since inquiry may progress over time, we may not realize how different the questions that contemporary epistemologists ask are from questions asked at various different points in the history of philosophy.
Central concepts in epistemology
Knowledge
Bertrand Russell famously brought attention to the distinction between propositional knowledge and knowledge by acquaintance.
Main article: Knowledge
Nearly all debates in epistemology are in some way related to knowledge.
Most generally, "knowledge" is a familiarity, awareness, or understanding of someone or something, which might include facts (propositional knowledge), skills (procedural knowledge), or objects (acquaintance knowledge). Philosophers tend to draw an important distinction between three different senses of "knowing" something: "knowing that" (knowing the truth of propositions), "knowing how" (understanding how to perform certain actions), and "knowing by acquaintance" (directly perceiving an object, being familiar with it, or otherwise coming into contact with it). Epistemology is primarily concerned with the first of these forms of knowledge, propositional knowledge.
All three senses of "knowing" can be seen in our ordinary use of the word.
In mathematics, you can know that 2 + 2 = 4, but there is also knowing how to add two numbers, and knowing a person (e.g., knowing other persons, or knowing oneself), place (e.g., one's hometown), thing (e.g., cars), or activity (e.g., addition). While these distinctions are not explicit in English, they are explicitly made in other languages, including French, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, German and Dutch (although some languages closely related to English have been said to retain these verbs, such as Scots).[note 1] The theoretical interpretation and significance of these linguistic issues remains controversial.
In his paper On Denoting and his later book Problems of Philosophy, Bertrand Russell brought a great deal of attention to the distinction between "knowledge by description" and "knowledge by acquaintance". Gilbert Ryle is similarly credited with bringing more attention to the distinction between knowing how and knowing that in The Concept of Mind.
In Personal Knowledge, Michael Polanyi argues for the epistemological relevance of knowledge how and knowledge that; using the example of the act of balance involved in riding a bicycle, he suggests that the theoretical knowledge of the physics involved in maintaining a state of balance cannot substitute for the practical knowledge of how to ride, and that it is important to understand how both are established and grounded.
This position is essentially Ryle's, who argued that a failure to acknowledge the distinction between "knowledge that" and "knowledge how" leads to infinite regress.
A priori and a posteriori knowledge
Main article: A priori and a posteriori
One of the most important distinctions in epistemology is between what can be known a priori (independently of experience) and what can be known a posteriori (through experience). The terms originate from the Analytic methods of Aristotle's Organon, and may be roughly defined as follows:
A priori knowledge is knowledge that is known independently of experience (that is, it is non-empirical, or arrived at before experience, usually by reason). It will henceforth be acquired through anything that is independent from experience.
A posteriori knowledge is knowledge that is known by experience (that is, it is empirical, or arrived at through experience).
Views that emphasize the importance of a priori knowledge are generally classified as rationalist.
Views that emphasize the importance of a posteriori knowledge are generally classified as empiricist.[citation needed]
Belief
Main article: Belief
One of the core concepts in epistemology is belief.
A belief is an attitude that a person holds regarding anything that they take to be true.
For instance, to believe that snow is white is comparable to accepting the truth of the proposition "snow is white". Beliefs can be occurrent (e.g. a person actively thinking "snow is white"), or they can be dispositional (e.g. a person who if asked about the color of snow would assert "snow is white"). While there is not universal agreement about the nature of belief, most contemporary philosophers hold the view that a disposition to express belief B qualifies as holding the belief B. There are various different ways that contemporary philosophers have tried to describe beliefs, including as representations of ways that the world could be (Jerry Fodor), as dispositions to act as if certain things are true (Roderick Chisholm), as interpretive schemes for making sense of someone's actions (Daniel Dennett and Donald Davidson), or as mental states that fill a particular function (Hilary Putnam). Some have also attempted to offer significant revisions to our notion of belief, including eliminativists about belief who argue that there is no phenomenon in the natural world which corresponds to our folk psychological concept of belief (Paul Churchland) and formal epistemologists who aim to replace our bivalent notion of belief ("either I have a belief or I don't have a belief") with the more permissive, probabilistic notion of credence ("there is an entire spectrum of degrees of belief, not a simple dichotomy between belief and non-belief").
While belief plays a significant role in epistemological debates surrounding knowledge and justification, it also has many other philosophical debates in its own right.
Notable debates include: "What is the rational way to revise one's beliefs when presented with various sorts of evidence?"; "Is the content of our beliefs entirely determined by our mental states, or do the relevant facts have any bearing on our beliefs (e.g. if I believe that I'm holding a glass of water, is the non-mental fact that water is H2O part of the content of that belief)?"; "How fine-grained or coarse-grained are our beliefs?"; and "Must it be possible for a belief to be expressible in language, or are there non-linguistic beliefs?"
Truth
Main article: Truth
Truth is the property or state of being in accordance with facts or reality.
On most views, truth is the correspondence of language or thought to a mind-independent world.
This is called the correspondence theory of truth.
Among philosophers who think that it is possible to analyze the conditions necessary for knowledge, virtually all of them accept that truth is such a condition.
There is much less agreement about the extent to which a knower must know why something is true in order to know.
On such views, something being known implies that it is true.
However, this should not be confused for the more contentious view that one must know that one knows in order to know (the KK principle).
Epistemologists disagree about whether belief is the only truth-bearer.
Other common suggestions for things that can bear the property of being true include propositions, sentences, thoughts, utterances, and judgments.
Plato, in his Gorgias, argues that belief is the most commonly invoked truth-bearer.[clarification needed]
Many of the debates regarding truth are at the crossroads of epistemology and logic.
Some contemporary debates regarding truth include: How do we define truth? Is it even possible to give an informative definition of truth? What things are truth-bearers and are therefore capable of being true or false? Are truth and falsity bivalent, or are there other truth values? What are the criteria of truth that allow us to identify it and to distinguish it from falsity? What role does truth play in constituting knowledge? And is truth absolute, or is it merely relative to one's perspective?
Justification
Main article: Justification (epistemology)
As the term "justification" is used in epistemology, a belief is justified if one has good reason for holding it.
Loosely speaking, justification is the reason that someone holds a rationally admissible belief, on the assumption that it is a good reason for holding it.
Sources of justification might include perceptual experience (the evidence of the senses), reason, and authoritative testimony, among others.
Importantly however, a belief being justified does not guarantee that the belief is true, since a person could be justified in forming beliefs based on very convincing evidence that was nonetheless deceiving.
Internalism and externalism
Main article: Internalism and externalism
A central debate about the nature of justification is a debate between epistemological externalists on the one hand and epistemological internalists on the other.
While epistemic externalism first arose in attempts to overcome the Gettier problem, it has flourished in the time since as an alternative way of conceiving of epistemic justification.
The initial development of epistemic externalism is often attributed to Alvin Goldman, although numerous other philosophers have worked on the topic in the time since.
Externalists hold that factors deemed "external", meaning outside of the psychological states of those who gain knowledge, can be conditions of justification.
For example, an externalist response to the Gettier problem is to say that for a justified true belief to count as knowledge, there must be a link or dependency between the belief and the state of the external world.
Usually, this is understood to be a causal link.
Such causation, to the extent that it is "outside" the mind, would count as an external, knowledge-yielding condition.
Internalists, on the other hand, assert that all knowledge-yielding conditions are within the psychological states of those who gain knowledge.
Though unfamiliar with the internalist/externalist debate himself, many point to René Descartes as an early example of the internalist path to justification.
He wrote that because the only method by which we perceive the external world is through our senses, and that, because the senses are not infallible, we should not consider our concept of knowledge infallible.
The only way to find anything that could be described as "indubitably true", he advocates, would be to see things "clearly and distinctly". He argued that if there is an omnipotent, good being who made the world, then it's reasonable to believe that people are made with the ability to know.
However, this does not mean that man's ability to know is perfect.
God gave man the ability to know but not with omniscience.
Descartes said that man must use his capacities for knowledge correctly and carefully through methodological doubt.
The dictum "Cogito ergo sum" (I think, therefore I am) is also commonly associated with Descartes's theory.
In his own methodological doubt—doubting everything he previously knew so he could start from a blank slate—the first thing that he could not logically bring himself to doubt was his own existence: "I do not exist" would be a contradiction in terms.
The act of saying that one does not exist assumes that someone must be making the statement in the first place.
Descartes could doubt his senses, his body, and the world around him—but he could not deny his own existence, because he was able to doubt and must exist to manifest that doubt.
Even if some "evil genius" were deceiving him, he would have to exist to be deceived.
This one sure point provided him with what he called his Archimedean point, in order to further develop his foundation for knowledge.
Simply put, Descartes's epistemological justification depended on his indubitable belief in his own existence and his clear and distinct knowledge of God.
Defining knowledge
Main article: Definitions of knowledge
A central issue in epistemology is the question of what the nature of knowledge is or how to define it.
Sometimes the expressions "theory of knowledge" and "analysis of knowledge" are used specifically for this form of inquiry.
The term "knowledge" has various meanings in natural language.
It can refer to an awareness of facts, as in knowing that Mars is a planet, to a possession of skills, as in knowing how to swim, or to an experiential acquaintance, as in knowing Daniel Craig personally.
Factual knowledge, also referred to as propositional knowledge or descriptive knowledge, plays a special role in epistemology.
On the linguistic level, it is distinguished from the other forms of knowledge since it can be expressed through a that-clause, i.e. using a formulation like "They know that..." followed by the known proposition.
Some features of factual knowledge are widely accepted: it is a form of cognitive success that establishes epistemic contact with reality.
However, there are still various disagreements about its exact nature even though it has been studied intensely.
Different factors are responsible for these disagreements.
Some theorists try to furnish a practically useful definition by describing its most noteworthy and easily identifiable features.
Others engage in an analysis of knowledge, which aims to provide a theoretically precise definition that identifies the set of essential features characteristic for all instances of knowledge and only for them.
Differences in the methodology may also cause disagreements.
In this regard, some epistemologists use abstract and general intuitions in order to arrive at their definitions.
A different approach is to start from concrete individual cases of knowledge to determine what all of them have in common.
Yet another method is to focus on linguistic evidence by studying how the term "knowledge" is commonly used.
Different standards of knowledge are further sources of disagreement.
A few theorists set these standards very high by demanding that absolute certainty or infallibility is necessary.
On such a view, knowledge is a very rare thing.
Theorists more in tune with ordinary language usually demand lower standards and see knowledge as something commonly found in everyday life.
As justified true belief
The historically most influential definition, discussed since ancient Greek philosophy, characterizes knowledge in relation to three essential features: as (1) a belief that is (2) true and (3) justified.
There is still wide acceptance that the first two features are correct, i.e. that knowledge is a mental state that affirms a true proposition.
However, there is a lot of dispute about the third feature: justification.
This feature is usually included to distinguish knowledge from true beliefs that rest on superstition, lucky guesses, or faulty reasoning.
This expresses the idea that knowledge is not the same as being right about something.
Traditionally, justification is understood as the possession of evidence: a belief is justified if the believer has good evidence supporting it.
Such evidence could be a perceptual experience, a memory, or a second belief.
Gettier problem and alternative definitions
An Euler diagram representing a version of the traditional definition of knowledge that is adapted to the Gettier problem.
This problem gives us reason to think that not all justified true beliefs constitute knowledge.
The justified-true-belief account of knowledge came under severe criticism in the second half of the 20th century, when Edmund Gettier proposed various counterexamples.
In a famous so-called Gettier-case, a person is driving on a country road.
There are many barn façades along this road and only one real barn.
But it is not possible to tell the difference between them from the road.
The person then stops by a fortuitous coincidence in front of the only real barn and forms the belief that it is a barn.
The idea behind this thought experiment is that this is not knowledge even though the belief is both justified and true.
The reason is that it is just a lucky accident since the person cannot tell the difference: they would have formed exactly the same justified belief if they had stopped at another site, in which case the belief would have been false.
Various additional examples were proposed along similar lines.
Most of them involve a justified true belief that apparently fails to amount to knowledge because the belief's justification is in some sense not relevant to its truth.
These counterexamples have provoked very diverse responses.
Some theorists think that one only needs to modify one's conception of justification to avoid them.
But the more common approach is to search for an additional criterion.
On this view, all cases of knowledge involve a justified true belief but some justified true beliefs do not amount to knowledge since they lack this additional feature.
There are diverse suggestions for this fourth criterion.
Some epistemologists require that no false belief is involved in the justification or that no defeater of the belief is present.
A different approach is to require that the belief tracks truth, i.e. that the person would not have the belief if it was false.
Some even require that the justification has to be infallible, i.e. that it necessitates the belief's truth.
A quite different approach is to affirm that the justified-true-belief account of knowledge is deeply flawed and to seek a complete reconceptualization of knowledge.
These reconceptualizations often do not require justification at all.
One such approach is to require that the true belief was produced by a reliable process.
Naturalized epistemologists often hold that the believed fact has to cause the belief.
Virtue theorists are also interested in how the belief is produced.
For them, the belief must be a manifestation of a cognitive virtue.
The value problem
We generally assume that knowledge is more valuable than mere true belief.
If so, what is the explanation? A formulation of the value problem in epistemology first occurs in Plato's Meno.
Socrates points out to Meno that a man who knew the way to Larissa could lead others there correctly.
But so, too, could a man who had true beliefs about how to get there, even if he had not gone there or had any knowledge of Larissa.
Socrates says that it seems that both knowledge and true opinion can guide action.
Meno then wonders why knowledge is valued more than true belief and why knowledge and true belief are different.
Socrates responds that knowledge is more valuable than mere true belief because it is tethered or justified.
Justification, or working out the reason for a true belief, locks down true belief.
The problem is to identify what (if anything) makes knowledge more valuable than mere true belief, or that makes knowledge more valuable than a mere minimal conjunction of its components, such as justification, safety, sensitivity, statistical likelihood, and anti-Gettier conditions, on a particular analysis of knowledge that conceives of knowledge as divided into components (to which knowledge-first epistemological theories, which posit knowledge as fundamental, are notable exceptions). The value problem re-emerged in the philosophical literature on epistemology in the twenty-first century following the rise of virtue epistemology in the 1980s, partly because of the obvious link to the concept of value in ethics.
Virtue epistemology
Main article: Virtue epistemology
In contemporary philosophy, epistemologists including Ernest Sosa, John Greco, Jonathan Kvanvig, Linda Zagzebski, and Duncan Pritchard have defended virtue epistemology as a solution to the value problem.
They argue that epistemology should also evaluate the "properties" of people as epistemic agents (i.e. intellectual virtues), rather than merely the properties of propositions and propositional mental attitudes.
The value problem has been presented as an argument against epistemic reliabilism by Linda Zagzebski, Wayne Riggs, and Richard Swinburne, among others.
Zagzebski analogizes the value of knowledge to the value of espresso produced by an espresso maker: "The liquid in this cup is not improved by the fact that it comes from a reliable espresso maker.
If the espresso tastes good, it makes no difference if it comes from an unreliable machine." For Zagzebski, the value of knowledge deflates to the value of mere true belief.
She assumes that reliability in itself has no value or disvalue, but Goldman and Olsson disagree.
They point out that Zagzebski's conclusion rests on the assumption of veritism: all that matters is the acquisition of true belief.
To the contrary, they argue that a reliable process for acquiring a true belief adds value to the mere true belief by making it more likely that future beliefs of a similar kind will be true.
By analogy, having a reliable espresso maker that produced a good cup of espresso would be more valuable than having an unreliable one that luckily produced a good cup because the reliable one would more likely produce good future cups compared to the unreliable one.
The value problem is important to assessing the adequacy of theories of knowledge that conceive of knowledge as consisting of true belief and other components.
According to Kvanvig, an adequate account of knowledge should resist counterexamples and allow an explanation of the value of knowledge over mere true belief.
Should a theory of knowledge fail to do so, it would prove inadequate.
One of the more influential responses to the problem is that knowledge is not particularly valuable and is not what ought to be the main focus of epistemology.
Instead, epistemologists ought to focus on other mental states, such as understanding.
Advocates of virtue epistemology have argued that the value of knowledge comes from an internal relationship between the knower and the mental state of believing.
Acquiring knowledge
Sources of knowledge
There are many proposed sources of knowledge and justified belief which we take to be actual sources of knowledge in our everyday lives.
Some of the most commonly discussed include perception, reason, memory, and testimony.
Important distinctions
A priori–a posteriori distinction
Main article: A priori and a posteriori
As mentioned above, epistemologists draw a distinction between what can be known a priori (independently of experience) and what can only be known a posteriori (through experience). Much of what we call a priori knowledge is thought to be attained through reason alone, as featured prominently in rationalism.
This might also include a non-rational faculty of intuition, as defended by proponents of innatism.
In contrast, a posteriori knowledge is derived entirely through experience or as a result of experience, as emphasized in empiricism.
This also includes cases where knowledge can be traced back to an earlier experience, as in memory or testimony.
A way to look at the difference between the two is through an example.
Bruce Russell gives two propositions in which the reader decides which one he believes more.[clarification needed] Option A: All crows are birds.  Option B: All crows are black.  If you believe option A, then you are a priori justified in believing it because you don't have to see a crow to know it's a bird.  If you believe in option B, then you are posteriori justified to believe it because you have seen many crows therefore knowing they are black.  He goes on to say that it doesn't matter if the statement is true or not, only that if you believe in one or the other that matters.
The idea of a priori knowledge is that it is based on intuition or rational insights.  Laurence BonJour says in his article "The Structure of Empirical Knowledge", that a "rational insight is an immediate, non-inferential grasp, apprehension or 'seeing' that some proposition is necessarily true." (3) Going back to the crow example, by Laurence BonJour's definition the reason you would believe in option A is because you have an immediate knowledge that a crow is a bird, without ever experiencing one.
Evolutionary psychology takes a novel approach to the problem.
It says that there is an innate predisposition for certain types of learning. "Only small parts of the brain resemble a tabula rasa; this is true even for human beings.
The remainder is more like an exposed negative waiting to be dipped into a developer fluid".
Analytic–synthetic distinction
The analytic–synthetic distinction was first proposed by Immanuel Kant.
Main article: Analytic–synthetic distinction
Immanuel Kant, in his Critique of Pure Reason, drew a distinction between "analytic" and "synthetic" propositions.
He contended that some propositions are such that we can know they are true just by understanding their meaning.
For example, consider, "My father's brother is my uncle." We can know it is true solely by virtue of our understanding in what its terms mean.
Philosophers call such propositions "analytic". Synthetic propositions, on the other hand, have distinct subjects and predicates.
An example would be, "My father's brother has black hair." Kant stated that all mathematical and scientific statements are analytic priori propositions because they are necessarily true but our knowledge about the attributes of the mathematical or physical subjects we can only get by logical inference.
While this distinction is first and foremost about meaning and is therefore most relevant to the philosophy of language, the distinction has significant epistemological consequences, seen most prominently in the works of the logical positivists.
In particular, if the set of propositions which can only be known a posteriori is coextensive with the set of propositions which are synthetically true, and if the set of propositions which can be known a priori is coextensive with the set of propositions which are analytically true (or in other words, which are true by definition), then there can only be two kinds of successful inquiry: Logico-mathematical inquiry, which investigates what is true by definition, and empirical inquiry, which investigates what is true in the world.
Most notably, this would exclude the possibility that branches of philosophy like metaphysics could ever provide informative accounts of what actually exists.
The American philosopher Willard Van Orman Quine, in his paper "Two Dogmas of Empiricism", famously challenged the analytic-synthetic distinction, arguing that the boundary  between the two is too blurry to provide a clear division between propositions that are true by definition and propositions that are not.
While some contemporary philosophers take themselves to have offered more sustainable accounts of the distinction that are not vulnerable to Quine's objections, there is no consensus about whether or not these succeed.
Science as knowledge acquisition
Main article: Philosophy of science
Science is often considered to be a refined, formalized, systematic, institutionalized form of the pursuit and acquisition of empirical knowledge.
As such, the philosophy of science may be viewed variously as an application of the principles of epistemology or as a foundation for epistemological inquiry.
The regress problem
Main article: Regress argument
The regress problem (also known as Agrippa's Trilemma) is the problem of providing a complete logical foundation for human knowledge.
The traditional way of supporting a rational argument is to appeal to other rational arguments, typically using chains of reason and rules of logic.
A classic example that goes back to Aristotle is deducing that Socrates is mortal.
We have a logical rule that says All humans are mortal and an assertion that Socrates is human and we deduce that Socrates is mortal.
In this example how do we know that Socrates is human? Presumably we apply other rules such as:  All born from human females are human.
Which then leaves open the question how do we know that all born from humans are human? This is the regress problem: how can we eventually terminate a logical argument with some statements that do not require further justification but can still be considered rational and justified? As John Pollock stated:
... to justify a belief one must appeal to a further justified belief.
This means that one of two things can be the case.
Either there are some beliefs that we can be justified for holding, without being able to justify them on the basis of any other belief, or else for each justified belief there is an infinite regress of (potential) justification [the nebula theory]. On this theory there is no rock bottom of justification.
Justification just meanders in and out through our network of beliefs, stopping nowhere.
The apparent impossibility of completing an infinite chain of reasoning is thought by some to support skepticism.
It is also the impetus for Descartes's famous dictum: I think, therefore I am.
Descartes was looking for some logical statement that could be true without appeal to other statements.
Responses to the regress problem
Many epistemologists studying justification have attempted to argue for various types of chains of reasoning that can escape the regress problem.
Foundationalism
Foundationalists respond to the regress problem by asserting that certain "foundations" or "basic beliefs" support other beliefs but do not themselves require justification from other beliefs.
These beliefs might be justified because they are self-evident, infallible, or derive from reliable cognitive mechanisms.
Perception, memory, and a priori intuition are often considered possible examples of basic beliefs.
The chief criticism of foundationalism is that if a belief is not supported by other beliefs, accepting it may be arbitrary or unjustified.
Coherentism
Another response to the regress problem is coherentism, which is the rejection of the assumption that the regress proceeds according to a pattern of linear justification.
To avoid the charge of circularity, coherentists hold that an individual belief is justified circularly by the way it fits together (coheres) with the rest of the belief system of which it is a part.
This theory has the advantage of avoiding the infinite regress without claiming special, possibly arbitrary status for some particular class of beliefs.
Yet, since a system can be coherent while also being wrong, coherentists face the difficulty of ensuring that the whole system corresponds to reality.
Additionally, most logicians agree that any argument that is circular is, at best, only trivially valid.
That is, to be illuminating, arguments must operate with information from multiple premises, not simply conclude by reiterating a premise.
Nigel Warburton writes in Thinking from A to Z that "[c]ircular arguments are not invalid; in other words, from a logical point of view there is nothing intrinsically wrong with them.
However, they are, when viciously circular, spectacularly uninformative."
Infinitism
An alternative resolution to the regress problem is known as "infinitism". Infinitists take the infinite series to be merely potential, in the sense that an individual may have indefinitely many reasons available to them, without having consciously thought through all of these reasons when the need arises.
This position is motivated in part by the desire to avoid what is seen as the arbitrariness and circularity of its chief competitors, foundationalism and coherentism.
The most prominent defense of infinitism has been given by Peter Klein.
Foundherentism
An intermediate position, known as "foundherentism", is advanced by Susan Haack.
Foundherentism is meant to unify foundationalism and coherentism.
Haack explains the view by using a crossword puzzle as an analogy.
Whereas, for example, infinitists regard the regress of reasons as taking the form of a single line that continues indefinitely, Haack has argued that chains of properly justified beliefs look more like a crossword puzzle, with various different lines mutually supporting each other.
Thus, Haack's view leaves room for both chains of beliefs that are "vertical" (terminating in foundational beliefs) and chains that are "horizontal" (deriving their justification from coherence with beliefs that are also members of foundationalist chains of belief).
Schools of thought in epistemology
Empiricism
David Hume, one of the most staunch defenders of empiricism.
Main article: Empiricism
Empiricism is a view in the theory of knowledge which focuses on the role of experience, especially experience based on perceptual observations by the senses, in the generation of knowledge.
Certain forms exempt disciplines such as mathematics and logic from these requirements.
There are many variants of empiricism, including British empiricism, logical empiricism, phenomenalism, and some versions of common sense philosophy.
Most forms of empiricism give epistemologically privileged status to sensory impressions or sense data, although this plays out very differently in different cases.
Some of the most famous historical empiricists include John Locke, David Hume, George Berkeley, Francis Bacon, John Stuart Mill, Rudolf Carnap, and Bertrand Russell.
Rationalism
Main article: Rationalism
Rationalism is the epistemological view that reason is the chief source of knowledge and the main determinant of what constitutes knowledge.
More broadly, it can also refer to any view which appeals to reason as a source of knowledge or justification.
Rationalism is one of the two classical views in epistemology, the other being empiricism.
Rationalists claim that the mind, through the use of reason, can directly grasp certain truths in various domains, including logic, mathematics, ethics, and metaphysics.
Rationalist views can range from modest views in mathematics and logic (such as that of Gottlob Frege) to ambitious metaphysical systems (such as that of Baruch Spinoza).
Some of the most famous rationalists include Plato, René Descartes, Baruch Spinoza, and Gottfried Leibniz.
Skepticism
Main article: Philosophical skepticism
Skepticism is a position that questions the possibility of human knowledge, either in particular domains or on a general level.
Skepticism does not refer to any one specific school of philosophy, but is rather a thread that runs through many epistemological debates.
Ancient Greek skepticism began during the Hellenistic period in philosophy, which featured both Pyrrhonism (notably defended by Pyrrho, Sextus Empiricus, and Aenesidemus) and Academic skepticism (notably defended by Arcesilaus and Carneades). Among ancient Indian philosophers, skepticism was notably defended by the Ajñana school and in the Buddhist Madhyamika tradition.
In modern philosophy, René Descartes' famous inquiry into mind and body began as an exercise in skepticism, in which he started by trying to doubt all purported cases of knowledge in order to search for something that was known with absolute certainty.
Epistemic skepticism questions whether knowledge is possible at all.
Generally speaking, skeptics argue that knowledge requires certainty, and that most or all of our beliefs are fallible (meaning that our grounds for holding them always, or almost always, fall short of certainty), which would together entail that knowledge is always or almost always impossible for us.
Characterizing knowledge as strong or weak is dependent on a person's viewpoint and their characterization of knowledge.
Much of modern epistemology is derived from attempts to better understand and address philosophical skepticism.
Pyrrhonism
Main article: Pyrrhonism
One of the oldest forms of epistemic skepticism can be found in Agrippa's trilemma (named after the Pyrrhonist philosopher Agrippa the Skeptic) which demonstrates that certainty can not be achieved with regard to beliefs.
Pyrrhonism dates back to Pyrrho of Elis from the 4th century BCE, although most of what we know about Pyrrhonism today is from the surviving works of Sextus Empiricus.
Pyrrhonists claim that for any argument for a non-evident proposition, an equally convincing argument for a contradictory proposition can be produced.
Pyrrhonists do not dogmatically deny the possibility of knowledge, but instead point out that beliefs about non-evident matters cannot be substantiated.
Cartesian skepticism
The Cartesian evil demon problem, first raised by René Descartes,[note 2] supposes that our sensory impressions may be controlled by some external power rather than the result of ordinary veridical perception.
In such a scenario, nothing we sense would actually exist, but would instead be mere illusion.
As a result, we would never be able to know anything about the world, since we would be systematically deceived about everything.
The conclusion often drawn from evil demon skepticism is that even if we are not completely deceived, all of the information provided by our senses is still compatible with skeptical scenarios in which we are completely deceived, and that we must therefore either be able to exclude the possibility of deception or else must deny the possibility of infallible knowledge (that is, knowledge which is completely certain) beyond our immediate sensory impressions.
While the view that no beliefs are beyond doubt other than our immediate sensory impressions is often ascribed to Descartes, he in fact thought that we can exclude the possibility that we are systematically deceived, although his reasons for thinking this are based on a highly contentious ontological argument for the existence of a benevolent God who would not allow such deception to occur.
Responses to philosophical skepticism
Epistemological skepticism can be classified as either "mitigated" or "unmitigated" skepticism.
Mitigated skepticism rejects "strong" or "strict" knowledge claims but does approve weaker ones, which can be considered "virtual knowledge", but only with regard to justified beliefs.  Unmitigated skepticism rejects claims of both virtual and strong knowledge.
Characterizing knowledge as strong, weak, virtual or genuine can be determined differently depending on a person's viewpoint as well as their characterization of knowledge.
Some of the most notable attempts to respond to unmitigated skepticism include direct realism, disjunctivism, common sense philosophy, pragmatism, fideism, and fictionalism.
Pragmatism
Main article: Pragmatism
Pragmatism is a fallibilist epistemology that emphasizes the role of action in knowing.
Different interpretations of pragmatism variously emphasize: truth as the final outcome of ideal scientific inquiry and experimentation, truth as closely related to usefulness, experience as transacting with instead of representing nature, and human practices as the foundation of language.
Pragmatism's origins are often attributed to Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, and John Dewey.
In 1878, Peirce formulated the maxim: "Consider what effects, that might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have.
Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object."
William James suggested that through a pragmatist epistemology, theories "become instruments, not answers to enigmas in which we can rest".: 28  In James's pragmatic method, which he adapted from Peirce, metaphysical disputes can be settled by tracing the practical consequences of the different sides of the argument.
If this process does not resolve the dispute, then "the dispute is idle".: 25 
Contemporary versions of pragmatism have been developed by thinkers such as Richard Rorty and Hilary Putnam.
Rorty proposed that values were historically contingent and dependent upon their utility within a given historical period.
Contemporary philosophers working in pragmatism are called neopragmatists, and also include Nicholas Rescher, Robert Brandom, Susan Haack, and Cornel West.
Naturalized epistemology
Main article: Naturalized epistemology
In certain respects an intellectual descendant of pragmatism, naturalized epistemology considers the evolutionary role of knowledge for agents living and evolving in the world.
It de-emphasizes the questions around justification and truth, and instead asks, empirically, how reliable beliefs are formed and the role that evolution played in the development of such processes.
It suggests a more empirical approach to the subject as a whole, leaving behind philosophical definitions and consistency arguments, and instead using psychological methods to study and understand how "knowledge" is actually formed and is used in the natural world.
As such, it does not attempt to answer the analytic questions of traditional epistemology, but rather replace them with new empirical ones.
Naturalized epistemology was first proposed in "Epistemology Naturalized", a seminal paper by W.V.O. Quine.
A less radical view has been defended by Hilary Kornblith in Knowledge and its Place in Nature, in which he seeks to turn epistemology towards empirical investigation without completely abandoning traditional epistemic concepts.
Epistemic relativism
Main article: Relativism
Epistemic relativism is the view that what is true, rational, or justified for one person need not be true, rational, or justified for another person.
Epistemic relativists therefore assert that while there are relative facts about truth, rationality, justification, and so on, there is no perspective-independent fact of the matter.
Note that this is distinct from epistemic contextualism, which holds that the meaning of epistemic terms vary across contexts (e.g. "I know" might mean something different in everyday contexts and skeptical contexts). In contrast, epistemic relativism holds that the relevant facts vary, not just linguistic meaning.
Relativism about truth may also be a form of ontological relativism, insofar as relativists about truth hold that facts about what exists vary based on perspective.
Epistemic constructivism
Main article: Social constructivism
Constructivism is a view in philosophy according to which all "knowledge is a compilation of human-made constructions", "not the neutral discovery of an objective truth". Whereas objectivism is concerned with the "object of our knowledge", constructivism emphasizes "how we construct knowledge". Constructivism proposes new definitions for knowledge and truth, which emphasize intersubjectivity rather than objectivity, and viability rather than truth.
The constructivist point of view is in many ways comparable to certain forms of pragmatism.
Epistemic idealism
Main article: Idealism
Idealism is a broad term referring to both an ontological view about the world being in some sense mind-dependent and a corresponding epistemological view that everything we know can be reduced to mental phenomena.
First and foremost, "idealism" is a metaphysical doctrine.
As an epistemological doctrine, idealism shares a great deal with both empiricism and rationalism.
Some of the most famous empiricists have been classified as idealists (particularly Berkeley), and yet the subjectivism inherent to idealism also resembles that of Descartes in many respects.
Many idealists believe that knowledge is primarily (at least in some areas) acquired by a priori processes, or that it is innate—for example, in the form of concepts not derived from experience.
The relevant theoretical concepts may purportedly be part of the structure of the human mind (as in Kant's theory of transcendental idealism), or they may be said to exist independently of the mind (as in Plato's theory of Forms).
Some of the most famous forms of idealism include transcendental idealism (developed by Immanuel Kant), subjective idealism (developed by George Berkeley), and absolute idealism (developed by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Friedrich Schelling).
Bayesian epistemology
Bayesian epistemology is a formal approach to various topics in epistemology that has its roots in Thomas Bayes' work in the field of probability theory.
One advantage of its formal method in contrast to traditional epistemology is that its concepts and theorems can be defined with a high degree of precision.
It is based on the idea that beliefs can be interpreted as subjective probabilities.
As such, they are subject to the laws of probability theory, which act as the norms of rationality.
These norms can be divided into static constraints, governing the rationality of beliefs at any moment, and dynamic constraints, governing how rational agents should change their beliefs upon receiving new evidence.
The most characteristic Bayesian expression of these principles is found in the form of Dutch books, which illustrate irrationality in agents through a series of bets that lead to a loss for the agent no matter which of the probabilistic events occurs.
Bayesians have applied these fundamental principles to various epistemological topics but Bayesianism does not cover all topics of traditional epistemology.
Feminist epistemology
Main article: Feminist epistemology
Feminist epistemology is a subfield of epistemology which applies feminist theory to epistemological questions.
It began to emerge as a distinct subfield in the 20th century.
Prominent feminist epistemologists include Miranda Fricker (who developed the concept of epistemic injustice), Donna Haraway (who first proposed the concept of situated knowledge), Sandra Harding, and Elizabeth Anderson.
Harding proposes that feminist epistemology can be broken into three distinct categories: Feminist empiricism, standpoint epistemology, and postmodern epistemology.
Feminist epistemology has also played a significant role in the development of many debates in social epistemology.
Decolonial epistemology
Main article: Decolonization of knowledge
Epistemicide is a term used in decolonisation studies that describes the killing of knowledge systems under systemic oppression such as colonisation and slavery.
The term was coined by Boaventura de Sousa Santos, who presented the significance of such physical violence creating the centering of Western knowledge in the current world.
This term challenges the thought of what is seen as knowledge in academia today.
Indian pramana
Main article: Pramana
Indian schools of philosophy, such as the Hindu Nyaya and Carvaka schools, and the Jain and Buddhist philosophical schools, developed an epistemological tradition independently of the Western philosophical tradition called "pramana". Pramana can be translated as "instrument of knowledge" and refers to various means or sources of knowledge that Indian philosophers held to be reliable.
Each school of Indian philosophy had their own theories about which pramanas were valid means to knowledge and which were unreliable (and why). A Vedic text, Taittirīya Āraṇyaka (c. 9th–6th centuries BCE), lists "four means of attaining correct knowledge": smṛti ("tradition" or "scripture"), pratyakṣa ("perception"), aitihya ("communication by one who is expert", or "tradition"), and anumāna ("reasoning" or "inference").
In the Indian traditions, the most widely discussed pramanas are: Pratyakṣa (perception), Anumāṇa (inference), Upamāṇa (comparison and analogy), Arthāpatti (postulation, derivation from circumstances), Anupalabdi (non-perception, negative/cognitive proof) and Śabda (word, testimony of past or present reliable experts). While the Nyaya school (beginning with the Nyāya Sūtras of Gotama, between 6th-century BCE and 2nd-century CE) were a proponent of realism and supported four pramanas (perception, inference, comparison/analogy and testimony), the Buddhist epistemologists (Dignaga and Dharmakirti) generally accepted only perception and inference.
The Carvaka school of materialists only accepted the pramana of perception, and hence were among the first empiricists in the Indian traditions.
Another school, the Ajñana, included notable proponents of philosophical skepticism.
The theory of knowledge of the Buddha in the early Buddhist texts has been interpreted as a form of pragmatism as well as a form of correspondence theory.  Likewise, the Buddhist philosopher Dharmakirti has been interpreted both as holding a form of pragmatism or correspondence theory for his view that what is true is what has effective power (arthakriya). The Buddhist Madhyamika school's theory of emptiness (shunyata) meanwhile has been interpreted as a form of philosophical skepticism.
The main contribution to epistemology by the Jains has been their theory of "many sided-ness" or "multi-perspectivism" (Anekantavada), which says that since the world is multifaceted, any single viewpoint is limited (naya – a partial standpoint). This has been interpreted as a kind of pluralism or perspectivism.
According to Jain epistemology, none of the pramanas gives absolute or perfect knowledge since they are each limited points of view.
Domains of inquiry in epistemology
Social epistemology
Main article: Social epistemology
Social epistemology deals with questions about knowledge in contexts where our knowledge attributions cannot be explained by simply examining individuals in isolation from one another, meaning that the scope of our knowledge attributions must be widened to include broader social contexts.
It also explores the ways in which interpersonal beliefs can be justified in social contexts.
The most common topics discussed in contemporary social epistemology are testimony, which deals with the conditions under which a belief "x is true" which resulted from being told "x is true" constitutes knowledge; peer disagreement, which deals with when and how I should revise my beliefs in light of other people holding beliefs that contradict mine; and group epistemology, which deals with what it means to attribute knowledge to groups rather than individuals, and when group knowledge attributions are appropriate.
Formal epistemology
Main article: Formal epistemology
Formal epistemology uses formal tools and methods from decision theory, logic, probability theory and computability theory to model and reason about issues of epistemological interest.
Work in this area spans several academic fields, including philosophy, computer science, economics, and statistics.
The focus of formal epistemology has tended to differ somewhat from that of traditional epistemology, with topics like uncertainty, induction, and belief revision garnering more attention than the analysis of knowledge, skepticism, and issues with justification.
Metaepistemology
Main article: Metaepistemology
Metaepistemology is the metaphilosophical study of the methods, aims, and subject matter of epistemology.
In general, metaepistemology aims to better understand our first-order epistemological inquiry.
Some goals of metaepistemology are identifying inaccurate assumptions made in epistemological debates and determining whether the questions asked in mainline epistemology are the right epistemological questions to be asking.
See also
Philosophy portal
For a topical guide, see Outline of epistemology.
Anekantavada
Epistemological pluralism
Evolutionary epistemology
Feminist epistemology
Knowledge-first epistemology
Moral epistemology
Noölogy
Reformed epistemology
Self-evidence
Sociology of knowledge
Virtue epistemology
Theory of Knowledge (IB Course)
References
Notes
In Scots, the distinction is between wit and ken.
In French, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, German, and Dutch 'to know (a person)' is translated using connaître, conhecer, conocer, a cunoaște and kennen (both German and Dutch) respectively, whereas 'to know (how to do something)' is translated using savoir, saber (both Portuguese and Spanish), a şti, wissen, and weten.
Modern Greek has the verbs γνωρίζω (gnorízo) and ξέρω (kséro). Italian has the verbs conoscere and sapere and the nouns for 'knowledge' are conoscenza and sapienza.
German has the verbs wissen and kennen; the former implies knowing a fact, the latter knowing in the sense of being acquainted with and having a working knowledge of; there is also a noun derived from kennen, namely Erkennen, which has been said to imply knowledge in the form of recognition or acknowledgment.
The verb itself implies a process: you have to go from one state to another, from a state of "not-erkennen" to a state of true erkennen.
This verb seems the most appropriate in terms of describing the "episteme" in one of the modern European languages, hence the German name "Erkenntnistheorie".
Skeptical scenarios in a similar vein date back to Plato's Allegory of the Cave, although Plato's Allegory was quite different in both presentation and interpretation.
In contemporary philosophical literature, something akin to evil demon skepticism is presented in brain in a vat scenarios.
See also the New Evil Demon Problem (IEP).
Citations
a b c d e f g h i j "Epistemology". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 22 June 2020.
a b c Steup, Matthias (2005).  Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 ed.).
a b "Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 10 June 2020.
Borchert, Donald M., ed. (1967). "Epistemology". Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Vol. 3. Macmillan.
Carl J. Wenning. "Scientific epistemology: How scientists know what they know" (PDF).
a b "Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 30 June 2020.
"The Epistemology of Ethics". 1 September 2011.
"Epistemology". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. 2014.
Anonymous (November 1847). "Jean-Paul Frederich Richter". The Eclectic Magazine of Foreign Literature, Science and Art. 12: 317. hdl:2027/iau.31858055206621.
Ferrier, James Frederick (1854). Institutes of metaphysic: the theory of knowing and being.
Edinburgh: W. Blackwood. p. 46. Retrieved 21 June 2018.
Meyerson, Émile (1908). Identité et réalité. Paris: F. Alcan. p. i.
Retrieved 21 June 2018.. See also Suchting, Wal. "Epistemology". Historical Materialism: 331–345.
Locke, John (1689). "Introduction". An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Carus, Paul (1891). Fundamental Problems: The Method of Philosophy as a Systematic Arrangement of Knowledge.
Open Court. p. 29.
a b Sturm, Thomas (2011). "Historical Epistemology or History of Epistemology? The Case of the Relation Between Perception and Judgment". Erkenntnis. 75 (3): 303–324. doi:10.1007/s10670-011-9338-3. S2CID 142375514.
a b Stroud, Barry (2011). "The History of Epistemology". Erkenntnis. 75 (3): 495–503. doi:10.1007/s10670-011-9337-4. S2CID 143497596.
John Bengson (Editor), Marc A. Moffett (Editor): Essays on Knowledge, Mind, and Action.
New York: Oxford University Press. 2011
For example, Talbert, Bonnie (2015). "Knowing Other People". Ratio. 28 (2): 190–206. doi:10.1111/rati.12059. and Benton, Matthew (2017). "Epistemology Personalized". The Philosophical Quarterly. 67 (269): 813–834. doi:10.1093/pq/pqx020.
For related linguistic data, see Benton, Matthew (2017). "Epistemology Personalized". The Philosophical Quarterly. 67 (269): 813–834. doi:10.1093/pq/pqx020., esp.
Section 1.
a b c d "A Priori Justification and Knowledge". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 6 July 2020.
a b c d e "Belief". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 22 June 2020.
"Formal Representations of Belief". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 22 June 2020.
a b c "Truth". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 29 June 2020.
Gorgias.
Project Gutenberg. 5 October 2008. Retrieved 31 March 2017.
"The Analysis of Knowledge". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 12 June 2020.
Descartes, Rene (1985). The Philosophical Writings of Rene Descartes Vol. I. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-28807-1.
Descartes, Rene (1985). Philosophical Writings of Rene Descartes Vol.
II. Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-28808-8.
Descartes, Rene (1985). The Philosophical Writings of Rene Descartes.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-28808-8.
Hannon, Michael (2021). "Knowledge, concept of". Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
London; New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-P031-2 (inactive 31 July 2022).{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2022 (link)
a b c d e Lehrer, Keith (15 October 2015). "1. The Analysis of Knowledge". Theory of Knowledge.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-135-19609-7.
a b c d e f g Ichikawa, Jonathan Jenkins; Steup, Matthias (2018). "The Analysis of Knowledge". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Retrieved 24 May 2022.
Stanley, Jason; Willlamson, Timothy (2001). "Knowing How". Journal of Philosophy. 98 (8): 411–444. doi:10.2307/2678403. JSTOR 2678403.
a b c d e f g h i Hetherington, Stephen. "Knowledge". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 18 May 2022.
a b c d e f g h i Zagzebski, Linda (1999). "What Is Knowledge?".  In Greco, John; Sosa, Ernest (eds.). The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology.
Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 92–116. doi:10.1002/9781405164863.ch3. ISBN 9780631202905. OCLC 39269507. S2CID 158886670.
a b c d e Klein, Peter D. (1998). "Knowledge, concept of".  In Craig, Edward (ed.). Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
London; New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-P031-1. ISBN 9780415250696. OCLC 38096851.
a b c Stroll, Avrum. "epistemology". 
a b Steup, Matthias; Neta, Ram (2020). "Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Retrieved 22 May 2022.
Gupta, Anil (2021). "Definitions: 1.1 Real and nominal definitions". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Retrieved 28 May 2022.
Pritchard, Duncan (1 October 2013). "3 Defining knowledge". What is this thing called Knowledge?. Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-134-57367-7.
McCain, Kevin. "Problem of the Criterion". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 28 May 2022.
Fumerton, Richard (25 September 2008). "The Problem of the Criterion". The Oxford Handbook of Skepticism.
Black, Tim (1 April 2002). "Relevant alternatives and the shifting standards of knowledge". Southwest Philosophy Review. 18 (1): 23–32. doi:10.5840/swphilreview20021813.
Sidelle, Alan (2001). "An Argument That Internalism Requires Infallibility". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 63 (1): 163–179. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2001.tb00096.x.
Parikh, Rohit; Renero, Adriana (2017). "Justified True Belief: Plato, Gettier, and Turing". Philosophical Explorations of the Legacy of Alan Turing: Turing 100. Springer International Publishing. pp. 93–102. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-53280-6_4. ISBN 978-3-319-53280-6.
Hetherington, Stephen. "Gettier Problems". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 28 May 2022.
Rodríguez, Ángel García (2018). "Fake barns and our epistemological theorizing". Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía. 50 (148): 29–54. doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2018.02. ISSN 0011-1503. JSTOR 26767766. S2CID 171635198.
Goldman, Alvin I. (18 November 1976). "Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge". The Journal of Philosophy. 73 (20): 771–791. doi:10.2307/2025679. JSTOR 2025679.
a b Sudduth, Michael. "Defeaters in Epistemology: 2b Defeasibility Analyses and Propositional Defeaters". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 17 May 2022.
Durán, Juan M.; Formanek, Nico (1 December 2018). "Grounds for Trust: Essential Epistemic Opacity and Computational Reliabilism". Minds and Machines. 28 (4): 645–666. doi:10.1007/s11023-018-9481-6. ISSN 1572-8641. S2CID 53102940.
Kraft, Tim (2012). "Scepticism, Infallibilism, Fallibilism". Discipline Filosofiche. 22 (2): 49–70.
Swain, Marshall (1998). "Knowledge, causal theory of".  In Craig, Edward (ed.). Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
London; New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-P004-1. ISBN 9780415250696. OCLC 38096851.
Poston, Ted. "Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 17 May 2022.
Baehr, Jason S. "Virtue Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 18 May 2022.
Turri, John; Alfano, Mark; Greco, John (2021). "Virtue Epistemology". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Retrieved 18 May 2022.
Plato (2002). Five Dialogues.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Pub.
Co. pp. 89–90, 97b–98a.
ISBN 978-0-87220-633-5.
a b Pritchard, Duncan; Turri, John. "The Value of Knowledge". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 24 February 2016.
Pritchard, Duncan (April 2007). "Recent Work on Epistemic Value". American Philosophical Quarterly. 44 (2): 85–110. JSTOR 20464361.
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (2003). The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 9781139442282.[page needed]
Zagzebski, Linda. "The Search for the Source of Epistemic Good" (PDF). Metaphilosophy. 34 (1/2): 13.
Goldman, Alvin I. & Olsson, E.J. (2009). "Reliabilism and the Value of Knowledge".  In Haddock, A.; Millar, A. & Pritchard, D. (eds.). Epistemic Value.
Oxford University Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-19-923118-8.
Kvanvig, Jonathan (2003). The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding.
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-521-03786-0.
Kvanvig, Jonathan (2003). The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding.
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-03786-0.
BonJour, Laurence, 1985, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, E.O., Sociobiology: The New Synthesis.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 1975
a b "The Analytic/Synthetic Distinction". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 7 July 2020.
Russell, G.: Truth in Virtue of Meaning: A Defence of the Analytic/Synthetic Distinction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2008
John L. Pollock (1975). Knowledge and Justification.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
ISBN 978-0-691-07203-6. p. 26.
Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Foundational Theories of Epistemic Justification". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Warburton, Nigel (1996). Thinking from A to Z. Routledge.
ISBN 978-0415433716.
Klein, Peter D.; Turri, John. "Infinitism in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 8 June 2020.
Haack, Susan (1993). Evidence and Inquiry: Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology.
Wiley-Blackwell.
ISBN 978-0-631-19679-2.
Psillos, Stathis; Curd, Martin (2010). The Routledge companion to philosophy of science (1. publ. in paperback ed.). London: Routledge. pp. 129–138. ISBN 978-0-415-54613-3.
Uebel, Thomas (2015). Empiricism at the Crossroads: The Vienna Circle's Protocol-Sentence Debate Revisited.
Open Court. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-8126-9929-6.
a b Klein, Peter (2015), "Skepticism",  in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2015 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, retrieved 1 October 2018
Popkin, Richard (1972). "Skepticism".  In Edwards, Paul (ed.). Encyclopedia of Philosophy Volume 7. Macmillan. pp. 449–461. ISBN 978-0-02-864651-0.
a b c d "Skepticism". Encyclopedia of Empiricism. 1997.
a b Ancient Skepticism.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.
a b "Descartes' Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 16 June 2020.
"Descartes". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 16 June 2020.
"Peter Suber, "Classical Skepticism"". Archived from the original on 3 February 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2018.
a b c Legg, Catherine; Hookway, Christopher (6 April 2021). "Pragmatism".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 ed.).
"How to Make Our Ideas Clear". Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
a b James, William (2000).  Gunn, Giles B. (ed.). Pragmatism and Other Writings.
Penguin Books.
ISBN 9780140437355. OCLC 41871068.
Rorty, R. and Saatkamp, H. (n.d.). Rorty & Pragmatism.
Nashville [u.a.]: Vanderbilt Univ.
Press.
a b Quine, Willard (2004). "Epistemology Naturalized".  In E. Sosa & J. Kim (ed.). Epistemology: An Anthology.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 292–300. ISBN 978-0-631-19724-9.
Kim, Jaegwon (1988). "What Is Naturalized Epistemology?". Philosophical Perspectives. 2: 381–405. doi:10.2307/2214082. JSTOR 2214082.
Kornblith, Hilary (2002). Knowledge and its Place in Nature.
Oxford University Press.
a b Boghossian, Paul (2006). Fear of Knowledge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Raskin, J.D. (2002). Constructivism in psychology: Personal construct psychology, radical constructivism, and social constructivism.
In J.D. Raskin & S.K. Bridges (Eds.), Studies in meaning: Exploring constructivist psychology (pp. 1–25). New York: Pace University Press. p. 4
Castelló M., & Botella, L. (2006). Constructivism and educational psychology.
In J.L. Kincheloe & R.A. Horn (Eds.), The Praeger handbook of education and psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 263–270). Westport, CT: Praeger. p. 263
Jonassen, David H. (1991). "Objectivism versus constructivism: Do we need a new philosophical paradigm?". Educational Technology Research and Development. 39 (3): 5–14. doi:10.1007/bf02296434. S2CID 53412771.
For an example, see Weber, Eric Thomas. 2010. Rawls, Dewey, and Constructivism: On the Epistemology of Justice (London: Continuum).
Markie, Peter. "Rationalism vs.
Empiricism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanford University.
Retrieved 17 July 2012.
Talbott, William (2016). "Bayesian Epistemology". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Retrieved 6 March 2021.
Olsson, Erik J. (2018). "Bayesian Epistemology". Introduction to Formal Philosophy.
Springer. pp. 431–442.
Hartmann, Stephan; Sprenger, Jan (2010). "Bayesian Epistemology". The Routledge Companion to Epistemology.
London: Routledge. pp. 609–620.
Hájek, Alan; Lin, Hanti (2017). "A Tale of Two Epistemologies?". Res Philosophica. 94 (2): 207–232. doi:10.11612/resphil.1540. S2CID 160029122.
"Feminist Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 17 June 2020.
"Feminist Social Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 17 June 2020.
Santos, Boaventura de Sousa (17 November 2015). Epistemologies of the South (0 ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315634876. ISBN 978-1-317-26034-9.
Bennett, Karen (November 2007). "Epistemicide!: The Tale of a Predatory Discourse". The Translator. 13 (2): 151–169. doi:10.1080/13556509.2007.10799236. ISSN 1355-6509. S2CID 220274129.
James Lochtefeld, "Pramana" in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Vol. 2: N–Z, Rosen Publishing.
ISBN 0-8239-2287-1, pp. 520–521
A.B. Keith (1989), The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upanishads, Part II, p.482
S. C. Vidyabhusana (1971). A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern Schools, p.23
Jeaneane Fowler (2002), Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism, Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 978-1-898723-94-3, p. 129
B.K. Matilal "Perception.
An Essay on Classical Indian Theories of Knowledge" (Oxford University Press, 1986), p. xiv.
MM Kamal (1998), The Epistemology of the Cārvāka Philosophy, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, 46(2): 13–16
Jayatilleke, K.N.; Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge, p. 356
Cabezón, José I., 2000, "Truth in Buddhist Theology," in R. Jackson and J. Makransky, (eds.), Buddhist Theology, Critical Reflections by Contemporary Buddhist Scholars.
London: Curzon, 136–154.
Tom Tillemans (2011), Dharmakirti, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Arnold, Dan; Buddhists, Brahmins, and Belief: Epistemology in South Asian Philosophy of belief and religion, p. 132.
Griffin, David Ray (2005) p. 145
Stroud, Scott R; Anekantavada and Engaged Rhetorical Pluralism: Explicating Jaina Views on Perspectivism, Violence, and Rhetoric[dead link].
D. Long, Jeffery; Jainism: An Introduction 125.
a b Goldman, Alvin; Blanchard, Thomas (2015). "Social Epistemology".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Formal Epistemology". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 6 July 2020.
Gerken, Mikkel (2016). "Metaepistemology". Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1 ed.). London: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6. Retrieved 24 May 2021.
Sources
Works cited
Annis, David (1978). "A Contextualist Theory of Epistemic Justification". American Philosophical Quarterly. 15: 213–219.
Ayer, Alfred Jules. 1936. Language, Truth, and Logic.
BonJour, Laurence. 2002. Epistemology: Classic Problems and Contemporary Responses.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Bovens, Luc & Hartmann, Stephan. 2003. Bayesian Epistemology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Butchvarov, Panayot. 1970. The Concept of Knowledge.
Evanston, Northwestern University Press.
Cohen, Stewart (1998). "Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Skepticism, Gettier, and the Lottery". Australasian Journal of Philosophy. 76 (2): 289–306. doi:10.1080/00048409812348411.
Cohen, Stewart. 1999. "Contextualism, Skepticism, and Reasons", in Tomberlin 1999.
Dancy, Jonathan. 1991. An Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology (Second Edition). John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 0-631-13622-3
DeRose, Keith (1992). "Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 15: 213–219.
DeRose, Keith. 1999. "Contextualism: An Explanation and Defense", in Greco and Sosa 1999.
Descartes, Rene. 1641. Meditations on First Philosophy
Feldman, Richard. 1999. "Contextualism and Skepticism", in Tomberlin 1999, pp. 91–114.
Gettier, Edmund. 1963. "Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?", Analysis, Vol. 23, pp. 121–123. Online text.
Greco, J. & Sosa, E. 1999. Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, Blackwell Publishing.
Harris, Errol E. 1970. Hypothesis And Perception, George Allen and Unwin, London, Reprinted 2002 Routledge, London.
Harwood, Sterling (1989). "Taking Skepticism Seriously – And In Context". Philosophical Investigations. 12 (3): 223–233. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9205.1989.tb00275.x.
Hay, Clare. 2008. The Theory of Knowledge: A Coursebook, The Lutterworth Press, Cambridge.
ISBN 978-0-7188-3088-5
Hawthorne, John. 2005. "The Case for Closure", Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Peter Sosa and Matthias Steup (ed.): 26–43.
Hendricks, Vincent F. 2006. Mainstream and Formal Epistemology, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1781. Critique of Pure Reason.
Keeton, Morris T. 1962. "Empiricism", in Dictionary of Philosophy, Dagobert D. Runes (ed.), Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ, pp. 89–90.
Kirkham, Richard. 1984. "Does the Gettier Problem Rest on a Mistake?" Mind, 93.
Klein, Peter. 1981. Certainty: a Refutation of Skepticism, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Kyburg, H.E. 1961. Probability and the Logic of Rational Belief, Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Korzybski, Alfred. 1994 (1933). Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics, Fifth Edition.
Ft.
Worth, TX: Institute of General Semantics.
Lewis, David (1996). "Elusive Knowledge". Australasian Journal of Philosophy. 74 (4): 549–567. doi:10.1080/00048409612347521.
Morin, Edgar. 1986. La Méthode, Tome 3, La Connaissance de la connaissance (Method, 3rd volume : The knowledge of knowledge)
Morton, Adam. 2002. A Guide Through the Theory of Knowledge (Third Edition) Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
ISBN 1-4051-0012-5
Nelson, Quee. 2007. The Slightest Philosophy, Indianapolis, IN: Dog Ear Publishing, 296 pages.
Niiniluoto, Ilkka. 2002. Critical Scientific Realism, Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press.
Plato.
Meno.
Popper, Karl R. 1972. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach, Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press.
Preyer, G./Siebelt, F./Ulfig, A. 1994. Language, Mind and Epistemology, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Russell, Bertrand. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy, New York: Oxford University Press.
Russell, Bertrand. 1940. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, Nottingham: Spokesman Books.
Santayana, George. 1923. Scepticism and Animal Faith, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons – London: Constable and Co.
Spir, African. 1877. Denken und Wirklichkeit: Versuch einer Erneuerung der kritischen Philosophie (Thought and Reality: Attempt at a Renewal of Critical Philosophy), (Second Edition) Leipzig: J.G. Findel.
Schiffer, Stephen (1996). "Contextualist Solutions to Skepticism". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society. 96: 317–333. doi:10.1093/aristotelian/96.1.317.
Steup, Matthias. 2005. "Knowledge and Skepticism", Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Peter Sosa and Matthias Steup (eds.): 1–13.
Tomberlin, James (ed.). 1999. Philosophical Perspectives 13, Epistemology, Blackwell Publishing.
Turri, John (2016). Knowledge and the Norm of Assertion: An Essay in Philosophical Science.
Cambridge: Open Book Publishers.
Open Book Publishers. doi:10.11647/OBP.0083. ISBN 978-1-78374-183-0.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1922. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Frank P. Ramsey and C.K. Ogden (trns.), Dover.
Online text.
External links
Epistemology  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata
Library resources about  Epistemology 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy articles
"Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Bayesian Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Evolutionary Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Feminist Epistemology and Philosophy of Science" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Naturalized Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Social Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Virtue Epistemology" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Knowledge How" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy articles
"Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Coherentism". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Contextualism in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Epistemic Circularity". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Epistemic Justification". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Epistemology of Perception". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Ethnoepistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Evolutionary Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Fallibilism". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Feminist Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Infinitism in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Moral Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Naturalistic Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Virtue Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"Understanding in Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Encyclopædia Britannica
Epistemology by Avrum Stroll and A.P. Martinich
Other links
The London Philosophy Study Guide Archived 23 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject: Epistemology & Methodology Archived 1 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Epistemology at PhilPapers
Knowledge-How at Philpapers
Epistemology at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
What Is Epistemology? – a brief introduction to the topic by Keith DeRose.
Epistemology Introduction, Part 1 and Part 2 by Paul Newall at the Galilean Library.
Teaching Theory of Knowledge (1986) – Marjorie Clay (ed.), an electronic publication from The Council for Philosophical Studies.
An Introduction to Epistemology by Paul Newall, aimed at beginners.
EpistemologyEpistemologists
Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
Gilles Deleuze
Keith DeRose
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
Anil Gupta
Susan Haack
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Peter Klein
Saul Kripke
Hilary Kornblith
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
John McDowell
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Duncan Pritchard
James Pryor
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Reid
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Wilfrid Sellars
Susanna Siegel
Ernest Sosa
P. F. Strawson
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle
more...
Theories
Coherentism
Constructivism
Contextualism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representational realism
Skepticism
Transcendental idealism
Concepts
A priori knowledge
A posteriori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Epistemic injustice
Gettier problem
Induction
Internalism and externalism
Justification
Knowledge
Objectivity
Privileged access
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Procedural knowledge
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...
Related articles
Outline of epistemology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Metaepistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
Articles related to epistemology
PhilosophyBranchesTraditional
Axiology
Aesthetics
Ethics
Epistemology
Logic
Metaphysics
Ontology
Philosophy of...
Art
Design
Film
Music
Color
Cosmology
Culture
Education
Environment
Feminism
History
Human nature
Language
Law
Life
Literature
Logic
Mathematics
Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Information
Medicine
Healthcare
Psychiatry
Mind
Action
Happiness
Humor
Pain
Perception
Psychology
Philosophy
Religion
Science
Biology
Chemistry
Geography
Linguistics
Physics
Sexuality
Social science
Business
Economics
Politics
Society
Space and time
Sport
Technology
Engineering
War
Schools of thoughtBy era
Ancient
Western
Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary
AncientChinese
Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Chan
Greco-Roman
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eleatics
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Ionian
Ephesian
Milesian
Megarian school
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Pluralism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism
Neopythagoreanism
Sophistic
Stoicism
Indian
Hindu
Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Ājīvika
Ajñana
Cārvāka
Jain
Anekantavada
Syādvāda
Buddhist
Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika
Persian
Mazdakism
Mithraism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism
MedievalEast Asian
Korean Confucianism
Edo neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism
European
Christian
Augustinianism
Scholasticism
Thomism
Scotism
Occamism
Renaissance humanism
Indian
Vedanta
Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Nimbarka Sampradaya
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita
Navya-Nyāya
Islamic
Averroism
Avicennism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Sufi
Jewish
Judeo-Islamic
Modern
Anarchism
Classical Realism
Liberalism
Collectivism
Conservatism
Determinism
Dualism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Historicism
Holism
Humanism
Anti-
Idealism
Absolute
British
German
Objective
Subjective
Transcendental
Individualism
Kokugaku
Materialism
Modernism
Monism
Naturalism
Natural law
Nihilism
New Confucianism
Neo-scholasticism
Pragmatism
Phenomenology
Positivism
Reductionism
Rationalism
Social contract
Socialism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
People
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo
Kierkegaardianism
Krausism
Hegelianism
Marxism
Newtonianism
Nietzscheanism
Spinozism
ContemporaryAnalytic
Applied ethics
Analytic feminism
Analytical Marxism
Communitarianism
Consequentialism
Critical rationalism
Experimental philosophy
Falsificationism
Foundationalism / Coherentism
Internalism and externalism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Normative ethics
Meta-ethics
Moral realism
Quinean naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Systemics
Scientism
Scientific realism
Scientific skepticism
Transactionalism
Contemporary utilitarianism
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian
Continental
Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
New Historicism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Marxism
Phenomenology
Posthumanism
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Western Marxism
Other
Kyoto School
Objectivism
Postcritique
Russian cosmism
more...
PositionsAesthetics
Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response
Epistemology
Empiricism
Fideism
Naturalism
Particularism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Solipsism
Ethics
Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue
Free will
Compatibilism
Determinism
Hard
Incompatibilism
Hard
Libertarianism
Metaphysics
Atomism
Dualism
Idealism
Monism
Naturalism
Realism
Mind
Behaviorism
Emergentism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism
Normativity
Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism
Ontology
Action
Event
Process
Reality
Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Physicalism
Realism
By regionRelated listsMiscellaneousBy regionAfrican
Bantu
Egyptian
Ethiopian
Eastern
Chinese
Indian
Indonesian
Japanese
Korean
Pakistani
Taiwanese
Vietnamese
Middle Eastern
Iranian
Jewish
Turkish
Western
American
Australian
British
Scottish
Canada
Czech
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Greek
Italian
Maltese
Polish
Slovene
Spanish
Miscellaneous
Amerindian
Aztec
Romanian
Russian
Yugoslav
Lists
Glossary
Index
Movements
Outline
Philosophers
Problems
Publications
Schools
Years
Miscellaneous
Applied philosophy
Natural law
Sage
Theoretical philosophy / Practical philosophy
Women in philosophy
Philosophy portal
Category
Philosophy of scienceConcepts
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Functional contextualism
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific pluralism
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science
Metatheoryof science
Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism
Rationalism / Empiricism
Received view / Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism
Philosophy of
Physics
thermal and statistical
Motion
Chemistry
Biology
Geography
Social science
Technology
Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time
Related topics
Alchemy
Criticism of science
Descriptive science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
Hard and soft science
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Normative science
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Science studies
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance
Philosophers of science by eraAncient
Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans
Epicurus
Medieval
Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby
Early modern
Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume
Late modern
Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson
Contemporary
Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett
Category
Philosophy portal
Science portal
PositivismPerspectives
Antihumanism
Empiricism
Rationalism
Scientism
Declinations
Legal positivism
Logical positivism / analytic philosophy
Positivist school
Postpositivism
Sociological positivism
Machian positivism (empirio-criticism)
Rankean historical positivism
Polish positivism
Russian Machism
Principal concepts
Consilience
Demarcation
Evidence
Induction
Justification
Pseudoscience
Critique of metaphysics
Unity of science
Verificationism
Antitheses
Antipositivism
Confirmation holism
Critical theory
Falsifiability
Geisteswissenschaft
Hermeneutics
Historicism
Historism
Human science
Humanities
Methodological dualism
Problem of induction
Reflectivism
Related paradigm shiftsin the history of science
Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s)
Uncertainty principle (1927)
Related topics
Behavioralism
Post-behavioralism
Critical rationalism
Criticism of science
Epistemology
anarchism
idealism
nihilism
pluralism
realism
Holism
Instrumentalism
Modernism
Naturalism in literature
Nomothetic–idiographic distinction
Objectivity in science
Operationalism
Phenomenalism
Philosophy of science
Deductive-nomological model
Ramsey sentence
Sense-data theory
Qualitative research
Relationship between religion and science
Sociology
Social science
Philosophy
Structural functionalism
Structuralism
Structuration theory
Positivist-related debateMethod
Methodenstreit (1890s)
Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959)
Positivismusstreit (1960s)
Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s)
Science wars (1990s)
Contributions
The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830)
A General View of Positivism (1848)
Critical History of Philosophy (1869)
Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884)
The Analysis of Sensations (1886)
The Logic of Modern Physics (1927)
Language, Truth, and Logic (1936)
The Two Cultures (1959)
The Universe in a Nutshell (2001)
Proponents
Richard Avenarius
A. J. Ayer
Alexander Bogdanov
Auguste Comte
Eugen Dühring
Émile Durkheim
Ernst Laas
Ernst Mach
Berlin Circle
Vienna Circle
Criticism
Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909)
History and Class Consciousness (1923)
The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934)
The Poverty of Historicism (1936)
World Hypotheses (1942)
Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951)
Truth and Method (1960)
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962)
Conjectures and Refutations (1963)
One-Dimensional Man (1964)
Knowledge and Human Interests (1968)
The Poverty of Theory (1978)
The Scientific Image (1980)
The Rhetoric of Economics (1986)
Critics
Theodor W. Adorno
Gaston Bachelard
Mario Bunge
Wilhelm Dilthey
Paul Feyerabend
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Thomas Kuhn
György Lukács
Karl Popper
Willard Van Orman Quine
Max Weber
Concepts in contention
Knowledge
Objectivity
Phronesis
Truth
Verstehen
Category
Jurisprudence
Index
Legal theory
Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Economic analysis
Legal norms
International legal theory
Legal history
Philosophy of law
Sociology of law
Philosophers
Alexy
Allan
Aquinas
Aristotle
Austin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Betti
Bickel
Blackstone
Bobbio
Bork
Brożek
Cardozo
Castanheira Neves
Chafee
Coleman
Del Vecchio
Diniz
Durkheim
Dworkin
Ehrlich
Feinberg
Fineman
Finnis
Frank
Fuller
Gardner
George
Green
Grisez
Grotius
Gurvitch
Habermas
Han
Hart
Hegel
Hobbes
Hohfeld
Hägerström
Jellinek
Jhering
Kant
Kelsen
Köchler
Kramer
Leoni
Llewellyn
Lombardía
Luhmann
Lundstedt
Lyons
MacCormick
Marx
Nussbaum
Olivecrona
Pashukanis
Perelman
Petrażycki
Pontes de Miranda
Posner
Pound
Puchta
Pufendorf
Radbruch
Rawls
Raz
Reale
Reinach
Renner
Ross
Rumi
Savigny
Scaevola
Schauer
Schmitt
Shang
Simmonds
Somló
Suárez
Tribe
Unger
Voegelin
Waldron
Walzer
Weber
Wronkowska
Ziembiński
Znamierowski
Theories
Analytical jurisprudence
Deontological ethics
Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law
Interpretivism
Legalism
Legal moralism
Legal positivism
Legal realism
Libertarian theories of law
Natural law
Paternalism
Utilitarianism
Virtue jurisprudence
Concepts
Dharma
Fa
Judicial interpretation
Justice
Legal system
Li
Question of law
Rational-legal authority
Usul al-Fiqh
Category
Law portal
Philosophy portal
WikiProject Law
WikiProject Philosophy
changes
Authority control: National libraries 
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 26 September 2022, at 13:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
