Government - Wikipedia
Government
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 28 September 2022.
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
System or group of people governing an organized community, often a state
For the executive of parliamentary systems referred to as the government, see Executive (government).
For other uses, see Government (disambiguation).
"Gov" redirects here.
For other uses, see Gov (disambiguation).
This article has multiple issues.
Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations.
Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
‹ The template below (Globalize) is being considered for merging.
See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. ›The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject.
You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
(Learn how and when to remove this template message)
World's states colored by form of government1  Map legend          Full presidential republics2      Semi-presidential republics2       Republics with an executive president elected by or nominated by the legislature that may or may not be subject to parliamentary confidence      Parliamentary republics2       Parliamentary constitutional monarchies where royalty does not hold significant power      Parliamentary constitutional monarchies which have a separate head of government but where royalty holds significant executive and/or legislative power       Absolute monarchies      One-party states       Countries where constitutional provisions for government have been suspended (e.g. military juntas)      Countries which do not fit any of the above systems (e.g. provisional governments/unclear political situations)       No government      1 This map was compiled according to the Wikipedia list of countries by system of government.
See there for sources. 2 This map presents only the de jure form of government, and not the de facto degree of democracy.   
Part of the Politics seriesPolitics
Outline
Index
Category
Primary topics
Outline of political science
Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy
Political systems
Anarchy
City-state
Democracy
Dictatorship
Directory
Federacy
Feudalism
Meritocracy
Monarchy
Parliamentary
Presidential
Republic
Semi-parliamentary
Semi-presidential
Theocracy
Academic disciplines
Political science (political scientists)
International relations (theory)
Comparative politics
Political analysis
Political theory
Policy studies
Political psychology
Political sociology
Public administration
Bureaucracy (street-level)
Technocracy
Adhocracy
Policy
Public policy (doctrine)
Domestic policy
Foreign policy
Civil society
Public interest
Branches of government
Separation of powers
Legislature
Executive
Judiciary
Election commission
Related topics
Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Critique of political economy
Subseries
Electoral systems
Elections
voting
Unitarism
Federalism
Government
forms
Ideology
Political campaigning
Political parties
Politics portal
A government is the system or group of people governing an organized community, generally a state.
In the case of its broad associative definition, government normally consists of legislature, executive, and judiciary.
Government is a means by which organizational policies are enforced, as well as a mechanism for determining policy.
In many countries, the government has a kind of constitution, a statement of its governing principles and philosophy.
While all types of organizations have governance, the term government is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments and subsidiary organizations.
Historically prevalent forms of government include monarchy, aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, theocracy, and tyranny.
These forms are not always mutually exclusive, and mixed governments are common.
The main aspect of any philosophy of government is how political power is obtained, with the two main forms being electoral contest and hereditary succession.
Contents
Definitions and etymology
A government is the system to govern a state or community.
The Columbia Encyclopedia defines government as "a system of social control under which the right to make laws, and the right to enforce them, is vested in a particular group in society". While all types of organizations have governance, the word government is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on Earth, as well as their subsidiary organizations, such as state and provincial governments as well as local governments.
The word government derives from the Greek verb κυβερνάω [kubernáo] meaning to steer with a gubernaculum (rudder), the metaphorical sense being attested in the literature of classical antiquity, including Plato's Ship of State.
In British English, "government" sometimes refers to what's also known as a "ministry" or an "administration", i.e., the policies and government officials of a particular executive or governing coalition.
Finally, government is also sometimes used in English as a synonym for rule or governance.
History
Main articles: Political history of the world and Political philosophy
Earliest governments
The moment and place that the phenomenon of human government developed is lost in time; however, history does record the formations of early governments.
About 5,000 years ago, the first small city-states appeared.
By the third to second millenniums BC, some of these had developed into larger governed areas: Sumer, ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley civilization, and the Yellow River civilization.
The development of agriculture and water control projects were a catalyst for the development of governments.
On occasion a chief of a tribe was elected by various rituals or tests of strength to govern his tribe, sometimes with a group of elder tribesmen as a council.
The human ability to precisely communicate abstract, learned information allowed humans to become ever more effective at agriculture, and that allowed for ever increasing population densities.
David Christian explains how this resulted in states with laws and governments.
As farming populations gathered in larger and denser communities, interactions between different groups increased and the social pressure rose until, in a striking parallel with star formation, new structures suddenly appeared, together with a new level of complexity.
Like stars, cities and states reorganize and energize the smaller objects within their gravitational field.
Modern governments
Starting at the end of the 17th century, the prevalence of republican forms of government grew.
The English Civil War and Glorious Revolution in England, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution contributed to the growth of representative forms of government.
The Soviet Union was the first large country to have a Communist government.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, liberal democracy has become an even more prevalent form of government.
In the nineteenth and twentieth century, there was a significant increase in the size and scale of government at the national level.
This included the regulation of corporations and the development of the welfare state.
Political science
Main article: Political science
Classification
In political science, it has long been a goal to create a typology or taxonomy of polities, as typologies of political systems are not obvious.
It is especially important in the political science fields of comparative politics and international relations.
Like all categories discerned within forms of government, the boundaries of government classifications are either fluid or ill-defined.
Superficially, all governments have an official or ideal form.
The United States is a constitutional republic, while the former Soviet Union was a socialist republic.
However self-identification is not objective, and as Kopstein and Lichbach argue, defining regimes can be tricky.
For example, Voltaire argued that "the Holy Roman Empire is neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire".
Identifying a form of government is also difficult because many political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by parties naming themselves after those movements; all with competing political-ideologies.
Experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.
Other complications include general non-consensus or deliberate "distortion or bias" of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing, due to the nature of politics in the modern era.
For example: The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word's definition is used elsewhere.
As Ribuffo notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism"; a "conservative" in Finland would be labeled a "socialist" in the United States.
Since the 1950s conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party.
However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the conservative coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963.[a]
Social-political ambiguity
Opinions vary by individuals concerning the types and properties of governments that exist. "Shades of gray" are commonplace in any government and its corresponding classification.
Even the most liberal democracies limit rival political activity to one extent or another while the most tyrannical dictatorships must organize a broad base of support thereby creating difficulties for "pigeonholing" governments into narrow categories.
Examples include the claims of the United States as being a plutocracy rather than a democracy since some American voters believe elections are being manipulated by wealthy Super PACs.
Forms
Part of the Politics seriesBasic forms of government
List of forms of government
Source of power
Democracy (rule by many)
Demarchy
Direct
Liberal
Representative
Social
Socialist
Others
Oligarchy (rule by few)
Anocracy
Aristocracy
Gerontocracy
Kleptocracy
Kritarchy
Meritocracy
Noocracy
Particracy
Plutocracy
Stratocracy
Technocracy
Theocracy
Autocracy (rule by one)
Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship
Tyranny
Anarchism (rule by none)
Anarchy
Free association
Stateless
Power ideology
MonarchyRepublic (socio-political ideologies)
Absolute
Constitutional
Directorial
Legalist
Parliamentary
Presidential
Semi-presidential
Socialist
AuthoritarianLibertarian (socio-economic ideologies)
Anarchism
Colonialism
Communism
Despotism
Distributism
Fascism
Feudalism
Socialism
Totalitarianism
Tribalism
ReligiousSecular
State religion
Secular state
GlobalLocal (geo-cultural ideologies)
City-state
Intergovernmental organisation
National government
World government
Nationalism
Internationalism
Globalism
Power structure
Unitarism
Unitary state
Empire
Principality
Client state
Associated state
Dependent territory
Dominion
Protectorate
Puppet state
Puppet monarch
Satellite state
Self-governing colony
Tributary state
Buffer State
Vassal state
Viceroyalty
Federalism
Confederation
Devolution
Federation
Superstate
Supranational union
International relations
Small power
Regional power
Middle power
Great power
Superpower
Hyperpower
Administrative division
Politics portal
Further information: List of forms of government
See also: Plato's five regimes
In Republic, Plato discusses five types of regimes: aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, and tyranny.
These five regimes progressively degenerate starting with aristocracy at the top and tyranny at the bottom.
In his Politics, Aristotle elaborates on Plato's five regimes discussing them in relation to the government of one, of the few, and of the many.[citation needed] From this follows the classification of forms of government according to which people have the authority to rule: either one person (an autocracy, such as monarchy), a select group of people (an aristocracy), or the people as a whole (a democracy, such as a republic).
Thomas Hobbes stated on their classification:
The difference of Commonwealths consisteth in the difference of the sovereign, or the person representative of all and every one of the multitude.
And because the sovereignty is either in one man, or in an assembly of more than one; and into that assembly either every man hath right to enter, or not every one, but certain men distinguished from the rest; it is manifest there can be but three kinds of Commonwealth.
For the representative must needs be one man, or more; and if more, then it is the assembly of all, or but of a part.
When the representative is one man, then is the Commonwealth a monarchy; when an assembly of all that will come together, then it is a democracy, or popular Commonwealth; when an assembly of a part only, then it is called an aristocracy.
Other kind of Commonwealth there can be none: for either one, or more, or all, must have the sovereign power (which I have shown to be indivisible) entire.
Autocracy
Main article: Autocracy
An autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power is concentrated in the hands of one person, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regularized mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for the implicit threat of a coup d'état or mass insurrection). Absolute monarchy is a historically prevalent form of autocracy, wherein a monarch governs as a singular sovereign with no limitation on royal prerogative.
Most absolute monarchies are hereditary, however some, notably the Holy See, are elected by an electoral college (such as the college of cardinals, or prince-electors). Other forms of autocracy include tyranny, despotism, and dictatorship.
Aristocracy
Main article: Aristocracy
Aristocracy[b] is a form of government that places power in the hands of a small, elite ruling class, such as a hereditary nobility or privileged caste.
This class exercises minority rule, often as a landed timocracy, wealthy plutocracy, or oligarchy.
Many monarchies were aristocracies, although in modern constitutional monarchies the monarch may have little effective power.
The term aristocracy could also refer to the non-peasant, non-servant, and non-city classes in the feudal system.[citation needed]
Democracy
National governments which self-identify as democracies  National governments which do not self-identify as democracies
Governments recognised as "electoral democracies" as of 2020[update] by the Freedom in the World survey[c]
Main articles: Democracy and Types of democracy
Democracy is a system of government where citizens exercise power by voting and deliberation.
In a direct democracy, the citizenry as a whole directly forms a participatory governing body and vote directly on each issue.
In indirect democracy, the citizenry governs indirectly through the selection of representatives or delegates from among themselves, typically by election or, less commonly, by sortition.
These select citizens then meet to form a governing body, such as a legislature or jury.
Some governments combine both direct and indirect democratic governance, wherein the citizenry selects representatives to administer day-to-day governance, while also reserving the right govern directly through popular initiatives, referenda (plebiscites), and the right of recall.
In a constitutional democracy the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits majority rule, usually through the provision by all of certain universal rights, e.g. freedom of speech, or freedom of association.
Republics
Main article: Republic
A republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: res publica), not the private concern or property of the rulers, and where offices of states are subsequently directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited.
The people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.
A common simplified definition of a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch.
Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.
Other terms used to describe different republics include democratic republic, parliamentary republic, semi-presidential republic, presidential republic, federal republic, people's republic, and Islamic republic.
Federalism
Main article: Federalism
Federalism is a political concept in which a group of members are bound together by covenant with a governing representative head.
The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units, variously called states, provinces or otherwise.
Federalism is a system based upon democratic principles and institutions in which the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state governments, creating what is often called a federation.[citation needed] Proponents are often called federalists.
Branches
Separation of powers in the US government, demonstrating the trias politica model
Further information: Separation of powers and Fusion of powers
Governments are typically organised into distinct institutions constituting branches of government each with particular powers, functions, duties, and responsibilities.
The distribution of powers between these institutions differs between governments, as do the functions and number of branches.
An independent, parallel distribution of powers between branches of government is the separation of powers.
A shared, intersecting, or overlapping distribution of powers is the fusion of powers.
Governments are often organised into three branches with separate powers: a legislature, an executive, and a judiciary; this is sometimes called the trias politica model.
However, in parliamentary and semi-presidential systems, branches of government often intersect, having shared membership and overlapping functions.
Many governments have fewer or additional branches, such as an independent electoral commission or auditory branch.
Party system
Part of the Politics seriesParty politics
Political spectrum
Left-wing
Far-leftCentre-left
Centre
Centre-leftRadical centreCentre-right
Right-wing
Centre-rightFar-right
Platforms/Ideologies
Anarchist
Christian democratic
Communist
Conservative
Democratic
Environmentalist
Fascist
Fundamentalist
Globalist
Green
Internationalist
Liberal
Libertarian
Nationalist
Pirate Party
Populist
Progressive
Regionalist
Republican
Social democratic
Socialist
Syncretic
Types
Elite party
Cartel party
Catch-all party
Entrepreneurial party
Mass party
Ruling party
Opposition party
Parliamentary opposition
Official party status
Single-issue party
Leaders and organization
Backbencher
Caucus
Caucus chair
Floor leader
Frontbencher
Lead candidate
Leader of the Opposition
Majority leader
Minority leader
Parliamentary group
Parliamentary leader
Party chair
Party leader
Party spokesperson
Secretary
Shadow cabinet
Whip
Internal elections
Primary election
Leadership election
Open list
Party convention/conference
Leadership convention
Party discipline
Conscience vote
Crossing the floor
Party discipline
Party line
Party-line vote
Party switching
Party systems
One-party
Dominant-partyTwo-partyMulti-party
Non-partisan
Coalitions between parties
Political group
Divided government
Coalition government
Confidence and supply
Consensus government
Grand coalition
Hung parliament
Majority government
Minority government
National unity government
Rotation government
Lists of political parties
Ruling parties by country
Political parties by region
Political ideologies
Category:Banned political parties
Politics portal
Further information: Political party and Party system
Presently, most governments are administered by members of an explicitly constituted political party which coordinates the activities of associated government officials and candidates for office.
In a multiparty system of government, multiple political parties have the capacity to gain control of government offices, typically by competing in elections, although the effective number of parties may be limited.
A majority government is a government by one or more governing parties together holding an absolute majority of seats in the parliament, in contrast to a minority government in which they have only a plurality of seats and often depend on a confidence and supply arrangement with other parties.
A coalition government is one in which multiple parties cooperate to form a government as part of a coalition agreement.
In a single-party government a single party forms a government without the support of a coalition, as is typically the case with majority governments, but even a minority government may consist of just one party unable to find a willing coalition partner at the moment.
A party which continuously maintains a single-party government within a (nominally) multiparty system constitutes a dominant-party system.
In a (nondemocratic) one party system a single ruling party has the (more or less) exclusive right to form the government, and the formation of other parties may be obstructed or illegal.
In some cases, a government may have a non-partisan system, as is the case with absolute monarchy or non-partisan democracy.
Maps
See also: List of countries by system of government
Democracy Index by the Economist Intelligence Unit, 2017.      Full Democracies   9–10   8–9   Flawed Democracies   7–8   6–7   Hybrid Regimes   5–6   4–5   Authoritarian Regimes   3–4   2–3   0–2 
World first-and-second degree administrative levels
A world map distinguishing countries of the world as federations (green) from unitary states (blue).    Unitary states   Federations
See also
List of forms of government
Central government
Civics
Comparative government
Constitutional economics
Deep state
Digital democracy
E-Government
Government effectiveness index
History of politics
Legal rights
List of countries by system of government
List of European Union member states by political system
Local government
Ministry
Political economy
Political history
Prime ministerial government
State (polity)
Voting system
World government
Notes
Frederickson 2000, p. 12, quote:"...conservative southern Democrats viewed warily the potential of New Deal programs to threaten the region's economic dependence on cheap labor while stirring the democratic ambitions of the disfranchised and undermining white supremacy."
Ancient Greek: ἀριστοκρατία aristokratía, from ἄριστος aristos "excellent", and κράτος kratos "power".
Conducted by American think tank Freedom House, which is largely funded by the US government.
References
Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th edition.
Columbia University Press. 2000.[full citation needed]
a b Smelser & Baltes 2001, p. [page needed].
Brock 2013, p. 53–62.
"Government English Definition and Meaning". Lexico.
Archived from the original on 17 July 2022. Retrieved 17 July 2022.
a b c Christian 2004, p. 245.
Christian 2004, p. 294.
The New Encyclopædia Britannica (15th edition)[full citation needed]
Christian 2004, pp. 146–147.
a b Kuper & Kuper 2008, p. [page needed].
Haider-Markel 2014, p. [page needed].
Lewellen 2003, p. [page needed].
Kopstein & Lichbach 2005, p. 4.
Renna 2015.
Ribuffo 2011, pp. 2–6, quote on p. 6.
Frederickson 2000, p. 12.
Freeland 2012.
Brill 2016.
Hobbes, Thomas.
Leviathan  – via Wikisource.
Johnson, Paul M. "Autocracy: A Glossary of Political Economy Terms". Auburn.edu.
Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 14 September 2012.
"aristocracy". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
Oxford English Dictionary: "democracy".
Watkins, Frederick (1970). "Democracy". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 7 (Expo '70 hardcover ed.). William Benton. pp. 215–23. ISBN 978-0-85229-135-1.
Montesquieu 1748, book 2, chapters 1.
"Republic". Encyclopædia Britannica.[full citation needed]
"republic". WordNet 3.0. Archived from the original on 12 March 2009. Retrieved 20 March 2009.
"Republic". Merriam-Webster.
Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2010.
Montesquieu 1748, book 2, chapters 2–3.
Needler 1991, pp. 116–118.
Gallagher, Laver & Mair 2006.
Kettle 2015.
Duxbury 2021.
"Democracy Index 2017 – Economist Intelligence Unit" (PDF). EIU.com.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2018.
Bibliography
Brill, Sara (2016). "Political Pathology in Plato's Republic". Apeiron. 49 (2): 127–161. doi:10.1515/apeiron-2015-0003. ISSN 2156-7093. S2CID 148505083.
Brock, Roger (2013). Greek Political Imagery from Homer to Aristotle.
London: Bloomsbury.
ISBN 978-1-4725-0218-6. OCLC 1040413173. Retrieved 14 July 2022.
Christian, David (2004). Maps of Time: an Introduction to Big History.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-24476-4. OCLC 966003275.
Duxbury, Charlie (29 November 2021). "Magdalena Andersson named Swedish prime minister (again)". Politico.
Archived from the original on 15 April 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2022.
Frederickson, Kari (2000). The Dixiecrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932–1968. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
ISBN 978-0-8078-4910-1. OCLC 475254808.
Freeland, Chrystia (2012). Plutocrats: the Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone Else.
London: Allen Lane.
ISBN 978-1-84614-252-9. OCLC 795857028.
Gallagher, Michael; Laver, M.; Mair, P. (2006). Representative Government in Western Europe (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 9780070366848. OCLC 906939909.
Haider-Markel, Donald P. (2014). The Oxford Handbook of State and Local Government.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-957967-9. OCLC 904484428.
Kettle, Martin (17 April 2015). "Coalition and minority governments are not so unusual in UK elections; The first-past-the-post system has led to fewer one-party majority governments in Britain than might be expected -- only half of all those in the 20th century". Guardian.
Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2022 – via Gale General OneFile.
Kopstein, Jeffrey; Lichbach, Mark, eds. (2005). Comparative politics: interests, identities, and institutions in a changing global order (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 0521708400. OCLC 1293165230.
Kuper, Adam; Kuper, Jessica, eds. (2008). The Social Science Encyclopedia.
London: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-47635-5. OCLC 789658928.
Lewellen, Ted C. (2003). Political Anthropology: An Introduction (3rd ed.). Westport, CT: Praeger.
ISBN 978-0-89789-891-1. OCLC 936497371. Retrieved 20 May 2020.
Montesquieu (1748). The Spirit of the Laws.
Needler, Martin C. (1991). The Concepts of Comparative Politics.
New York: Praeger.
ISBN 978-0-275-93653-2. OCLC 925042067.
Renna, Thomas (September 2015). "The Holy Roman Empire was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire". Michigan Academician. 42 (1): 60–75. doi:10.7245/0026-2005-42.1.60.
Ribuffo, Leo P. (2011). "20 Suggestions for Studying the Right now that Studying the Right is Trendy". Historically Speaking. 12 (1): 2–6. doi:10.1353/hsp.2011.0013. S2CID 144367661.
Smelser, Neil J.; Baltes, Paul B. (2001). International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences.
New York: Elsevier Science.
ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8. OCLC 43548228.
Further reading
de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno; Smith, Alastair (2012). The Dictator's Handbook: Why Bad Behavior is Almost Always Good Politics.
New York: PublicAffairs.
ISBN 9781610390446. OCLC 1026803822.
de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno; Smith, Alastair; Siverson, Randolph M.; Morrow, James D. (2003). The Logic of Political Survival.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
ISBN 9780262025461. OCLC 475265120.
Dobson, William J. (2013). The Dictator's Learning Curve: Inside the Global Battle for Democracy.
New York: Anchor.
ISBN 978-0307477552. OCLC 849820048.
Friedrich, Carl J.; Brzezinski, Zbigniew K. (1966) . Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (2nd ed.). New York: Frederick A. Praeger.
ISBN 9780674895652. OCLC 826626632.
Krader, Lawrence (1968). Formation of the State.
Foundations of Modern Anthropology.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
ISBN 0133294900. OCLC 266086412.
Links to related articles
Autonomous types of first-tier subdivision administrationFederalism
Asymmetric federalism
Confederation
Corporative federalism
Dual federalism
Ethnic federalism
Federacy
Federal monarchy
Federal republic
Federated state
Federation
Fiscal federalism
Symmetric federalism
List of federal countries
Unitary state
Devolution
Regional state
Unions
Composite monarchy
Continental union
Dual monarchy
Dynastic union
Empire
Colonial empire
Multinational state
Personal union
Political union
Real union
Superstate
Supranational union
Subordinacy
Associated state
Client state
Colony
Dependent territory
Direct rule
Dominion
Indirect rule
Mandate
Protectorate
Puppet state
Satellite state
Trusteeship
Tributary state
Vassal state
Development
Annexation
Cession
Detachment
Irredentism
Military occupation
Partition
Secession
Separatism
Territorial dispute
See also
Autonomy
Autonomous area
Decentralization
Hegemony
Home rule
Stateless nation
Subsidiarity
Suzerainty
Tribal sovereignty
Global governance and identityProposals
United Nations Parliamentary Assembly
World government
World federalism
World taxation system
Flag
Theories
Cosmopolitanism
Democratic globalization
Democratic mundialization
Global apartheid
Global citizenship
Global governance
Globalism
Internationalism
Transnational governance
World currency
Organisations
Democratic World Federalists
Global citizens movement
World Federalist Movement
World Service Authority
World portal
Political cultureTypes of political culture
Civic political culture
Parochial political culture
Country-specific articles
Political culture of Canada
Political culture of Germany
Political culture of the United Kingdom
Political culture of the United States
Politics portal
Political science portal
List of political ideologies
Anti-establishment
Centrism
Hardline
Left-wing politics
Reactionary
Revolutionary
Right-wing politics
The Establishment
Agrarianism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Capitalism
Centrism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Corporatism
Democracy
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Familialism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Federalism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Interculturalism
Internationalism
Islamism
Leftism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Marxism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism
Nationalism
Nazism
Nihilism
Pacifism
Political radicalism
Populism
Progressive conservatism
Progressivism
Reformism
Regionalism
Republicanism
Rightism
Royalism
Secularism
Separatism
Social anarchism
Social credit
Social democracy
Socialism
Statism
Syncretism
Technocracy
Third Way
Totalitarianism
Utilitarianism
White supremacy
Zionism
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Political spectrum
Far-left
Left
Centre-left
Centre
Centre-right
Right
Far-right
Political positions
Post-leftism
Ultra-leftism
Anti-Stalinist left
New Left
Centrist Marxism
Third Way
Radical centrism
New RightPolitical ideologies
Anarchism
Marxism
Communism
Socialism
Social democracy
Liberalism
Christian democracy
Conservatism
Nationalism
Fascism
NazismReligious politics
Buddhist socialism
Christian left
Jewish left
Muslim left
Christian right
Hindutva
Islamism
Islamic conservatism
Islam and democracy
Religious ZionismPolitical pejoratives
Baizuo
Champagne socialist
Hard left
Liberal elite
Loony left
Moonbat
Red fascist
Regressive left
Social fascism
Social imperialism
Social justice warrior
Soft left
WingnutModels
Horseshoe theory
Left–right political spectrum
Nolan Chart
Overton window
Open–closed political spectrum
Pournelle chart
Right-wing authoritarianismSee also
Anti-authoritarianism
Libertarianism
Syndicalism
Progressivism
Green politics
Identity politics
Corporatism
Authoritarianism
Totalitarianism
Revolutionary
Reactionary
Anti-establishment
Collectivism
Communitarianism
The Establishment
Individualism
Hardline
Populism
Radical politics
Triangulation
Government at Wikipedia's sister projects:Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityData from WikidataPortal: Politics
Authority control: National libraries 
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Korea
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 28 September 2022, at 10:55 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
