Hatshepsut - Wikipedia
Hatshepsut
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Second confirmed female Egyptian pharaoh
For the 13th dynasty princess, see Hatshepsut (king's daughter).
HatshepsutStatue of Hatshepsut on display at the Metropolitan Museum of ArtPharaohReignc. 1479 – 1458 BC (18th Dynasty)PredecessorThutmose IISuccessorThutmose IIIRoyal titulary
Horus name
Weseret kauwsrt-kꜢwPowerful of kas 
Nebty name
Wadjet renputwꜢḏt-rnpwtFlourishing of years 
Golden Horus
Netjeret khaunṯrt-ḫꜤwDivine of appearances 
Prenomen  (Praenomen)
Maat ka remꜢꜤt kꜢ rꜤThe true one of the ka of ReTruth (Ma'at) is the Ka of Re 
Nomen
Khenemet imun, hat shepsutimn ẖnmt ḥꜢt špswtUnited with Amun, foremost of noble women 
ConsortThutmose IIChildrenNeferureFatherThutmose IMotherAhmoseBornc. 1507 BCDied1458 BC (aged 50)BurialKV20 (possibly re-interred in KV60)MonumentsTemple of Karnak, Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut, Speos Artemidos Chapelle Rouge
Hatshepsut (/hætˈʃɛpsʊt/; also Hatchepsut; Egyptian: ḥꜣt-špswt "Foremost of Noble Ladies"; c. 1507–1458 BC) was the fifth pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt.
She was the second historically confirmed female pharaoh, after Sobekneferu. (Various other women may have also ruled as pharaohs or at least regents before Hatshepsut, as early as Neithhotep around 1,600 years prior.)
Hatshepsut came to the throne of Egypt in 1478 BC. As the principal wife of Thutmose II, Hatshepsut initially ruled as regent to Thutmose III, a son of Thutmose II by another wife and the first male heir.
While Thutmose III had inherited the throne at about two years old, Hatshepsut continued to rule by asserting her lineage as the daughter and only child of Thutmose I and his primary wife, Ahmose.
Her husband Thutmose II was the son of Thutmose I and a secondary wife named Mutnofret, who carried the title 'King's daughter' and was probably a child of Ahmose I. Hatshepsut and Thutmose II had a daughter named Neferure.
Thutmose II with Iset, a secondary wife, would father Thutmose III, who would succeed Hatshepsut as pharaoh.
Contents
Reign
Jar bearing the cartouche of Hatshepsut.
Filled in with cedar resin.
Calcite, unfinished.
Foundation deposit. 18th Dynasty.
From Deir el-Bahari, Egypt.
The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, London
Although contemporary records of her reign are documented in diverse ancient sources, Hatshepsut was thought by early modern scholars as only having served as a co-regent from about 1479 to 1458 BC, during years seven to 21 of the reign previously identified as that of Thutmose III. Today Egyptologists generally agree that Hatshepsut assumed the position of pharaoh.
Hatshepsut was described as having a reign of about 21 years by ancient authors.
Josephus and Julius Africanus both quote Manetho's king list, mentioning a woman called Amessis or Amensis who has been identified (from the context) as Hatshepsut.
In Josephus' work, her reign is described as lasting 21 years and nine months, while Africanus stated it was 22 years.
At this point in the history, records of the reign of Hatshepsut end, since the first major foreign campaign of Thutmose III was dated to his 22nd year, which also would have been Hatshepsut's 22nd year as pharaoh.
Dating the beginning of her reign is more difficult, however.
Her father's reign began in either 1526 or 1506 BC according to the high and low estimates of her reign, respectively.
The length of the reigns of Thutmose I and Thutmose II, however, cannot be determined with absolute certainty.
With short reigns, Hatshepsut would have ascended the throne 14 years after the coronation of Thutmose I, her father.
Longer reigns would put her ascension 25 years after Thutmose I's coronation.
Thus, Hatshepsut could have assumed power as early as 1512 BC, or, as late as 1479 BC.[citation needed]
The earliest attestation of Hatshepsut as pharaoh occurs in the tomb of Ramose and Hatnofer, where a collection of grave goods contained a single pottery jar or amphora from the tomb's chamber—which was stamped with the date "Year 7". Another jar from the same tomb—which was discovered in situ by a 1935–36 Metropolitan Museum of Art expedition on a hillside near Thebes — was stamped with the seal of the "God's Wife Hatshepsut" while two jars bore the seal of "The Good Goddess Maatkare." The dating of the amphorae, "sealed into the [tomb's] burial chamber by the debris from Senenmut's own tomb", is undisputed, which means that Hatshepsut was acknowledged as pharaoh, and not queen, of Egypt by Year 7 of her reign.
Nuanced legacy
Hatshepsut's legacy is oftentimes dominated by a debate regarding the extent of whether her reign challenged or upheld the patriarchy.
On one hand, Hatshepsut was an innovator.
She managed to rule as regent for a son who was not her own, defying the system which had previously only allowed direct mothers to rule on behalf of their biological sons.
Moreover, she used this regency to manufacture her female kingship, constructing extensive temples to celebrate her reign, thereby forcing the public to grow accustomed to seeing a woman in such a powerful role.
This ensured that when the oracle declared her king, the Egyptian public readily accepted her status.
All the while, she did so while feigning a lack of ambition and cunning, thus ensuring that she would not alienate potential supporters.
However, Hatshepsut was not an innovator in other respects, and arguably was placed in power by males to further their own wealth.
She gained power during a time when Egypt had recently amassed extensive wealth, implying that she was placed in power by Egyptian elites due to her record as successful in various domains - as High Priestess or as a placeholder serving for her father Thutmose I in Thebes while he was away on military campaigns.
This record of success made such elites confident that she could handle Egyptian wealth and trade, capitalizing on Egypt's moment of prosperity.
Indeed, historian Kara Cooney describes Hatshepsut as "the only woman to have ever taken power as king in ancient Egypt during a time of prosperity and expansion."
Major accomplishments
Trade routes
Main article: Land of Punt
Hatshepsut re-established the trade networks that had been disrupted during the Hyksos occupation of Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period, thereby building the wealth of the Eighteenth Dynasty.
She oversaw the preparations and funding for a mission to the Land of Punt.
This trading expedition to Punt was during the ninth year of Hatshepsut's reign.
It set out in her name with five ships, each measuring 70 feet (21 m) long, bearing several sails[dubious  – discuss] and accommodating 210 men that included sailors and 30 rowers.[citation needed] Many trade goods were bought in Punt, notably frankincense and myrrh.[citation needed]
Hatshepsut's delegation returned from Punt bearing 31 live myrrh trees, the roots of which were carefully kept in baskets for the duration of the voyage.
This was the first recorded attempt to transplant foreign trees.
It is reported that Hatshepsut had these trees planted in the courts of her mortuary temple complex.
Egyptians also returned with a number of other gifts from Punt, among which was frankincense.
Hatshepsut would grind the charred frankincense into kohl eyeliner.
This is the first recorded use of the resin.
Hatshepsut had the expedition commemorated in relief at Deir el-Bahari, which is also famous for its realistic depiction of the Queen of the Land of Punt, Queen Ati.
Hatshepsut also sent raiding expeditions to Byblos and the Sinai Peninsula shortly after the Punt expedition.
Very little is known about these expeditions.
Although many Egyptologists have claimed that her foreign policy was mainly peaceful, it's possible that she led military campaigns against Nubia and Canaan.
Building projects
Copper or bronze sheet bearing the name of Hatshepsut.
From a foundation deposit in "a small pit covered with a mat" found at Deir el-Bahri, Egypt. 18th Dynasty.
The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, London
Hatshepsut was one of the most prolific builders in Ancient Egypt, commissioning hundreds of construction projects throughout both Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt.
Many of these building projects were temples to build her religious base and legitimacy beyond her position as God's Wife of Amun.
At these temples, she performed religious rituals that had hitherto been reserved for kings, corroborating the evidence that Hatshepsut assumed traditionally male roles as pharaoh.
Arguably, her buildings were grander and more numerous than those of her Middle Kingdom predecessors.
Later, pharaohs attempted to claim some of her projects as theirs.
She employed the great architect Ineni, who also had worked for her father, her husband, and for the royal steward Senenmut.
During her reign, so much statuary was produced that almost every major museum with Ancient Egyptian artifacts in the world has Hatshepsut statuary among their collections; for instance, the Hatshepsut Room in New York City's Metropolitan Museum of Art is dedicated solely to some of these pieces.
The extant artifacts of the statuary provide archaeological evidence of Hatshepsut's portrayals of herself as a male pharaoh, with physically masculine traits and traditionally male Ancient Egyptian garb, such as a false beard and ram's horns.
Following the tradition of most pharaohs, Hatshepsut had monuments constructed at the Temple of Karnak.
She also restored the original Precinct of Mut, the great ancient goddess of Egypt, at Karnak that had been ravaged by the foreign rulers during the Hyksos occupation.
It later was ravaged by other pharaohs, who took one part after another to use in their own pet projects.
The precinct awaits restoration.
She had twin obelisks erected at the entrance to the temple which at the time of building were the tallest in the world.
Only one remains upright, which is the second-tallest ancient obelisk still standing, the other having toppled and broken in two.
The official in charge of those obelisks was the high steward Amenhotep.
Another project, Karnak's Red Chapel, or Chapelle Rouge, was intended as a barque shrine and originally may have stood between her two obelisks.
It was lined with carved stones that depicted significant events in Hatshepsut's life.[citation needed]
Later, she ordered the construction of two more obelisks to celebrate her 16th year as pharaoh; one of the obelisks broke during construction, and a third was therefore constructed to replace it.
The broken obelisk was left at its quarrying site in Aswan, where it still remains.
Known as the Unfinished Obelisk, it provides evidence of how obelisks were quarried.
Colonnaded design of Hatshepsut temple
Hatshepsut built the Temple of Pakhet at Beni Hasan in the Minya Governorate south of Al Minya.
The name, Pakhet, was a synthesis that occurred by combining Bast and Sekhmet, who were similar lioness war goddesses, in an area that bordered the north and south division of their cults.
The cavernous underground temple, cut into the rock cliffs on the eastern side of the Nile, was admired and called the Speos Artemidos by the Greeks during their occupation of Egypt, known as the Ptolemaic Dynasty.
They saw the goddess as akin to their hunter goddess, Artemis.
The temple is thought to have been built alongside much more ancient ones that have not survived.
This temple has an architrave with a long dedicatory text bearing Hatshepsut's famous denunciation of the Hyksos that James P. Allen has translated.
The Hyksos occupied Egypt and cast it into a cultural decline that persisted until a revival of her policies and innovations.
This temple was altered later, and some of its inside decorations were usurped by Seti I of the Nineteenth Dynasty in an attempt to have his name replace that of Hatshepsut.[citation needed]
Following the tradition of many pharaohs, the masterpiece of Hatshepsut's building projects was a mortuary temple.
She built hers in a complex at Deir el-Bahri.
It was designed and implemented by Senenmut at a site on the West Bank of the Nile River near the entrance to what now is called the Valley of the Kings because of all the pharaohs who later chose to associate their complexes with the grandeur of hers.
Her buildings were the first grand ones planned for that location.[citation needed]
The complex's focal point was the Djeser-Djeseru or "the Holy of Holies," a colonnaded structure of perfect harmony built nearly one thousand years before the Parthenon.
Djeser-Djeseru sits atop a series of terraces that once were graced with lush gardens.
Djeser-Djeseru is built into a cliff face that rises sharply above it.
Djeser-Djeseru and the other buildings of Hatshepsut's Deir el-Bahri complex are significant advances in architecture.
Another one of her great accomplishments is the Hatshepsut needle (also known as the granite obelisks).[citation needed]
Official lauding
See also: Depiction of Hatshepsut's birth and coronation
Hyperbole is common to virtually all royal inscriptions of Egyptian history.
While all ancient leaders used it to laud their achievements, Hatshepsut has been called the most accomplished pharaoh at promoting her accomplishments.
This may have resulted from the extensive building executed during her time as pharaoh, in comparison with many others.
It afforded her many opportunities to laud herself, but it also reflected the wealth that her policies and administration brought to Egypt, enabling her to finance such projects.
Aggrandizement of their achievements was traditional when pharaohs built temples and their tombs.[citation needed]
Large granite sphinx bearing the likeness of the pharaoh Hatshepsut, depicted with the traditional false beard, a symbol of her pharaonic power—Metropolitan Museum of Art
Women had a relatively high status in Ancient Egypt and enjoyed the legal right to own, inherit, or will property.
A woman becoming pharaoh was rare, however; only Sobekneferu, Khentkaus I and possibly Nitocris preceded her.
Nefernferuaten and Twosret may have been the only women to succeed her among the indigenous rulers.
In Egyptian history, there was no word for a "queen regnant" as in contemporary history, "king" being the ancient Egyptian title regardless of gender, and by the time of her reign, pharaoh had become the name for the ruler.[citation needed] Hatshepsut is not unique, however, in taking the title of king.
Sobekneferu, ruling six dynasties prior to Hatshepsut, also did so when she ruled Egypt.
Hatshepsut had been well-trained in her duties as the daughter of the pharaoh.
During her father's reign she held the powerful office of God's Wife.[citation needed] She had taken a strong role as queen to her husband and was well experienced in the administration of her kingdom by the time she became pharaoh.
There is no indication of challenges to her leadership and, until her death, her co-regent remained in a secondary role, quite amicably heading her powerful army—which would have given him the power necessary to overthrow a usurper of his rightful place, if that had been the case.[citation needed]
Hatshepsut assumed all the regalia and symbols of the Pharaonic office in official representations: the Khat head cloth, topped with the uraeus, the traditional false beard, and shendyt kilt.
Many existing statues alternatively show her in typically feminine attire as well as those that depict her in the royal ceremonial attire.
After this period of transition ended, however, most formal depictions of Hatshepsut as pharaoh showed her in the royal attire, with all the Pharaonic regalia, and some previously feminine depictions were carved over to now be masculine.
Hatshepsut was ambiguous and androgynous in many of her statues and monuments.
She would create a masculine version of herself to establish herself in the Egyptian patriarchy.
She also named herself Maatkare, or "Truth is the Soul of the Sun God". This name emphasized the Pharaoh Maatkare Hatshepsut’s connection to one of the many evolutions of Amun while referencing a Pharaoh's responsibility to maintain "ma’at", harmony, through respecting tradition.
Moreover, the Osirian statues of Hatshepsut — as with other pharaohs — depict the dead pharaoh as Osiris, with the body and regalia of that deity.
All the statues of Hatshepsut at her tomb follow that tradition.
The promise of resurrection after death was a tenet of the cult of Osiris.
The Hawk of the Pharaoh, Hatshepsut—Temple at Luxor
One of the most famous examples of the legends about Hatshepsut is a myth about her birth.
In this myth, Amun goes to Ahmose in the form of Thutmose I and awakens her with pleasant odors.
At this point Amun places the ankh, a symbol of life, to Ahmose's nose, and Hatshepsut is conceived by Ahmose.
Khnum, the god who forms the bodies of human children, is then instructed to create a body and ka, or corporal presence/life force, for Hatshepsut.
Heket, the goddess of life and fertility, and Khnum then lead Ahmose along to a lioness' bed where she gives birth to Hatshepsut.[citation needed] Reliefs depicting each step in these events are at Karnak and in her mortuary temple.
The Oracle of Amun proclaimed that it was the will of Amun that Hatshepsut be pharaoh, further strengthening her position.
She reiterated Amun's support by having these proclamations by the god Amun carved on her monuments:
Welcome my sweet daughter, my favorite, the King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Maatkare, Hatshepsut.
Thou art the Pharaoh, taking possession of the Two Lands.
Furthermore, on Khnum's potter's wheel, she is depicted as a little boy to further cement her divine right to rule.
Hatshepsut claimed that she was her father's intended heir and that he made her the heir apparent of Egypt.
Almost all scholars today view this as historical revisionism or prolepsis on Hatshepsut's part, since it was Thutmose II — a son of Thutmose I by Mutnofret — who was her father's heir.
Moreover, Thutmose I could not have foreseen that his daughter Hatshepsut would outlive his son within his own lifetime.
Thutmose II soon married Hatshepsut and the latter became both his senior royal wife and the most powerful woman at court.
Biographer Evelyn Wells, however, accepts Hatshepsut's claim that she was her father's intended successor.
Once she became pharaoh herself, Hatshepsut supported her assertion that she was her father's designated successor with inscriptions on the walls of her mortuary temple:
Then his majesty said to them: "This daughter of mine, Khnumetamun Hatshepsut—may she live!—I have appointed as my successor upon my throne... she shall direct the people in every sphere of the palace; it is she indeed who shall lead you.
Obey her words, unite yourselves at her command." The royal nobles, the dignitaries, and the leaders of the people heard this proclamation of the promotion of his daughter, the King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Maatkare—may she live eternally.
Death, burial, and mummification
See also: KV20
Hatshepsut died in her 22nd regnal year as she approached what we would consider middle age given typical contemporary lifespans.
The precise date of Hatshepsut's death—and when Thutmose III became the next pharaoh of Egypt—is considered Year 22, II Peret day 10 of her reign, as recorded on a single stela erected at Armant or 16 January 1458 BC. This information validates the basic reliability of Manetho's king list records since Hatshepsut's known accession date was I Shemu day 4 (i.e., Hatshepsut died nine months into her 22nd year as king, as Manetho writes in his Epitome for a reign of 21 years and nine months). No contemporary mention of the cause of her death has survived.
Hatshepsut had begun constructing a tomb when she was the Great Royal Wife of Thutmose II. Still, the scale of this was not suitable for a pharaoh, so when she ascended the throne, preparation for another burial started.
For this, KV20, originally quarried for her father, Thutmose I, and probably the first royal tomb in the Valley of the Kings, was extended with a new burial chamber.
Hatshepsut also refurbished her father's burial and prepared for a double interment of both Thutmose I and her within KV20. Therefore, it is likely that when she died (no later than the 22nd year of her reign), she was interred in this tomb along with her father.
During the reign of Thutmose III, however, a new tomb (KV38), together with new burial equipment, was provided for Thutmose I, who then was removed from his original tomb and re-interred elsewhere.
At the same time, Hatshepsut's mummy might have been moved into the tomb of her nurse, Sitre In, in KV60. It is possible that Amenhotep II, son to Thutmose III by a secondary wife, was the one motivating these actions in an attempt to assure his own uncertain right to succession.
Besides what was recovered from KV20 during Howard Carter's clearance of the tomb in 1903, other funerary furniture belonging to Hatshepsut has been found elsewhere, including a lioness "throne" (bedstead is a better description), a senet game board with carved lioness-headed, red-jasper game pieces bearing her pharaonic title, a signet ring, and a partial shabti figurine bearing her name.
In the Royal Mummy Cache at DB320, a wooden canopic box with an ivory knob was found that was inscribed with the name of Hatshepsut and contained a mummified liver or spleen as well as a molar tooth.
There was a royal lady of the 21st dynasty of the same name, however, and for a while, it was thought possible that it could have belonged to her instead.
Proposed mummy
The KV60A mummy, thought to be that of Hatshepsut
In 1903, Howard Carter had discovered tomb KV60 in the Valley of the Kings.
It contained two female mummies: one identified as Hatshepsut's wetnurse and the other unidentified.
In spring 2007, the unidentified body, called KV60A, was finally removed from the tomb by Dr.
Zahi Hawass and brought to Cairo's Egyptian Museum for testing.
This mummy was missing a tooth, and the space in the jaw perfectly matched Hatshepsut's existing molar, found in the DB320 "canopic box". Based on this, Hawass concluded that the KV60A mummy is very likely Hatshepsut.
While the mummy and the tooth could be DNA tested to see if belonged to the same person and confirm the mummy's identity, Dr.
Zahi Hawass, the Cairo Museum and some Egyptologists have refused to do it as it would require destroying the tooth to retrieve the DNA. Her death has since been attributed to a benzopyrene carcinogenic skin lotion found in possession of the Pharaoh, which led to her having bone cancer.
Other members of the queen's family are thought to have suffered from inflammatory skin diseases that tend to be genetic.
Assuming that the mummy is that of Hatshepsut, it is likely that she inadvertently poisoned herself while trying to soothe her itchy, irritated skin.
It also would suggest that she had arthritis and bad teeth, which may be why the tooth was removed.
However, in 2011, the tooth was identified as the molar from a lower jaw, whereas the mummy from KV60 was missing a molar from its upper jaw, thus casting doubt on the supposed identification.
Changing recognition
Toward the end of the reign of Thutmose III and into the reign of his son, an attempt was made to remove Hatshepsut from certain historical and pharaonic records — a damnatio memoriae.
This elimination was carried out in the most literal way possible.
Her cartouches and images were chiseled off some stone walls, leaving very obvious Hatshepsut-shaped gaps in the artwork.
Erasure methods ranged from full destruction of any instance of her name or image to replacement, inserting Thutmose I or II where Hatshepsut once stood.
There were also instances of smoothing, patchwork jobs that covered Hatshepsut's cartouche, examples of this can be seen on the walls of the Deir el-Bahri temple.
Simpler methods also included covering, where new stone was added to fully cover reliefs or sacred stone work.
At the Deir el-Bahari temple, Hatshepsut's numerous statues were torn down and in many cases, smashed or disfigured before being buried in a pit.
At Karnak, there even was an attempt to wall up her obelisks.
While it is clear that much of this rewriting of Hatshepsut's history occurred only during the close of Thutmose III's reign, it is not clear why it happened, other than the typical pattern of self-promotion that existed among the pharaohs and their administrators, or perhaps saving money by not building new monuments for the burial of Thutmose III and instead, using the grand structures built by Hatshepsut.
Amenhotep II, the son of Thutmose III, who became a co-regent toward the end of his father's reign, is suspected by some as being the defacer during the end of the reign of a very old pharaoh.
He would have had a motive because his position in the royal lineage was not so strong as to assure his elevation to pharaoh.
He is documented, further, as having usurped many of Hatshepsut's accomplishments during his own reign.
His reign is marked with attempts to break the royal lineage as well, not recording the names of his queens and eliminating the powerful titles and official roles of royal women, such as God's Wife of Amun.
For many years, presuming that it was Thutmose III acting out of resentment once he became pharaoh, early modern Egyptologists presumed that the erasures were similar to the Roman damnatio memoriae.
This appeared to make sense when thinking that Thutmose might have been an unwilling co-regent for years.
This assessment of the situation probably is too simplistic, however.
It is highly unlikely that the determined and focused Thutmose—not only Egypt's most successful general, but an acclaimed athlete, author, historian, botanist, and architect—would have brooded for two decades of his own reign before attempting to avenge himself on his stepmother and aunt.
According to renowned Egyptologist Donald Redford:
Here and there, in the dark recesses of a shrine or tomb where no plebeian eye could see, the queen's cartouche and figure were left intact ... which never vulgar eye would again behold, still conveyed for the king the warmth and awe of a divine presence.
The erasures were sporadic and haphazard, with only the more visible and accessible images of Hatshepsut being removed; had it been more complete, we would not now have so many images of Hatshepsut.
Thutmose III may have died before these changes were finished and it may be that he never intended a total obliteration of her memory.
In fact, we have no evidence to support the assumption that Thutmose hated or resented Hatshepsut during her lifetime.
Had that been true, as head of the army, in a position given to him by Hatshepsut (who was clearly not worried about her co-regent's loyalty), he surely could have led a successful coup, but he made no attempt to challenge her authority during her reign, and her accomplishments and images remained featured on all of the public buildings she built for 20 years after her death.
Tyldesley hypothesis
Joyce Tyldesley hypothesized that it is possible that Thutmose III, lacking any sinister motivation, may have decided toward the end of his life to relegate Hatshepsut to her expected place as the regent—which was the traditional role of powerful women in Egypt's court as the example of Queen Ahhotep attests—rather than pharaoh.
Tyldesley fashions her concept as, that by eliminating the more obvious traces of Hatshepsut's monuments as pharaoh and reducing her status to that of his co-regent, Thutmose III could claim that the royal succession ran directly from Thutmose II to Thutmose III without any interference from his aunt.
The deliberate erasures or mutilations of the numerous public celebrations of her accomplishments, but not the rarely seen ones, would be all that was necessary to obscure Hatshepsut's accomplishments.
Moreover, by the latter half of Thutmose III's reign, the more prominent high officials who had served Hatshepsut would have died, thereby eliminating the powerful religious and bureaucratic resistance to a change in direction in a highly stratified culture.
Hatshepsut's highest official and closest supporter, Senenmut, seems either to have retired abruptly or died around Years 16 and 20 of Hatshepsut's reign, and was never interred in either of his carefully prepared tombs.
According to Tyldesley, the enigma of Senenmut's sudden disappearance "teased Egyptologists for decades" given "the lack of solid archaeological or textual evidence" and permitted "the vivid imagination of Senenmut-scholars to run wild" resulting in a variety of strongly held solutions "some of which would do credit to any fictional murder/mystery plot." In such a scenario, newer court officials, appointed by Thutmose III, also would have had an interest in promoting the many achievements of their master in order to assure the continued success of their own families.
Presuming that it was Thutmose III (rather than his co-regent son), Tyldesley also put forth a hypothesis about Thutmose suggesting that his erasures and defacement of Hatshepsut's monuments could have been a cold, but rational attempt on his part to extinguish the memory of an "unconventional female king whose reign might possibly be interpreted by future generations as a grave offence against Ma'at, and whose unorthodox coregency" could "cast serious doubt upon the legitimacy of his own right to rule.
Hatshepsut's crime need not be anything more than the fact that she was a woman." Tyldesley conjectured that Thutmose III may have considered the possibility that the example of a successful female king in Egyptian history could demonstrate that a woman was as capable at governing Egypt as a traditional male king, which could persuade "future generations of potentially strong female kings" to not "remain content with their traditional lot as wife, sister and eventual mother of a king" and assume the crown.
Dismissing relatively recent history known to Thutmose III of another woman who was king, Sobekneferu of Egypt's Middle Kingdom, she conjectured further that he might have thought that while she had enjoyed a short, approximately four-year reign, she ruled "at the very end of a fading [12th dynasty] Dynasty, and from the very start of her reign the odds had been stacked against her.
She was, therefore, acceptable to conservative Egyptians as a patriotic 'Warrior Queen' who had failed" to rejuvenate Egypt's fortunes.
In contrast, Hatshepsut's glorious reign was a completely different case: she demonstrated that women were as capable as men of ruling the two lands since she successfully presided over a prosperous Egypt for more than two decades.
If Thutmose III's intent was to forestall the possibility of a woman assuming the throne, as proposed by Tyldesley, it was a failure since Twosret and Neferneferuaten (possibly), a female co-regent or successor of Akhenaten, assumed the throne for short reigns as pharaoh later in the New Kingdom.
Hatshepsut problem
The "Hatshepsut Problem" is a direct link to gender normatives in regards to ancient Egyptian social structures.
Although she did hold Queen status, her reign, especially after, was disregarded and even erased.
Her reign could be considered more successful than some pharaoh’s reign, for example with expanding borders, which can be seen as a threat to traditional gender roles.
This raises questions about the conflict between power and traditional gender roles, and to what extent modernism and conservatism overlap.
The erasure of Hatshepsut's name—by the men who succeeded her for whatever reason (besides misogyny)—almost caused her to disappear from Egypt's archaeological and written records.
When 19th-century Egyptologists started to interpret the texts on the Deir el-Bahri temple walls (which were illustrated with two seemingly male kings) their translations made no sense.
Jean-François Champollion, the French decoder of hieroglyphs, was not alone in feeling confused by the obvious conflict between words and pictures:
If I felt somewhat surprised at seeing here, as elsewhere throughout the temple, the renowned Moeris [Thutmose III], adorned with all the insignia of royalty, giving place to this Amenenthe [Hatshepsut], for whose name we may search the royal lists in vain, still more astonished was I to find upon reading the inscriptions that wherever they referred to this bearded king in the usual dress of the Pharaohs, nouns and verbs were in the feminine, as though a queen were in question.
I found the same peculiarity everywhere...The "Hatshepsut Problem" was a major issue in late 19th-century and early 20th-century Egyptology, centering on confusion and disagreement on the order of succession of early 18th Dynasty pharaohs.
The dilemma takes its name from confusion over the chronology of the rule of Queen Hatshepsut and Thutmose I, II, and III. In its day, the problem was controversial enough to cause academic feuds between leading Egyptologists and created perceptions about the early Thutmosid family that persisted well into the 20th century, the influence of which still can be found in more recent works.
Chronology-wise, the Hatshepsut problem was largely cleared up in the late 20th century, as more information about her and her reign was uncovered.
Archaeological discoveries
The 2006 discovery of a foundation deposit including nine golden cartouches bearing the names of both Hatshepsut and Thutmose III in Karnak may shed additional light on the eventual attempt by Thutmose III and his son Amenhotep II to erase Hatshepsut from the historical record and the correct nature of their relationships and her role as pharaoh.
In popular culture
This article appears to contain trivial, minor, or unrelated references to popular culture.
Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's impact on popular culture, providing citations to reliable, secondary sources, rather than simply listing appearances.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2018)
"Speech of the Queen" by Hatshepsut is included in the 1992 anthology Daughters of Africa, edited by Margaret Busby.
The feminist artwork for The Dinner Party by Judy Chicago features a place setting for Hatshepsut.
Sarah Hadland portrayed her in the 2009 TV adaptation of Horrible Histories (written by Terry Deary).
A reincarnated Hatshepsut is the subject of the Tina Turner song "I Might Have Been Queen".
Musician Jlin names a song after Hatshepsut on her 2017 album Black Origami.
Rapper Rapsody names a song after Hatshepsut on her 2019 album Eve.
Hatshepsut has appeared as a fictional character in many novels, including the following:
Stephanie Thornton: Daughter of the Gods.
Penguin. 2014.
Marek Halter: Zipporah: Wife of Moses.
New York: Crown (1st US Edition). 2005. ISBN 978-1-4000-5279-0.
Eloise Jarvis McGraw: Mara: Daughter of the Nile.
Coward-McCann. 1953.
Pauline Gedge: Child of the Morning.
Macmillan Company of Canada. 1977. ISBN 978-0-7705-1520-1.
Judith Tarr: King and Goddess.
New York: Tor. 1996. ISBN 978-0-8125-5084-9.
See also
Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt family tree
Djehuty, overseer of the treasury under Hatshepsut's rule
Notes
a b c d e Leprohon 2013, pp. 98.
a b c d Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, p. 226.
a b c d John Noble Wilford (27 June 2007). "Tooth May Have Solved Mummy Mystery". The New York Times.
Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2007. A single tooth and some DNA clues appear to have solved the mystery of the lost mummy of Hatshepsut, one of the great queens of ancient Egypt, who reigned in the 15th century B.C.
"Hatshepsut". Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.
Retrieved 27 July 2007.
Clayton, Peter (1994). Chronicle of the Pharaohs.
Thames & Hudson. p. 104. ISBN 9780500050743.
Wilkinson, Toby (2010). The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt.
London: Bloomsbury. pp. 181, 230. ISBN 978-1-4088-1002-6.
Kara., Cooney (2015). Woman Who Would be King.
Oneworld Publications.
ISBN 978-1-322-38466-5. OCLC 897502797.
Martin, G. (23 December 2012). African Political Thought.
Springer.
ISBN 978-1-137-06205-5. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021.
N.Y.), Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York (2005). Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh.
Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-58839-173-5. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2021.
Roehig, Catherine; Dreyfus, Renee; Keller, Cathleen (2015). Hatshepsut: from Queen to Pharaoh.
New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Dodson, Aidan; Dyan, Hilton (2004). The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt.
Thames & Hudson. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-500-05128-3.
Fletcher, Joann (2013). The Search For Nefertiti.
Hachette UK. p. 156. ISBN 978-1-4447-8054-3. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2016.
Stiebing, William H. Jr. (2016). Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture.
Routledge. p. 177. ISBN 978-1-315-51116-0. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2016.
Josephus.
Against Apion. 1.1.15., Perseus Project Ap.1.15, .
Steindorff, George; Seele, Keith (1942). When Egypt Ruled the East.
University of Chicago. p. 53.
a b Grimal, Nicolas (1988). A History of Ancient Egypt.
Librairie Arthéme Fayard. p. 204.
Gabolde, Luc (1987), La Chronologie du règne de Tuthmosis II, ses conséquences sur la datation des momies royales et leurs répercutions sur l'histoire du développement de la Vallée des Rois, SAK 14: pp. 61–87.
Tyldesley, Joyce (1996). Hatchepsut: The Female Pharaoh (hardback ed.). Penguin Books. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-14-024464-9.
a b Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, p. 99.
a b c d e Cooney, Kara (2018). When Women Ruled the World: Six Queens of Egypt.
Washington, D.C.: National Geographic.
ISBN 978-1426219771.
Njoku, Raphael Chijioke (2013). The History of Somalia.
ABC-CLIO. pp. 29–31. ISBN 978-0-313-37857-7. Archived from the original on 25 January 2015. Retrieved 11 November 2016.
Isaac, Michael (2004). A Historical Atlas of Oman.
The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-8239-4500-9. Archived from the original on 14 September 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014.
a b Joyce Tyldesley, Hatchepsut: The Female Pharaoh, Penguin Books, 1998 paperback, pp. 137–144.
Margaret Bunson, Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt, p. 161.
Roehrig, Catharine H. (2005). Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh.
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-0300111392.
JJ Shirley: The Power of the Elite: The Officials of Hatshepsut's Regency and Coregency, in: J. Galán, B. M. Bryan, P. F. Dorman (eds): Creativity and Innovation in the Reign of Hatshepsut, Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 69, Chicago 2014, ISBN 978-1-61491-024-4, p. 206.
Peter Tyson, The Unfinished Obelisk Archived 22 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine, NOVA online adventure, 16 March 1999.
James P. Allen, "The Speos Artemidos Inscription of Hatshepsut" Archived 3 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Bulletin of the Egyptological Seminar 16 (2002), pp. 1–17, pls.1+2.
Gray, Martin. "Obelisk of Queen Hapshetsut, Karnak". Places of Peace and Power.
Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2017.
a b "Hatshepsut". PBS. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2017.
Nevine El-Aref, "Back in the limelight" Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Al-Ahram Weekly.
"Hatshepsut". World History Encyclopedia.
Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2021.
a b "Hatshepsut". makingqueerhistory.com.
Archived from the original on 15 January 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2021.
Breasted, James Henry, Ancient Records of Egypt: Historical Documents from the Earliest Times to the Persian Conquest, The University of Chicago Press, 1906, pp. 116–117.
Hatshepsut, Female Pharaoh of Egypt Archived 16 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Caroline Seawright.
Tyldesley, pp. 210.
Joyce Tyldesley, Chronicle of the Queens of Egypt, Thames & Hudson, 2006, p. 106.
James P. Allen, "The Military Campaign of Thutmose III", in Catherine Roehrig (ed.), Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh, The Metropolitan Museum of Art New York, Yale University Press, 2005, p. 261. Allen writes here that scholars consider the Armant stela to mark the occasion of Thutmose III's sole reign since he uses the epithet "Thutmose, Ruler of Maat" twice on this document for the first time in his reign.
This means he was asserting his own claim to the administration of Egypt after that of Hatshepsut, who by then had probably died
Jürgen von Beckerath, Chronologie des Pharaonischen Ägypten.
Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 1997, p. 189.
Dennis C. Forbes, Maatkare Hatshepsut: The Female Pharaoh, KMT, Fall 2005, pp. 26–42.
Bickerstaffe, Dylan, "The Discovery of Hatshepsut's 'Throne," KMT, Spring 2002, pp. 71–77.
"Photo Gallery: Mummy of Egypt's Lost Queen Found". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 27 May 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
Pilkington, Ed; Mark Tran (27 June 2007). "Tooth solves Hatshepsut mummy mystery". The Guardian.
Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2016.
"The Search for Hatshepsut and the Discovery of Her Mummy – Dr.
Zahi Hawass – The Plateau". guardians.net.
Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 26 November 2018.
The King Herself, National Geographic, April 2009
Jennie Cohen, "Did Skin Cream Kill Egypt’s, Queen Hatshepsut?" Archived 27 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine, History, 19 August 2011.
"Deadly ancient Egyptian medication? German scientists shed light on dark secret of Queen Hatshepsut's flacon". ScienceDaily. 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 19 September 2020.
"Tooth Clinches Identification of Egyptian Queen". Reuters. 27 June 2007. Archived from the original on 11 January 2008. Retrieved 13 April 2008.
Erhard Graefe: Der angebliche Zahn der angeblich krebskranken Diabetikerin Königin Hatschepsut, oder: Die Mumie der Hatschepsut bleibt unbekannt.
In: Göttinger Miszellen, vol. 231, 2011, p. 41–43. (in German), see also J. L. Thimes:  "A Dental Observation". In: KMT: A Modern Journal of Ancient Egypt. 19/3 (2008), p. 6–7.
Roehrig, Catharine H.; Dreyfus, Renée (2005). Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh.
New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 278–9. ISBN 1-58839-172-8.
Gardiner, Alan, Egypt of the Pharaohs, Oxford University Press, 1964, p. 198.
Redford, p. 87.
Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, p. 206.
Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, p. 207, Tyldesley notes on p. 252 that a detailed discussion of Senenmut's disappearance and a useful list of other publications on this topic is given in A. R. Schulman's 1969–70 paper "Some Remarks on the Alleged 'Fall' of Senmut," JARCE 8, pp. 29–48.
Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, p. 225.
Tyldesley, Hatchepsut, pp. 225–226.
Champollion le Jeune, Nouvelle Edition, 1868. "Thèbes, 18 juin 1829 – Lettres écrites d'Égypte et de Nubie en 1828 et 1829" (in French). Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2015 – via Project Gutenberg.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Bediz, David. "The Story of Hatshepsut". Archived from the original on 29 June 2007. Retrieved 27 June 2007.
Mensan, Romain (Spring 2007). "Tuthmosid foundation deposits at Karnak". Egyptian Archaeology. 30: 21.
"Daughters of Africa: An International Anthology of Words and Writings by..." Retrieved 22 September 2022.
Kentake, Meserette (17 December 2013). "Daughters of Africa".
Place Settings Archived 3 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine.
Brooklyn Museum.
Retrieved 6 August 2015.
References
Brown, Chip (April 2009). "The King Herself". National Geographic: 88–111.
Fairman, H. W.; B. Grdseloff (1947). "Texts of Hatshepsut and Sethos I inside Speos Artemidos". Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 33: 12–33. doi:10.2307/3855434. JSTOR 3855434.
Fakhry, Ahmed (1939). "A new speos from the reign of Hatshepsut and Thutmosis III at Beni-Hasan". Annales du Service des Antiquités de l'Égypte. 39: 709–723.
Gardiner, Alan Henderson (1946). "Davies's copy of the great Speos Artemidos inscription". Journal of Egyptian Archaeology. 32: 43–56. doi:10.2307/3855414. JSTOR 3855414.
Harbin, Michael A. (2005). The Promise and the Blessing: A Historical Survey of the Old and New Testaments.
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan.
ISBN 978-0-310-24037-2.
Nadig, Peter (2014). Hatschepsut.
Mainz: von Zabern.
ISBN 978-3-8053-4763-1.
Redford, Donald B. (1967). History and Chronology of the 18th dynasty of Egypt: Seven studies.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Shaw, Ian, ed. (2002). The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-280293-4.
Tyldesley, Joyce (1996). Hatchepsut: The Female Pharaoh.
London: Viking.
ISBN 978-0-670-85976-4.
Wells, Evelyn (1969). Hatshepsut.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Aldred, Cyril (1952). The Development of Ancient Egyptian Art from 3200 to 1315 BC. London: A. Tiranti.
Edgerton, William F. (1933). The Thutmosid Succession.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gardiner, Sir Alan (1961). Egypt of the Pharaohs.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hayes, William C. (1973). "Egypt: Internal Affairs from Thuthmosis I to the Death of Amenophis III". Cambridge Ancient History: History of the Middle East and the Aegean Region, c. 1800–1380 BC (3rd ed.). London: Cambridge University Press.
Leprohon, Ronald J. (2013). The Great Name: Ancient Egyptian Royal Titulary.
SBL Press.
ISBN 978-1-58983-736-2. Retrieved 10 December 2021.
Maspero, Gaston (1903–1906). History of Egypt, Chaldea, Syria, Babylonia, and Assyria.
London: Grolier Society.
Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2015.
Nims, Charles F. (1965). Thebes of the Pharaohs: Pattern for Every City.
New York: Stein and Day.
Roehrig, Catharine H.; Dreyfus, Renée; Keller, Cathleen A., eds. (2005). Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh.
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-1-58839-172-8.
Wilson, John A. (1951). The Burden of Egypt.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Armstrong, Kim (2017). "Hatshepsut". Making Queer History.
Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2021.
Mark, Joshua (2016). "Hatshepsut". World History Encyclopedia.
Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2021.
External links
Hatshepsut  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata
Hatshepsut – Archaeowiki.org
Mummy Of Egyptian Queen Hatshepsut Found
Interactive, panoramic online view of Hatshepsut's mortuary temple at Deir el-Bahari, Egypt
Video tour the Metropolitan Museum of Art's gallery of Hatshepsut sculptures
Hatshepsut – the fifth ruler of the 18th Dynasty
In Our Time : Hatshepsut, BBC Radio 4
PharaohsProtodynastic to First Intermediate Period  (<3150–2040 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaohs
male
female♀
uncertain
Protodynastic(pre-3150 BC)Lower
Hedju Hor
Ny-Hor
Hsekiu
Khayu
Tiu
Thesh
Neheb
Wazner
Hat Hor
Mekh
Double Falcon
Wash
Upper
Finger Snail
Fish
Pen-Abu
Animal
Stork
Canide
Bull
Scorpion I
Shendjw
Iry-Hor
Ka
Scorpion II
Narmer / Menes
Early Dynastic(3150–2686 BC)I
Narmer / Menes
Hor-Aha
Djer
Djet
Den
Anedjib
Semerkhet
Qa'a
Sneferka
Horus Bird
II
Hotepsekhemwy
Nebra/Raneb
Nynetjer
Ba
Nubnefer
Horus Sa
Weneg-Nebty
Wadjenes
Senedj
Seth-Peribsen
Sekhemib-Perenmaat
Neferkara I
Neferkasokar
Hudjefa I
Khasekhemwy
Old Kingdom(2686–2181 BC)III
Djoser
Sekhemkhet
Sanakht
Nebka
Khaba
Qahedjet
Huni
IV
Snefru
Khufu
Djedefre
Khafre
Bikheris
Menkaure
Shepseskaf
Thamphthis
Userkaf
Sahure
Neferirkare Kakai
Neferefre
Shepseskare
Nyuserre Ini
Menkauhor Kaiu
Djedkare Isesi
Unas
VI
Teti
Userkare
Pepi I
Merenre Nemtyemsaf I
Pepi II
Merenre Nemtyemsaf II
Netjerkare Siptah
Menkare
Neferkare II
Neferkare III Neby
Djedkare Shemai
Neferkare IV Khendu
Merenhor
Neferkamin
Nikare
Neferkare V Tereru
Neferkahor
Neferkare VI Pepiseneb
Neferkamin Anu
Qakare Iby
Neferkaure
Neferkauhor
Neferirkare
Wadjkare
Khuiqer
Khui
IX
Meryibre Khety
Neferkare VII
Nebkaure Khety
Setut
Meryhathor
Neferkare VIII
Wahkare Khety
Merykare
Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period  (2040–1550 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaohs
male
female♀
uncertain
Middle Kingdom(2040–1802 BC)XI
Mentuhotep I
Intef I
Intef II
Intef III
Mentuhotep II
Mentuhotep III
Mentuhotep IV
Nubia
Segerseni
Qakare Ini
Iyibkhentre
XII
Amenemhat I
Senusret I
Amenemhat II
Senusret II
Senusret III
Amenemhat III
Amenemhat IV
Sobekneferu♀
Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep
Sonbef
Nerikare
Sekhemkare Amenemhat V
Ameny Qemau
Hotepibre
Iufni
Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI
Semenkare Nebnuni
Sehetepibre
Sewadjkare
Nedjemibre
Khaankhre Sobekhotep
Renseneb
Hor
Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw
Djedkheperew
Sebkay
Sedjefakare
Wegaf
Khendjer
Imyremeshaw
Sehetepkare Intef
Seth Meribre
Sobekhotep III
Neferhotep I
Sihathor
Sobekhotep IV
Merhotepre Sobekhotep
Khahotepre Sobekhotep
Wahibre Ibiau
Merneferre Ay
Merhotepre Ini
Sankhenre Sewadjtu
Mersekhemre Ined
Sewadjkare Hori
Merkawre Sobekhotep
Mershepsesre Ini II
Sewahenre Senebmiu
Merkheperre
Merkare
Sewadjare Mentuhotep
Seheqenre Sankhptahi
XIV
Yakbim Sekhaenre
Ya'ammu Nubwoserre
Qareh Khawoserre
'Ammu Ahotepre
Maaibre Sheshi
Nehesy
Khakherewre
Nebefawre
Sehebre
Merdjefare
Sewadjkare III
Nebdjefare
Webenre
Nebsenre
Sekheperenre
Djedkherewre
Bebnum
'Apepi
Nuya
Wazad
Sheneh
Shenshek
Khamure
Yakareb
Yaqub-Har
XV
Semqen
'Aper-'Anati
Salitis
Sakir-Har
Khyan
Yanassi
Apepi
Khamudi
XVI
Djehuti
Sobekhotep VIII
Neferhotep III
Mentuhotepi
Nebiryraw I
Nebiriau II
Semenre
Bebiankh
Sekhemre Shedwast
Dedumose I
Dedumose II
Montuemsaf
Merankhre Mentuhotep
Senusret IV
Pepi III
Abydos
Senebkay
Wepwawetemsaf
Pantjeny
Snaaib
XVII
Rahotep
Nebmaatre
Sobekemsaf I
Sobekemsaf II
Sekhemre-Wepmaat Intef
Nubkheperre Intef
Sekhemre-Heruhirmaat Intef
Senakhtenre Ahmose
Seqenenre Tao
Kamose
New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period  (1550–664 BC)PeriodDynastyPharaohs  (malefemale♀)uncertainNew Kingdom(1550–1070 BC)XVIII
Ahmose I
Amenhotep I
Thutmose I
Thutmose II
Hatshepsut♀
Thutmose III
Amenhotep II
Thutmose IV
Amenhotep III
Akhenaten
Smenkhkare
Neferneferuaten♀
Tutankhamun
Ay
Horemheb
XIX
Ramesses I
Seti I
Ramesses II
Merneptah
Amenmesses
Seti II
Siptah
Twosret♀
XX
Setnakhte
Ramesses III
Ramesses IV
Ramesses V
Ramesses VI
Ramesses VII
Ramesses VIII
Ramesses IX
Ramesses X
Ramesses XI
Smendes
Amenemnisu
Psusennes I
Amenemope
Osorkon the Elder
Siamun
Psusennes II
XXII
Shoshenq I
Osorkon I
Shoshenq II
Takelot I
Osorkon II
Shoshenq III
Shoshenq IV
Pami
Shoshenq V
Pedubast II
Osorkon IV
XXIII
Harsiese A
Takelot II
Pedubast I
Shoshenq VI
Osorkon III
Takelot III
Rudamun
Shoshenq VII
Menkheperre Ini
XXIV
Tefnakht
Bakenranef
XXV
Piye
Shebitku
Shabaka
Taharqa
Tanutamun
Late Period and Hellenistic Period  (664–30 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaohs
male
female♀
uncertain
Late(664–332 BC)XXVI
Necho I
Psamtik I
Necho II
Psamtik II
Wahibre
Ahmose II
Psamtik III
XXVII
Cambyses II
Petubastis III
Darius I
Xerxes
Artaxerxes I
Darius II
XXVIII
Amyrtaeus
XXIX
Nepherites I
Hakor
Psammuthes
Nepherites II
XXX
Nectanebo I
Teos
Nectanebo II
XXXI
Artaxerxes III
Khabash
Arses
Darius III
Hellenistic(332–30 BC)Argead
Alexander the Great
Philip III Arrhidaeus
Alexander IV
Ptolemaic
Ptolemy I Soter
Ptolemy II Philadelphus
Arsinoe II♀
Ptolemy III Euergetes
Berenice II Euergetes♀
Ptolemy IV Philopator
Arsinoe III Philopator♀
Ptolemy V Epiphanes
Cleopatra I Syra♀
Ptolemy VI Philometor
Cleopatra II♀
Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator
Ptolemy VIII Euergetes
Cleopatra III♀
Ptolemy IX Soter
Cleopatra IV♀
Ptolemy X Alexander I
Berenice III♀
Ptolemy XI Alexander II
Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos
Cleopatra V♀
Berenice IV Epiphaneia♀
Cleopatra VI Tryphaena♀
Cleopatra VII Philopator♀
Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator
Arsinoe IV♀
Ptolemy XIV Philopator
Ptolemy XV Caesarion
Dynastic genealogies
Ptolemaic
List of pharaohs
Queens of Ancient EgyptProtodynastic Period to First Intermediate Period  (<3150–2040 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaoh
uncertain
Protodynastic(pre-3150 BC)Naqada III
Ha
Early Dynastic(3150–2686 BC)I
Neithhotep
Benerib
Khenthap
Herneith
Nakhtneith
Penebui
Merneith
Seshemetka
Semat
Serethor
Betrest
II
Menka
Nimaathap
Old Kingdom(2686–2181 BC)III
Hetephernebti
Djeseretnebti
Djefatnebti
Meresankh I
IV
Hetepheres I
Meritites I
Henutsen
Khentetka
Meresankh II
Hetepheres II
Meresankh III
Khamerernebty I
Persenet
Hekenuhedjet
Khamerernebty II
Rekhetre
Bunefer
Khentkaus I
Neferhetepes
Meretnebty
Khentkaus II
Khentkaus III
Reptynub
Khuit I
Meresankh IV
Setibhor
Nebet
Khenut
VI
Iput I
Khuit II
Ankhesenpepi I
Ankhesenpepi II
Nubwenet
Meritites IV
Inenek-Inti
Nedjeftet
Neith
Iput II
Udjebten
Ankhesenpepi III
Ankhesenpepi IV
Nitocris 
Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period  (2040–1550 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaoh
uncertain
Middle Kingdom(2040–1802 BC)XI
Neferu I
Neferukayet
Iah
Tem
Neferu II
Ashayet
Henhenet
Sadeh
Kawit
Kemsit
XII
Neferitatjenen
Neferu III
Keminub
Senet
Khenemetneferhedjet I
Nofret II
Itaweret
Khenmet
Sithathoriunet
Khenemetneferhedjet II
Neferthenut
Meretseger
Aat
Khenemetneferhedjet III
Sobekneferu 
Nofret
Nubhetepti
Senebhenas
Neni
Tjan
Ineni
Nubkhaes
Aya
Satsobek
XIV
Tati
XVI
Mentuhotep
XVII
Nubemhat
Sobekemsaf
Haankhes
Tetisheri
Ahhotep I
Ahmose Inhapy
Sitdjehuti
Ahhotep II
New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period  (1550–664 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaoh
uncertain
New Kingdom(1550–1070 BC)XVIII
Ahmose-Nefertari
Ahmose-Sitkamose
Ahmose-Henuttamehu
Ahmose-Meritamun
Ahmose
Mutnofret
Hatshepsut 
Iset
Satiah
Merytre-Hatshepsut
Nebtu
Menhet, Menwi and Merti
Nebsemi
Tiaa
Nefertari
Iaret
Mutemwiya
Tiye
Gilukhipa
Sitamun
Iset
Tadukhipa / Kiya
Nefertiti
Meritaten
Neferneferuaten 
Ankhesenamun
Tey
Mutnedjmet
Nebetnehat
XIX
Sitre
Tuya
Tanedjemet
Nefertari
Isetnofret
Henutmire
Maathorneferure
Meritamen
Bintanath
Nebettawy
Merytre
Isetnofret II
Takhat
Twosret 
Tiaa
XX
Tiy-Merenese
Iset Ta-Hemdjert
Tyti
Tiye
Duatentopet
Henutwati
Tawerettenru
Nubkhesbed
Baketwernel
Tentamun
Tentamun
Mutnedjmet
Karimala
XXII
Karomama
Patareshnes
Maatkare
Tashedkhonsu
Nesitaudjatakhet
Nesitanebetashru
Kapes
Karomama I
Tadibast III
XXIII
Karomama II
XXV
Pebatjma
Tabiry
Abar
Khensa
Peksater
Arty
Qalhata
Tabekenamun
Takahatenamun
Naparaye
Atakhebasken
Malaqaye
Late Period and Hellenistic Period  (664–30 BC)PeriodDynasty
Pharaoh
uncertain
Late(664–332 BC)XXVI
Mehytenweskhet
Khedebneithirbinet I
Takhuit
Tentkheta
Nakhtubasterau
Ladice
XXVII
Atossa
Artystone
Parmys
Amestris
Damaspia
Parysatis
XXXI
Stateira I
Hellenistic(332–30 BC)Argead
Roxana
Stateira II
Parysatis II
Eurydice II of Macedon
Ptolemaic
Eurydice
Berenice I
Arsinoe I
Arsinoe II 
Berenice II 
Arsinoe III 
Cleopatra I 
Cleopatra II 
Cleopatra III 
Cleopatra IV 
Cleopatra Selene
Berenice III 
Cleopatra V 
Cleopatra VI 
Berenice IV 
Cleopatra VII 
Arsinoe IV 
Dynastic genealogies
Ptolemaic
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Poland
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 17:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
