Holy Roman Empire - Wikipedia
Holy Roman Empire
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Confederation of Central European states (800–1806)
Not to be confused with Roman Empire, Western Roman Empire, or Byzantine Empire.
Holy Roman EmpireSacrum Imperium Romanum (Latin)Heiliges Römisches Reich (German)800/962[a]–1806
Imperial Banner(c. 1430–1806)
Coat of arms(c. 1790–1806)
Anthem: Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser"God Save Emperor Francis" Quaternion Eagle of the Holy Roman EmpireThe change of territory of the Holy Roman Empire superimposed on present-day country bordersCapitalMulticentral 
Rome (de jure, Coronation of the Holy Roman Emperor)
Aachen 800-888 (as capital) 800-1562 (Coronation of King of Germany)
Palermo from 1194 (coronation of Henry VI to the hereditary title of the Kingdom of Sicily and Palermo became the seat of the Empire until the fall of the Hohenstaufen)
Innsbruck under Maximilian I (1508-1519) (seat of the Hofkammer  and the Court Chancery)
Vienna  from around 1550s, under Ferdinand I, to 1583; from 1612 to 1806  (seat of the Aulic Council since 1497, Imperial Residence since 1556)
Prague 1583-1612
Regensburg (Imperial Diet from 1594, perpetual from 1663)[b]
Wetzlar (Imperial Chamber Court from 1689)
Frankfurt (election and coronation of the emperor from 1562, before different places for the election and mostly Rome for the coronation)
Common languagesGerman, Medieval Latin (administrative/liturgical/ceremonial)Various[c]Religion Official religions:Catholicism (800–1806)Lutheranism (1555–1806)Calvinism (1648–1806)see detailsGovernmentConfederal feudal elective monarchymixed monarchy (since Imperial Reform)Emperor • 800–814 Charlemagne[a]• 962–973 Otto I• 1155–1190 Frederick I• 1508–1519 Maximilian I• 1519–1556 Charles V• 1792–1806 Francis II
LegislatureImperial DietHistorical eraMiddle Ages to early modern period• Frankish Charlemagne is crowned Emperor of the Romans[a] 25 December 800• East Frankish Otto I is crowned Emperor of the Romans 2 February 962• Conrad II assumes crown of the Kingdom of Burgundy 2 February 1033• Peace of Augsburg 25 September 1555• Peace of Westphalia 24 October 1648• Battle of Austerlitz 2 December 1805• Abdication of Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor 6 August 1806
Area1050[d]1,000,000 km2 (390,000 sq mi)Population• 1700 25,000,000• 1800 29,000,000
CurrencyMultiple: thaler, guilder, groschen, Reichsthaler
Preceded by
Succeeded by
East Francia
Kingdom of Italy
Carolingian Dynasty
Confederation of the Rhine
Austrian Empire
Kingdom of Prussia
Papal States
Old Swiss Confederacy
Kingdom of Sardinia
Dutch Republic
The Holy Roman Empire (Latin: Sacrum Romanum Imperium; German: Heiliges Römisches Reich, pronounced [ˌhaɪ̯lɪɡəs ˌʁøːmɪʃəs ˈʁaɪ̯ç] (listen)) was a political entity in Western, Central and Southern Europe that developed during the Early Middle Ages and continued until its dissolution in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars.
From the accession of Otto I in 962 until the twelfth century, the Empire was the most powerful monarchy in Europe.
Andrew Holt characterizes it as "perhaps the most powerful European state of the Middle Age". The functioning of government depended on the harmonic cooperation (dubbed consensual rulership or konsensuale Herrschaft by Schneidmüller) between monarch and vassals but this harmony was disturbed during the Salian period.
The empire reached the apex of territorial expansion and power under the House of Hohenstaufen in the mid-thirteenth century, but overextending led to partial collapse.
On 25 December 800, Pope Leo III crowned the Frankish king Charlemagne as emperor, reviving the title in Western Europe, more than three centuries after the fall of the earlier ancient Western Roman Empire in 476. In theory and diplomacy, the emperors were considered primus inter pares, regarded as first among equals among other Catholic monarchs across Europe.
The title continued in the Carolingian family until 888 and from 896 to 899, after which it was contested by the rulers of Italy in a series of civil wars until the death of the last Italian claimant, Berengar I, in 924. The title was revived again in 962 when Otto I, King of Germany, was crowned emperor by Pope John XII, fashioning himself as the successor of Charlemagne and beginning a continuous existence of the empire for over eight centuries.[e] Some historians refer to the coronation of Charlemagne as the origin of the empire, while others prefer the coronation of Otto I as its beginning.
Henry the Fowler, the founder of the medieval German state (ruled 919 – 936), has sometimes been considered the founder of the Empire as well.
The modern view favours Otto as the true founder.
Scholars generally concur in relating an evolution of the institutions and principles constituting the empire, describing a gradual assumption of the imperial title and role.
The exact term "Holy Roman Empire" was not used until the 13th century, but the Emperor's legitimacy always rested on the concept of translatio imperii, that he held supreme power inherited from the ancient emperors of Rome.
The imperial office was traditionally elective through the mostly German prince-electors.
During the final phase of the reign of Emperor Frederick III (ruled 1452–1493), Imperial Reform began.
The reform would largely be materialized during Maximilian I's rule (from 1486 as King of the Romans, from 1493 as sole ruler, and from 1508 as Holy Roman Emperor, until his death in 1519). The Empire transformed into the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation.
It was during this time that the Empire gained most of its institutions that endured until its final demise in the nineteenth century.
Thomas Brady Jr. opines that the Imperial Reform was successful, although perhaps at the expense of the reform of the Church, partly because Maximilian was not really serious about the religious matter.
According to Brady Jr., the Empire, after the Imperial Reform, was a political body of remarkable longevity and stability, and "resembled in some respects the monarchical polities of Europe's western tier, and in others the loosely integrated, elective polities of East Central Europe." The new corporate German Nation, instead of simply obeying the emperor, negotiated with him.
On 6 August 1806,  Emperor Francis II dissolved the empire following the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine by Emperor of the French Napoleon I the month before.
Contents
Name and general perception
Further information: Reich, Translatio imperii, Problem of two emperors, and Historiography of Germany
The double-headed eagle with coats of arms of individual states, the symbol of the Holy Roman Empire (painting from 1510)
The Empire was considered by the Roman Catholic Church to be the only legal successor of the Roman Empire during the Middle Ages and the early modern period.[citation needed] Since Charlemagne, the realm was merely referred to as the Roman Empire.
The term sacrum ("holy", in the sense of "consecrated") in connection with the medieval Roman Empire was used beginning in 1157 under Frederick I Barbarossa ("Holy Empire"): the term was added to reflect Frederick's ambition to dominate Italy and the Papacy.
The form "Holy Roman Empire" is attested from 1254 onward.
The exact term "Holy Roman Empire" was not used until the 13th century, before which the empire was referred to variously as universum regnum ("the whole kingdom", as opposed to the regional kingdoms), imperium christianum ("Christian empire"), or Romanum imperium ("Roman empire"), but the Emperor's legitimacy always rested on the concept of translatio imperii,[f] that he held supreme power inherited from the ancient emperors of Rome.
In a decree following the Diet of Cologne in 1512, the name was changed to the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (German: Heiliges Römisches Reich Deutscher Nation, Latin: Sacrum Imperium Romanum Nationis Germanicæ), a form first used in a document in 1474. The new title was adopted partly because the Empire lost most of its territories in Italy and Burgundy to the south and west by the late 15th century,[full citation needed] but also to emphasize the new importance of the German Imperial Estates in ruling the Empire due to the Imperial Reform.
The Hungarian denomination "German Roman Empire" (Hungarian: Német-római Birodalom) is the shortening of this.
By the end of the 18th century, the term "Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation" fell out of official use.
Contradicting the traditional view concerning that designation, Hermann Weisert has argued in a study on imperial titulature that, despite the claims of many textbooks, the name "Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation" never had an official status and points out that documents were thirty times as likely to omit the national suffix as include it.
In a famous assessment of the name, the political philosopher Voltaire remarked sardonically: "This body which was called and which still calls itself the Holy Roman Empire was in no way holy, nor Roman, nor an empire."
In the modern period, the Empire was often informally called the German Empire (Deutsches Reich) or Roman-German Empire (Römisch-Deutsches Reich). After its dissolution through the end of the German Empire, it was often called "the old Empire" (das alte Reich). Beginning in 1923, early twentieth-century German nationalists and Nazi Party propaganda would identify the Holy Roman Empire as the "First" Reich (Erstes Reich, Reich meaning empire), with the German Empire as the "Second" Reich and what would eventually become Nazi Germany as the "Third" Reich.
David S.Bachrach opines that the Ottonian kings, above all Henry the Fowler and Otto the Great, actually built their empire (which became the hegemonic state of Western Europe, with the leading role of the Kingdom of Germany) on the back of military and bureaucratic apparati as well as cultural legacy they inherited from the Carolingians, who ultimately inherited these from the Late Roman Empire:
Consequently, Henry I and Otto I did not begin de novo to develop a military, administrative, and intellectual infrastructure for their kingdom and empire.
They built upon the existing structures that they had inherited from their Carolingian predecessors.
An argument for continuity should not, however, be confused with a claim for stasis.
The Ottonians, just like their Carolingian predecessors, developed and refined their material, cultural, intellectual, and administrative inheritance in ways that fit their own time.
It was the success of the Ottonians in molding the raw materials bequeathed to them into a formidable military machine that made possible the establishment of Germany as the preeminent kingdom in Europe from the tenth through the mid-thirteenth century [...] the Carolingians built upon the military organization that they had inherited from their Merovingian and ultimately late-Roman predecessors."
Bachrach argues that the Ottonian empire was hardly an archaic kingdom of primitive Germans, maintained by personal relationships only and driven by the desire of the magnates to plunder and divide the rewards among themselves (as argued by Timothy Reuter), but instead, notable for their abilities to amass sophisticated economic, administrative, educational and cultural resources that they utilized to serve their enormous war machine.
Until the end of the 15th century, the empire was in theory composed of three major blocks – Italy, Germany and Burgundy.
Later territorially only the Kingdom of Germany and Bohemia remained, with the Burgundian territories lost to France.
Although the Italian territories were formally part of the empire, the territories were ignored in the Imperial Reform and splintered into numerous de facto independent territorial entities.
The status of Italy in particular varied throughout the 16th to 18th centuries.
Some territories like Piedmont-Savoy became increasingly independent, while others became more dependent due to the extinction of their ruling noble houses causing these territories to often fall under the dominions of the Habsburgs and their cadet branches.
Barring the loss of Franche-Comté in 1678, the external borders of the Empire did not change noticeably from the Peace of Westphalia – which acknowledged the exclusion of Switzerland and the Northern Netherlands, and the French protectorate over Alsace – to the dissolution of the Empire.
At the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, most of the Holy Roman Empire was included in the German Confederation, with the main exceptions being the Italian states.
History
Part of a series on the
History of Germany
Topics
Chronology
Historiography
Military history
Economic history
Women's history
Territorial evolution
Historic states (Holy Roman Empire)
Monarchs (Queens, Empresses, 1918, Family tree, Austria, Bavaria, Prussia, Saxony, Württemberg, Mediatised)
Early history
Germanic peoples
Migration Period
Barbarian kingdoms
Frankish Empire
Middle Ages
East Francia
Kingdom of Germany
Holy Roman Empire
Eastward settlement
Early Modern period
Sectionalism
Kingdom of Prussia
Unification
Mediatisation
Confederation of the Rhine
German ConfederationZollverein
German revolutions of 1848–1849
North German Confederation
German ReichGerman Empire1871–1918World War I1914–1918Weimar Republic1918–1933Nazi Germany1933–1945World War II1939–1945
Contemporary GermanyOccupationOstgebiete1945–1949/1952Expulsion of Germans1944–1950West–East division1949–1990ReunificationNew states1990Modern historysince 1990
Germany portal
Early Middle Ages
Carolingian period
Main article: Carolingian Empire
A map of the Carolingian Empire (a.k.a.
Francia, the Frankish Empire) within Europe circa 814 AD.
As Roman power in Gaul declined during the 5th century, local Germanic tribes assumed control.
In the late 5th and early 6th centuries, the Merovingians, under Clovis I and his successors, consolidated Frankish tribes and extended hegemony over others to gain control of northern Gaul and the middle Rhine river valley region.[full citation needed] By the middle of the 8th century, however, the Merovingians were reduced to figureheads, and the Carolingians, led by Charles Martel, became the de facto rulers.[full citation needed] In 751, Martel's son Pepin became King of the Franks, and later gained the sanction of the Pope.
The Carolingians would maintain a close alliance with the Papacy.[full citation needed]
In 768, Pepin's son Charlemagne became King of the Franks and began an extensive expansion of the realm.
He eventually incorporated the territories of present-day France, Germany, northern Italy, the Low Countries and beyond, linking the Frankish kingdom with Papal lands.
Although antagonism about the expense of Byzantine domination had long persisted within Italy, a political rupture was set in motion in earnest in 726 by the iconoclasm of Emperor Leo III the Isaurian, in what Pope Gregory II saw as the latest in a series of imperial heresies.
In 797, the Eastern Roman Emperor Constantine VI was removed from the throne by his mother Irene who declared herself Empress.
As the Latin Church only regarded a male Roman Emperor as the head of Christendom, Pope Leo III sought a new candidate for the dignity, excluding consultation with the Patriarch of Constantinople.
Charlemagne's good service to the Church in his defense of Papal possessions against the Lombards made him the ideal candidate.
On Christmas Day of 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne emperor, restoring the title in the West for the first time in over three centuries.
This can be seen as symbolic of the papacy turning away from the declining Byzantine Empire towards the new power of Carolingian Francia.
Charlemagne adopted the formula Renovatio imperii Romanorum ("renewal of the Roman Empire"). In 802, Irene was overthrown and exiled by Nikephoros I and henceforth there were two Roman Emperors.
After Charlemagne died in 814, the imperial crown passed to his son, Louis the Pious.
Upon Louis' death in 840, it passed to his son Lothair, who was his co-ruler.
By this point the territory of Charlemagne was divided into several territories (cf.
Treaty of Verdun, Treaty of Prüm, Treaty of Meerssen and Treaty of Ribemont), and over the course of the later ninth century the title of Emperor was disputed by the Carolingian rulers of the Western Frankish Kingdom or West Francia and the Eastern Frankish Kingdom or East Francia, with first the western king (Charles the Bald) and then the eastern (Charles the Fat), who briefly reunited the Empire, attaining the prize.
In the ninth century, Charlemagne and his successors promoted the intellectual revival, known as the Carolingian Renaissance.
Some, like Mortimer Chambers, opine that the Carolingian Renaissance made possible the subsequent renaissances (even though by the early tenth century, the revival already diminished).
After the death of Charles, the Fat in 888 the Carolingian Empire broke apart, and was never restored.
According to Regino of Prüm, the parts of the realm "spewed forth kinglets", and each part elected a kinglet "from its own bowels". At this point in time, those crowned emperor by the pope controlled only territories in Italy.[citation needed] The last such emperor was Berengar I of Italy, who died in 924.
Post-Carolingian Eastern Frankish Kingdom
Around 900, East Francia's autonomous stem duchies (Franconia, Bavaria, Swabia, Saxony, and Lotharingia) reemerged.
After the Carolingian king Louis the Child died without issue in 911, East Francia did not turn to the Carolingian ruler of West Francia to take over the realm but instead elected one of the dukes, Conrad of Franconia, as Rex Francorum Orientalium.
On his deathbed, Conrad yielded the crown to his main rival, Henry the Fowler of Saxony (r. 919–36), who was elected king at the Diet of Fritzlar in 919. Henry reached a truce with the raiding Magyars, and in 933 he won a first victory against them in the Battle of Riade.
Henry died in 936, but his descendants, the Liudolfing (or Ottonian) dynasty, would continue to rule the Eastern kingdom or the Kingdom of Germany for roughly a century.
Upon Henry the Fowler's death, Otto, his son and designated successor, was elected King in Aachen in 936. He overcame a series of revolts from a younger brother and from several dukes.
After that, the king managed to control the appointment of dukes and often also employed bishops in administrative affairs.
He replaced leaders of most of the major East Frankish duchies with his own relatives.
At the same time, he was careful to prevent members of his own family from making infringements on his royal prerogatives.
Formation of the Holy Roman Empire
The Holy Roman Empire during the Ottonian Dynasty
The Holy Roman Empire between 972 and 1032
In 951, Otto came to the aid of Adelaide, the widowed queen of Italy, defeating her enemies, marrying her, and taking control over Italy.
In 955, Otto won a decisive victory over the Magyars in the Battle of Lechfeld.
In 962, Otto was crowned emperor by Pope John XII, thus intertwining the affairs of the German kingdom with those of Italy and the Papacy.
Otto's coronation as Emperor marked the German kings as successors to the Empire of Charlemagne, which through the concept of translatio imperii, also made them consider themselves as successors to Ancient Rome.
The flowering of arts beginning with Otto the Great's reign is known as the Ottonian Renaissance, centered in Germany but also happening in Northern Italy and France.
Otto created the imperial church system, often called "Ottonian church system of the Reich", which tied the great imperial churches and their representatives to imperial service, thus providing "a stable and long-lasting framework for Germany". During the Ottonian era, imperial women played a prominent role in political and ecclesiastic affairs, often combining their functions as religious leader and advisor, regent or co-ruler, notably Matilda of Ringelheim, Eadgyth, Adelaide of Italy, Theophanu, Matilda of Quedlinburg.
In 963, Otto deposed the current Pope John XII and chose Pope Leo VIII as the new pope (although John XII and Leo VIII both claimed the papacy until 964 when John XII died). This also renewed the conflict with the Eastern Emperor in Constantinople, especially after Otto's son Otto II (r. 967–83) adopted the designation imperator Romanorum.
Still, Otto II formed marital ties with the east when he married the Byzantine princess Theophanu.
Their son, Otto III, came to the throne only three years old, and was subjected to a power struggle and series of regencies until his age of majority in 994. Up to that time, he remained in Germany, while a deposed duke, Crescentius II, ruled over Rome and part of Italy, ostensibly in his stead.
In 996 Otto III appointed his cousin Gregory V the first German Pope.
A foreign pope and foreign papal officers were seen with suspicion by Roman nobles, who were led by Crescentius II to revolt.
Otto III's former mentor Antipope John XVI briefly held Rome, until the Holy Roman Emperor seized the city.
Otto died young in 1002, and was succeeded by his cousin Henry II, who focused on Germany.
Otto III's (and his mentor Pope Sylvester's) diplomatic activities coincided with and facilitated the Christianization and the spread of Latin culture in different parts of Europe.
They coopted a new group of nations (Slavic) into the framework of Europe, with their empire functioning, as some remark, as a "Byzantine-like presidency over a family of nations, centred on pope and emperor in Rome", has proved a lasting achievement.
Otto's early death though made his reign "the tale of largely unrealized potential".
Henry II died in 1024 and Conrad II, first of the Salian dynasty, was elected king only after some debate among dukes and nobles.
This group eventually developed into the college of Electors.
The Holy Roman Empire eventually came to be composed of four kingdoms.
The kingdoms were:
Kingdom of Germany (part of the empire since 962),
Kingdom of Italy (from 962 until 1801),
Kingdom of Bohemia (from 1002 as the Duchy of Bohemia and raised to a kingdom in 1198),
Kingdom of Burgundy (from 1032 to 1378).
High Middle Ages
Investiture controversy
Main article: Investiture Controversy
Kings often employed bishops in administrative affairs and often determined who would be appointed to ecclesiastical offices.
In the wake of the Cluniac Reforms, this involvement was increasingly seen as inappropriate by the Papacy.
The reform-minded Pope Gregory VII was determined to oppose such practices, which led to the Investiture Controversy with Henry IV (r. 1056–1106), the King of the Romans and Holy Roman Emperor.
Henry IV repudiated the Pope's interference and persuaded his bishops to excommunicate the Pope, whom he famously addressed by his born name "Hildebrand", rather than his regnal name "Pope Gregory VII". The Pope, in turn, excommunicated the king, declared him deposed, and dissolved the oaths of loyalty made to Henry.
The king found himself with almost no political support and was forced to make the famous Walk to Canossa in 1077, by which he achieved a lifting of the excommunication at the price of humiliation.
Meanwhile, the German princes had elected another king, Rudolf of Swabia.
Henry managed to defeat Rudolf, but was subsequently confronted with more uprisings, renewed excommunication, and even the rebellion of his sons.
After his death, his second son, Henry V, reached an agreement with the Pope and the bishops in the 1122 Concordat of Worms.
The political power of the Empire was maintained, but the conflict had demonstrated the limits of the ruler's power, especially in regard to the Church, and it robbed the king of the sacral status he had previously enjoyed.
The Pope and the German princes had surfaced as major players in the political system of the empire.
Ostsiedlung
As the result of Ostsiedlung, less-populated regions of Central Europe (i.e. sparsely populated border areas in present-day Poland and the Czech Republic) received a significant number of German speakers.
Silesia became part of the Holy Roman Empire as the result of the local Piast dukes' push for autonomy from the Polish Crown.
From the late 12th century, the Duchy of Pomerania was under the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Empire and the conquests of the Teutonic Order made that region German-speaking.
Hohenstaufen dynasty
The Hohenstaufen-ruled Holy Roman Empire and Kingdom of Sicily.
Imperial and directly held Hohenstaufen lands in the Empire are shown in bright yellow.
When the Salian dynasty ended with Henry V's death in 1125, the princes chose not to elect the next of kin, but rather Lothair, the moderately powerful but already old Duke of Saxony.
When he died in 1137, the princes again aimed to check royal power; accordingly they did not elect Lothair's favoured heir, his son-in-law Henry the Proud of the Welf family, but Conrad III of the Hohenstaufen family, the grandson of Emperor Henry IV and thus a nephew of Emperor Henry V. This led to over a century of strife between the two houses.
Conrad ousted the Welfs from their possessions, but after his death in 1152, his nephew Frederick I "Barbarossa" succeeded him and made peace with the Welfs, restoring his cousin Henry the Lion to his – albeit diminished – possessions.
The Hohenstaufen rulers increasingly lent land to ministerialia, formerly non-free servicemen, who Frederick hoped would be more reliable than dukes.
Initially used mainly for war services, this new class of people would form the basis for the later knights, another basis of imperial power.
A further important constitutional move at Roncaglia was the establishment of a new peace mechanism for the entire empire, the Landfrieden, with the first imperial one being issued in 1103 under Henry IV at Mainz.
This was an attempt to abolish private feuds, between the many dukes and other people, and to tie the emperor's subordinates to a legal system of jurisdiction and public prosecution of criminal acts – a predecessor of the modern concept of "rule of law". Another new concept of the time was the systematic founding of new cities by the Emperor and by the local dukes.
These were partly a result of the explosion in population; they also concentrated economic power at strategic locations.
Before this, cities had only existed in the form of old Roman foundations or older bishoprics.
Cities that were founded in the 12th century include Freiburg, possibly the economic model for many later cities, and Munich.
Frederick I, also called Frederick Barbarossa, was crowned emperor in 1155. He emphasized the "Romanness" of the empire, partly in an attempt to justify the power of the emperor independent of the (now strengthened) pope.
An imperial assembly at the fields of Roncaglia in 1158 reclaimed imperial rights in reference to Justinian I's Corpus Juris Civilis.
Imperial rights had been referred to as regalia since the Investiture Controversy but were enumerated for the first time at Roncaglia.
This comprehensive list included public roads, tariffs, coining, collecting punitive fees, and the seating and unseating of office-holders.
These rights were now explicitly rooted in Roman law, a far-reaching constitutional act.
Frederick's policies were primarily directed at Italy, where he clashed with the increasingly wealthy and free-minded cities of the north, especially Milan.
He also embroiled himself in another conflict with the Papacy by supporting a candidate elected by a minority against Pope Alexander III (1159–81). Frederick supported a succession of antipopes before finally making peace with Alexander in 1177. In Germany, the Emperor had repeatedly protected Henry the Lion against complaints by rival princes or cities (especially in the cases of Munich and Lübeck). Henry gave only lackluster support to Frederick's policies, and, in a critical situation during the Italian wars, Henry refused the Emperor's plea for military support.
After returning to Germany, an embittered Frederick opened proceedings against the Duke, resulting in a public ban and the confiscation of all Henry's territories.
In 1190, Frederick participated in the Third Crusade, dying in the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia.
During the Hohenstaufen period, German princes facilitated a successful, peaceful eastward settlement of lands that were uninhabited or inhabited sparsely by West Slavs.
German-speaking farmers, traders, and craftsmen from the western part of the Empire, both Christians and Jews, moved into these areas.
The gradual Germanization of these lands was a complex phenomenon that should not be interpreted in the biased terms of 19th-century nationalism.
The eastward settlement expanded the influence of the empire to include Pomerania and Silesia, as did the intermarriage of the local, still mostly Slavic, rulers with German spouses.
The Teutonic Knights were invited to Prussia by Duke Konrad of Masovia to Christianize the Prussians in 1226. The monastic state of the Teutonic Order (German: Deutschordensstaat) and its later German successor state of the Duchy of Prussia was never part of the Holy Roman Empire.
Under the son and successor of Frederick Barbarossa, Henry VI, the Hohenstaufen dynasty reached its apex.
Henry added the Norman kingdom of Sicily to his domains, held English king Richard the Lionheart captive, and aimed to establish a hereditary monarchy when he died in 1197. As his son, Frederick II, though already elected king, was still a small child and living in Sicily, German princes chose to elect an adult king, resulting in the dual election of Frederick Barbarossa's youngest son Philip of Swabia and Henry the Lion's son Otto of Brunswick, who competed for the crown.
After Philip was murdered in a private squabble in 1208, Otto prevailed for a while, until he began to also claim Sicily.[clarification needed]
The Reichssturmfahne, a military banner during the 13th and early 14th centuries
Pope Innocent III, who feared the threat posed by a union of the empire and Sicily, was now supported by Frederick II, who marched to Germany and defeated Otto.
After his victory, Frederick did not act upon his promise to keep the two realms separate.
Though he had made his son Henry king of Sicily before marching on Germany, he still reserved real political power for himself.
This continued after Frederick was crowned Emperor in 1220. Fearing Frederick's concentration of power, the Pope finally excommunicated him.
Another point of contention was the Crusade, which Frederick had promised but repeatedly postponed.
Now, although excommunicated, Frederick led the Sixth Crusade in 1228, which ended in negotiations and a temporary restoration of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
Despite his imperial claims, Frederick's rule was a major turning point towards the disintegration of central rule in the Empire.
While concentrated on establishing a modern, centralized state in Sicily, he was mostly absent from Germany and issued far-reaching privileges to Germany's secular and ecclesiastical princes: in the 1220 Confoederatio cum principibus ecclesiasticis, Frederick gave up a number of regalia in favour of the bishops, among them tariffs, coining, and fortification.
The 1232 Statutum in favorem principum mostly extended these privileges to secular territories.
Although many of these privileges had existed earlier, they were now granted globally, and once and for all, to allow the German princes to maintain order north of the Alps while Frederick concentrated on Italy.
The 1232 document marked the first time that the German dukes were called domini terræ, owners of their lands, a remarkable change in terminology as well.
Kingdom of Bohemia
Lands of the Bohemian Crown since the reign of Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV
The Kingdom of Bohemia was a significant regional power during the Middle Ages.
In 1212, King Ottokar I (bearing the title "king" since 1198) extracted a Golden Bull of Sicily (a formal edict) from the emperor Frederick II, confirming the royal title for Ottokar and his descendants, and the Duchy of Bohemia was raised to a kingdom.
Bohemian kings would be exempt from all future obligations to the Holy Roman Empire except for participation in the imperial councils.
Charles IV set Prague to be the seat of the Holy Roman Emperor.
Interregnum
Main article: Interregnum (Holy Roman Empire)
After the death of Frederick II in 1250, the German kingdom was divided between his son Conrad IV (died 1254) and the anti-king, William of Holland (died 1256). Conrad's death was followed by the Interregnum, during which no king could achieve universal recognition, allowing the princes to consolidate their holdings and become even more independent as rulers.
After 1257, the crown was contested between Richard of Cornwall, who was supported by the Guelph party, and Alfonso X of Castile, who was recognized by the Hohenstaufen party but never set foot on German soil.
After Richard's death in 1273, Rudolf I of Germany, a minor pro-Hohenstaufen count, was elected.
He was the first of the Habsburgs to hold a royal title, but he was never crowned emperor.
After Rudolf's death in 1291, Adolf and Albert were two further weak kings who were never crowned emperor.
Albert was assassinated in 1308. Almost immediately, King Philip IV of France began aggressively seeking support for his brother, Charles of Valois, to be elected the next King of the Romans.
Philip thought he had the backing of the French Pope,
Clement V (established at Avignon in 1309), and that his prospects of bringing the empire into the orbit of the French royal house were good.
He lavishly spread French money in the hope of bribing the German electors.
Although Charles of Valois had the backing of pro-French Henry, Archbishop of Cologne, many were not keen to see an expansion of French power, least of all Clement V. The principal rival to Charles appeared to be Rudolf, the Count Palatine.
But the electors, the great territorial magnates who had lived without a crowned emperor for decades, were unhappy with both Charles and Rudolf.
Instead Henry, Count of Luxembourg, with the aid of his brother, Baldwin, Archbishop of Trier, was elected as Henry VII with six votes at Frankfurt on 27 November 1308. Though a vassal of king Philip, Henry was bound by few national ties, and thus suitable as a compromise candidate.
Henry VII was crowned king at Aachen on 6 January 1309, and emperor by Pope Clement V on 29 June 1312 in Rome, ending the interregnum.
Changes in political structure
Further information: Medieval commune, League of cities, Hanseatic League, Swabian League of Cities, Imperial immediacy, and Feudalism in the Holy Roman Empire
An illustration from Schedelsche Weltchronik depicting the structure of the Reich: The Holy Roman Emperor is sitting; on his right are three ecclesiastics; on his left are four secular electors.
During the 13th century, a general structural change in how land was administered prepared the shift of political power towards the rising bourgeoisie at the expense of the aristocratic feudalism that would characterize the Late Middle Ages.
The rise of the cities and the emergence of the new burgher class eroded the societal, legal and economic order of feudalism.
Instead of personal duties, money increasingly became the common means to represent economic value in agriculture.[citation needed]
Peasants were increasingly required to pay tribute to their landlords.
The concept of "property" began to replace more ancient forms of jurisdiction, although they were still very much tied together.
In the territories (not at the level of the Empire), power became increasingly bundled: whoever owned the land had jurisdiction, from which other powers derived.
However, that jurisdiction at the time did not include legislation, which was virtually non-existent until well into the 15th century.
Court practice heavily relied on traditional customs or rules described as customary.
During this time, territories began to transform into the predecessors of modern states.
The process varied greatly among the various lands and was most advanced in those territories that were almost identical to the lands of the old Germanic tribes, e.g., Bavaria.
It was slower in those scattered territories that were founded through imperial privileges.
In the 12th century the Hanseatic League established itself as a commercial and defensive alliance of the merchant guilds of towns and cities in the empire and  all over northern and central Europe.
It dominated marine trade in the Baltic Sea, the North Sea and along the connected navigable rivers.
Each of the affiliated cities retained the legal system of its sovereign and, with the exception of the Free imperial cities, had only a limited degree of political autonomy.
By the late 14th century, the powerful league enforced its interests with military means, if necessary.
This culminated in a war with the sovereign Kingdom of Denmark from 1361 to 1370. The league declined after 1450.[g]
Late Middle Ages
Further information: Late Middle Ages and Pomerania during the Late Middle Ages
Rise of the territories after the Hohenstaufens
The Holy Roman Empire when the Golden Bull of 1356 was signed
The difficulties in electing the king eventually led to the emergence of a fixed college of prince-electors (Kurfürsten), whose composition and procedures were set forth in the Golden Bull of 1356, issued by Charles IV (reigned 1355–1378, King of the Romans since 1346), which remained valid until 1806. This development probably best symbolizes the emerging duality between emperor and realm (Kaiser und Reich), which were no longer considered identical.
The Golden Bull also set forth the system for election of the Holy Roman Emperor.
The emperor now was to be elected by a majority rather than by consent of all seven electors.
For electors the title became hereditary, and they were given the right to mint coins and to exercise jurisdiction.
Also it was recommended that their sons learn the imperial languages – German, Latin, Italian, and Czech.[h] The decision by Charles IV is the subject of debates: on one hand, it helped to restore peace in the lands of the Empire, that had been engulfed in civil conflicts after the end of the Hohenstaufen era; on the other hand, the "blow to central authority was unmistakable". Thomas Brady Jr. opines that Charles IV's intention was to end contested royal elections (from the Luxembourghs' perspective, they also had the advantage that the King of Bohemia had a permanent and preeminent status as one of the Electors himself). At the same time, he built up Bohemia as the Luxembourghs' core land of the Empire and their dynastic base.
His reign in Bohemia is often considered the land's Golden Age.
According to Brady Jr. though, under all the glitter, one problem arose: the government showed an inability to deal with the German immigrant waves into Bohemia, thus leading to religious tensions and persecutions.
The imperial project of the Luxembourgh halted under Charles's son Wenceslaus (reigned 1378–1419 as King of Bohemia, 1376–1400 as King of the Romans), who also faced opposition from 150 local baronial families.
The shift in power away from the emperor is also revealed in the way the post-Hohenstaufen kings attempted to sustain their power.
Earlier, the Empire's strength (and finances) greatly relied on the Empire's own lands, the so-called Reichsgut, which always belonged to the king of the day and included many Imperial Cities.
After the 13th century, the relevance of the Reichsgut faded, even though some parts of it did remain until the Empire's end in 1806. Instead, the Reichsgut was increasingly pawned to local dukes, sometimes to raise money for the Empire, but more frequently to reward faithful duty or as an attempt to establish control over the dukes.
The direct governance of the Reichsgut no longer matched the needs of either the king or the dukes.
The kings beginning with Rudolf I of Germany increasingly relied on the lands of their respective dynasties to support their power.
In contrast with the Reichsgut, which was mostly scattered and difficult to administer, these territories were relatively compact and thus easier to control.
In 1282, Rudolf I thus lent Austria and Styria to his own sons.
In 1312, Henry VII of the House of Luxembourg was crowned as the first Holy Roman Emperor since Frederick II. After him all kings and emperors relied on the lands of their own family (Hausmacht): Louis IV of Wittelsbach (king 1314, emperor 1328–47) relied on his lands in Bavaria; Charles IV of Luxembourg, the grandson of Henry VII, drew strength from his own lands in Bohemia.
It was thus increasingly in the king's own interest to strengthen the power of the territories, since the king profited from such a benefit in his own lands as well.
Imperial Reform
Main article: Imperial Reform
The "constitution" of the Empire still remained largely unsettled at the beginning of the 15th century.
Feuds often happened between local rulers.
The "robber baron" (Raubritter) became a social factor.
Simultaneously, the Catholic Church experienced crises of its own, with wide-reaching effects in the Empire.
The conflict between several papal claimants (two anti-popes and the "legitimate" Pope) ended only with the Council of Constance (1414–1418); after 1419 the Papacy directed much of its energy to suppressing the Hussites.
The medieval idea of unifying all Christendom into a single political entity, with the Church and the Empire as its leading institutions, began to decline.
With these drastic changes, much discussion emerged in the 15th century about the Empire itself.
Rules from the past no longer adequately described the structure of the time, and a reinforcement of earlier Landfrieden was urgently needed.
The vision for a simultaneous reform of the Empire and the Church on a central level began with Sigismund (reigned 1433–1437, King of the Romans since 1411), who, according to historian Thomas Brady Jr., "possessed a breadth of vision and a sense of grandeur unseen in a German monarch since the thirteenth century". But external difficulties, self-inflicted mistakes and the extinction of the Luxembourg male line made this vision unfulfilled.
Frederick III had been very careful regarding the reform movement in the empire.
For most of his reign, he considered reform as a threat to his imperial prerogatives.
He avoided direct confrontations, which might lead to humiliation if the princes refused to give way.
After 1440, the reform of the Empire and Church was sustained and led by local and regional powers, particularly the territorial princes.
In his last years, however, there was more on pressure on taking action from a higher level.
Berthold von Henneberg, the Archbishop of Mainz, who spoke on behalf of reform-minded princes (who wanted to reform the Empire without strengthening the imperial hand), capitalized on Frederick's desire to secure the imperial election for Maximilian.
Thus, in his last years, he presided over the initial phase of Imperial Reform, which would mainly unfold under his son Maximilian.
Maximilian himself was more open to reform, although naturally he also wanted to preserve and enhance imperial prerogatives.
After Frederick retired to Linz in 1488, as a compromise, Maximilian acted as mediator between the princes and his father.
When he attained sole rule after Frederick's death, he would continue this policy of brokerage, acting as the impartial judge between options suggested by the princes.
Creation of institutions
Major measures for the Reform was launched at the 1495 Reichstag at Worms.
Innsbruck, most important political centre under Maximilian, seat of the Hofkammer (Court Treasury) and the Court Chancery, which functioned as "the most influential body in Maximilian's government". Painting of Albrecht Dürer (1496)
A new organ was introduced, the Reichskammergericht, that was to be largely independent from the Emperor.
A new tax was launched to finance it, the Gemeine Pfennig, although this would only be collected under Charles V and Ferdinand I, and not fully.
To create a rival for the Reichskammergericht, in 1497 Maximilian establish the Reichshofrat, which had its seat in Vienna.
During Maximilian's reign, this council was not popular though.
In the long run, the two Courts functioned in parallel, sometimes overlapping.
In 1500, Maximilian agreed to establish an organ called the Reichsregiment (central imperial government, consisting of twenty members including the Electors, with the Emperor or his representative as its chairman), first organized in 1501 in Nuremberg.
But Maximilian resented the new organization, while the Estates failed to support it.
The new organ proved politically weak, and its power returned to Maximilian in 1502.
The most important governmental changes targeted the heart of the regime: the chancery.
Early in Maximilian's reign, the Court Chancery at Innsbruck competed with the Imperial Chancery (which was under the elector-archbishop of Mainz, the senior Imperial chancellor). By referring the political matters in Tyrol, Austria as well as Imperial problems to the Court Chancery, Maximilian gradually centralized its authority.
The two chanceries became combined in 1502. In 1496, the emperor created a general treasury (Hofkammer) in Innsbruck, which became responsible for all the hereditary lands.
The chamber of accounts (Raitkammer) at Vienna was made subordinate to this body.
Under Paul von Liechtenstein, the Hofkammer was entrusted with not only hereditary lands' affairs, but Maximilian's affairs as the German king too.
Reception of Roman Law
Maximilian I paying attention to an execution instead of watching the betrothal of his son Philip the Handsome and Joanna of Castile.
The top right corner shows Cain and Abel.
Satire against Maximilian's legal reform, associated with imperial tyranny.
Created on behalf of the councilors of Augsburg.
Plate 89 of Von der Arztney bayder Glück by the Petrarcameister.
At the 1495 Diet of Worms, the Reception of Roman Law was accelerated and formalized.
The Roman Law was made binding in German courts, except in the case it was contrary to local statutes.
In practice, it became the basic law throughout Germany, displacing Germanic local law to a large extent, although Germanic law was still operative at the lower courts.
Other than the desire to achieve legal unity and other factors, the adoption also highlighted the continuity between the Ancient Roman empire and the Holy Roman Empire.
To realize his resolve to reform and unify the legal system, the emperor frequently intervened personally in matters of local legal matters, overriding local charters and customs.
This practice was often met with irony and scorn from local councils, who wanted to protect local codes.
The legal reform seriously weakened the ancient Vehmic court (Vehmgericht, or Secret Tribunal of Westphalia, traditionally held to be instituted by Charlemagne but this theory is now considered unlikely.), although it would not be abolished completely until 1811 (when it was abolished under the order of Jérôme Bonaparte).
National political culture
Personification of the Reich as Germania by Jörg Kölderer, 1512. The "German woman", wearing her hair loose and a crown, sitting on the Imperial throne, corresponds both to the self-image of Maximilian I as King of Germany and the formula Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (omitting other nations). While usually depicted during the Middle Age as subordinate to both imperial power and Italia or Gallia, she now takes central stage in Maximilian's Triumphal Procession, being carried in front of Roma.
Maximilian and Charles V (despite the fact both emperors were internationalists personally) were the first who mobilized the rhetoric of the Nation, firmly identified with the Reich by the contemporary humanists.
With encouragement from Maximilian and his humanists, iconic spiritual figures were reintroduced or became notable.
The humanists rediscovered the work Germania, written by Tacitus.
According to Peter H. Wilson, the female figure of Germania was reinvented by the emperor as the virtuous pacific Mother of Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation.
Whaley further suggests that, despite the later religious divide, "patriotic motifs developed during Maximilian's reign, both by Maximilian himself and by the humanist writers who responded to him, formed the core of a national political culture."
Maximilian's reign also witnessed the gradual emergence of the German common language, with the notable roles of the imperial chancery and the chancery of the Wettin Elector Frederick the Wise.
The development of the printing industry together with the emergence of the postal system (the first modern one in the world), initiated by Maximilian himself with contribution from Frederick III and  Charles the Bold, led to a revolution in communication and allowed ideas to spread.
Unlike the situation in more centralized countries, the decentralized nature of the Empire made censorship difficult.
Terence McIntosh comments that the expansionist, aggressive policy pursued by Maximilian I and Charles V at the inception of the early modern German nation (although not to further the aims specific to the German nation per se), relying on German manpower as well as utilizing fearsome Landsknechte and mercenaries, would affect the way neighbours viewed the German polity, although in the longue durée, Germany tended to be at peace.
Imperial power
Maximilian was "the first Holy Roman Emperor in 250 years who ruled as well as reigned". In the early 1500s, he was true master of the Empire, although his power weakened during the last decade before his death.
Whaley notes that, despite struggles, what emerged at the end of Maximilian's rule was a strengthened monarchy and not an oligarchy of princes.  Benjamin Curtis opines that while Maximilian was not able to fully create a common government for his lands (although the chancellery and court council were able to coordinate affairs across the realms), he strengthened key administrative functions in Austria and created central offices to deal with financial, political and judicial matters – these offices replaced the feudal system and became representative of a more modern system that was administered by professionalized officials.
After two decades of reforms, the emperor retained his position as first among equals, while the empire gained common institutions through which the emperor shared power with the estates.
By the early sixteenth century, the Habsburg rulers had become the most powerful in Europe, but their strength relied on their composite monarchy as a whole, and not only the Holy Roman Empire (see also: Empire of Charles V). Maximilian had seriously considered combining the Burgundian lands (inherited from his wife Mary of Burgundy) with his Austrian lands to form a powerful core (while also extending towards the east). After the unexpected addition of Spain to the Habsburg Empire, at one point he intended to leave Austria (raised to a kingdom) to his younger grandson Ferdinand.
Charles V later gave most of the Burgundian lands to the Spanish branch.
Protestant Reformation and Renaissance
Further information: Reformation and German Renaissance
See also: Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
The Holy Roman Empire during the 16th century
Carta itineraria europae by Waldseemüller, 1520 (dedicated to Emperor Charles V)
In 1516, Ferdinand II of Aragon, grandfather of the future Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, died.
Charles initiated his reign in Castile and Aragon, a union which evolved into Spain, in conjunction with his mother Joanna of Castile.
In 1519, already reigning as Carlos I in Spain, Charles took up the imperial title as Karl V. The Holy Roman Empire would end up going to a more junior branch of the Habsburgs in the person of Charles's brother Ferdinand, while the senior branch continued to rule in Spain and the Burgundian inheritance in the person of Charles's son, Philip II of Spain.
Many factors contribute to this result.
For James D.Tracy, it was the polycentric character of the European civilization that made it hard to maintain "a dynasty whose territories bestrode the continent from the Low Countries to Sicily and from Spain to Hungary—not to mention Spain's overseas possessions". Others point out the religious tensions, fiscal problems and obstruction from external forces including France and the Ottomans.
On a more personal level, Charles failed to persuade the German princes to support his son Philip, whose "awkward and withdrawn character and lack of German language skills doomed this enterprise to failure".
Before Charles's reign in the Holy Roman Empire began, in 1517, Martin Luther launched what would later be known as the Reformation.
The empire then became divided along religious lines, with the north, the east, and many of the major cities – Strasbourg, Frankfurt, and Nuremberg – becoming Protestant while the southern and western regions largely remained Catholic.
At the beginning of Charles's reign, another Reichsregiment was set up again (1522), although Charles declared that he would only tolerate it in his absence and its chairman had to be a representative of his.
Charles V was absent in Germany from 1521 to 1530. Similar to the one set up in the early 1500s, the Reichsregiment failed to create a federal authority independent of the emperor, due to the unsteady participation and differences between princes.
Charles V defeated the Protestant princes in 1547 in the Schmalkaldic War, but the momentum was lost and the Protestant estates were able to survive politically despite military defeat.
In the 1555 Peace of Augsburg, Charles V, through his brother Ferdinand, officially recognized the right of rulers to choose Catholicism or Lutheranism (Zwinglians, Calvinists and radicals were not included). In 1555, Paul IV was elected pope and took the side of France, whereupon an exhausted Charles finally gave up his hopes of a world Christian empire.
Baroque period
Main articles: Germany in the early modern period and Pomerania during the Early Modern Age
Further information: Baroque, Protestant Union, Catholic League (German), and Thirty Years' War
Religion in the Holy Roman Empire on the eve of the Thirty Years' War
The Empire after the Peace of Westphalia, 1648
Germany would enjoy relative peace for the next six decades.
On the eastern front, the Turks continued to loom large as a threat, although war would mean further compromises with the Protestant princes, and so the Emperor sought to avoid it.
In the west, the Rhineland increasingly fell under French influence.
After the Dutch revolt against Spain erupted, the Empire remained neutral, de facto allowing the Netherlands to depart the empire in 1581. A side effect was the Cologne War, which ravaged much of the upper Rhine.
Emperor Ferdinand III formally accepted Dutch neutrality in 1653, a decision ratified by the Reichstag in 1728.
After Ferdinand died in 1564, his son Maximilian II became Emperor, and like his father accepted the existence of Protestantism and the need for occasional compromise with it.
Maximilian was succeeded in 1576 by Rudolf II, who preferred classical Greek philosophy to Christianity and lived an isolated existence in Bohemia.
He became afraid to act when the Catholic Church was forcibly reasserting control in Austria and Hungary, and the Protestant princes became upset over this.
Imperial power sharply deteriorated by the time of Rudolf's death in 1612. When Bohemians rebelled against the Emperor, the immediate result was the series of conflicts known as the Thirty Years' War (1618–48), which devastated the Empire.
Foreign powers, including France and Sweden, intervened in the conflict and strengthened those fighting Imperial power, but also seized considerable territory for themselves.
The actual end of the empire did not come for two centuries.
The Peace of Westphalia in 1648, which ended the Thirty Years' War allowed Calvinism, but Anabaptists, Arminians and other Protestant communities would still lack any support and continue to be persecuted well until the end of the Empire.
The Habsburg Emperors focused on consolidating their own estates in Austria and elsewhere.
At the Battle of Vienna (1683), the Army of the Holy Roman Empire, led by the Polish King John III Sobieski, decisively defeated a large Turkish army, stopping the western Ottoman advance and leading to the eventual dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire in Europe.
The army was one third forces of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and two thirds forces of the Holy Roman Empire.
Modern period
Main article: 18th-century history of Germany
Prussia and Austria
Further information: Austro-Prussian rivalry, Kingdom of Prussia, and Habsburg monarchy
By the rise of Louis XIV, the Habsburgs were chiefly dependent on their hereditary lands to counter the rise of Prussia, which possessed territories inside the Empire.
Throughout the 18th century, the Habsburgs were embroiled in various European conflicts, such as the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714), the War of the Polish Succession (1733–1735), and the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748). The German dualism between Austria and Prussia dominated the empire's history after 1740.
French Revolutionary Wars and final dissolution
Main article: Dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire
The Empire on the eve of the French Revolution, 1789
From 1792 onwards, revolutionary France was at war with various parts of the Empire intermittently.
The German mediatization was the series of mediatizations and secularizations that occurred between 1795 and 1814, during the latter part of the era of the French Revolution and then the Napoleonic Era. "Mediatization" was the process of annexing the lands of one imperial estate to another, often leaving the annexed some rights.
For example, the estates of the Imperial Knights were formally mediatized in 1806, having de facto been seized by the great territorial states in 1803 in the so-called Rittersturm. "Secularization" was the abolition of the temporal power of an ecclesiastical ruler such as a bishop or an abbot and the annexation of the secularized territory to a secular territory.
The empire was dissolved on 6 August 1806, when the last Holy Roman Emperor Francis II (from 1804, Emperor Francis I of Austria) abdicated, following a military defeat by the French under Napoleon at Austerlitz (see Treaty of Pressburg). Napoleon reorganized much of the Empire into the Confederation of the Rhine, a French satellite.
Francis' House of Habsburg-Lorraine survived the demise of the empire, continuing to reign as Emperors of Austria and Kings of Hungary until the Habsburg empire's final dissolution in 1918 in the aftermath of World War I.
The Napoleonic Confederation of the Rhine was replaced by a new union, the German Confederation in 1815, following the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
It lasted until 1866 when Prussia founded the North German Confederation, a forerunner of the German Empire which united the German-speaking territories outside of Austria and Switzerland under Prussian leadership in 1871. This state developed into modern Germany.
The only princely member states of the Holy Roman Empire that have preserved their status as monarchies until today are the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and the Principality of Liechtenstein.
The only Free Imperial Cities still existing as states within Germany are Hamburg and Bremen.
All other historic member states of the Holy Roman Empire were either dissolved or have adopted republican systems of government.
The Holy Roman Empire and the imperial families' dynastic empires
See also: Erbreichsplan and Empire of Charles V
Holy Roman Empire (Német-római Császárság), including Italy and Bohemia (Csehország), and Hungary (Magyarország) under SigismundThe empire of Charles V at its peak after the Peace of Crépy in 1544.
In its earlier days, the Empire provided the principal medium for Christianity to infiltrate the pagans' realms in the North and the East (Scandinavians, Magyars, Slavic people etc.). By the Reform era, the Empire, in its nature, was defensive and not aggressive, desiring of both internal peace and security against invading forces, a fact that even warlike princes such as Maximilian I appreciated.
In the Early Modern age, the association with the Church (the Church Universal for the Luxemburgs, and the Catholic Church for the Habsburgs) as well as the emperor's responsibility for the defence of Central Europe remained a reality though.
Even the trigger for the conception of the Imperial Reform under Sigismund was the idea of helping the Church to put its house in order.
Traditionally, German dynasties had exploited the potential of the imperial title to bring Eastern Europe into the fold, in addition to their lands north and south of the Alps.
Marriage and inheritance strategies, following by (usually defensive) warfare, played a great role both for the Luxemburgs and the Habsburgs.
It was under Sigismund of the Luxemburg, who married Mary, Queen regnal and the rightful heir of Hungary and later consolidated his power with the marriage to the capable and well-connected noblewoman Barbara of Cilli, that the emperor's personal empire expanded to a kingdom outside the boundary of the Holy Roman Empire: Hungary.
This last monarch of the Luxemburg dynasty (who wore four royal crowns) had managed to gain an empire almost comparable in scale to the later Habsburg empire, although at the same time they lost the Kingdom of Burgundy and control over Italian territories.
The Luxemburgs' focus on the East, especially Hungary, allowed the new Burgundian rulers from the Valois dynasty to foster discontent among German princes.
Thus, the Habsburgs were forced to refocus their attention on the West.
Frederick III's cousin and predecessor, Albert II (who was Sigismund's son-in-law and heir through his marriage with Elizabeth of Luxembourg) had managed to combine the crowns of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia and Croatia under his rule, but he died young.
During his rule, Maximilian I had a double focus on both the East and the West.
The successful expansion (with the notable role of marriage policy) under Maximilian bolstered his position in the Empire, and also created more pressure for an imperial reform, so that they could get more resources and coordinated help from the German territories to defend their realms and counter hostile powers such as France.
Ever since he became King of the Romans in 1486, the Empire provided essential help for his activities in Burgundian Netherlands as well as dealings with Bohemia, Hungary and other eastern polities.
In the reigns of his grandsons, Croatia and the remaining rump of the Hungarian kingdom chose Ferdinand as their ruler after he managed to rescue Silesia and Bohemia from Hungary's fate against the Ottoman.
Simms notes that their choice was a contractual one, tying Ferdinand's rulership in these kingdoms and territories to his election as King of the Romans and his ability to defend Central Europe.
In turn, the Habsburgs' imperial rule also "depended on holding these additional extensive lands as independent sources of wealth and prestige."
The later Austrian Habsburgs from Ferdinand I were careful to maintain a distinction between their dynastic empire and the Holy Roman Empire: The institutions and structures developed by the Imperial Reform mostly served German lands, while the Habsburg monarchy "remained closely entwined with the Empire", but deliberately refrained from including their other territories in its framework. "Instead, they developed their own institutions to manage what was, effectively, a parallel dynastic-territorial empire and which gave them an overwhelming superiority of resources, in turn allowing them to retain an almost unbroken grip on the imperial title over the next three centuries." Ferdinand had an interest in keeping Bohemia separate from imperial jurisdiction and making the connection between Bohemia and the Empire looser (Bohemia did not have to pay taxes to the Empire). As he refused the rights of an Imperial Elector as King of Bohemia (which provided him with half of his revenue), he was able to give Bohemia (as well as associated territories such as Upper and Lower Alsatia, Silesia and Moravia the same privileged status as Austria, therefore affirming his superior position in the Empire). The Habsburgs also tried to mobilize imperial aid for Hungary (which, throughout the sixteenth century, cost the dynasty more money in defense expenditure than the total revenue it yielded). Since 1542, Charles V and Ferdinand had been able to collect the Common Penny tax, or Türkenhilfe (Turkish aid), designed to protect the Empire against the Ottomans or France.
But as Hungary, unlike Bohemia, was not part of the Reich, the imperial aid for Hungary depended on political factors.
The obligation was only in effect if Vienna or the Empire was threatened.
Wilson notes that, "In the early 1520s the Reichstag hesitated to vote aid for Hungary’s King Louis II, because it regarded him as a foreign prince.
This changed once Hungary passed to the Habsburgs on Louis’ death in battle in 1526 and the main objective of imperial taxation across the next 90 years was to subsidize the cost of defending the Hungarian frontier against the Ottomans.
The bulk of the weaponry and other military materiel was supplied by firms based in the Empire and financed by German banks.
The same is true of the troops who eventually evicted the Ottomans from Hungary between 1683 and 1699. The imperial law code of 1532 was used in parts of Hungary until the ­mid-­seventeenth century, but otherwise Hungary had its own legal system and did not import Austrian ones.
Hungarian nobles resisted the use of Germanic titles like Graf for count until 1606, and very few acquired the personal status of imperial prince."
Responding to the opinion that the Habsburg's dynastic concerns were damaging to the Holy Roman Empire, Whaley writes that, "There was no fundamental incompatibility between dynasticism and participation in the empire, either for the Habsburgs or for the Saxons or others." Imperial marriage strategies had double-edged effects for the Holy Roman Empire though.
The Spanish connection was an example: while it provided a powerful partner in the defense of Christendom against the Ottomans, it allowed Charles V to transfer the Burgundian Netherlands, Franche-Comte as well as other imperial fiefs such as Milan to his son Philip II of Spain's Spanish Empire.
Other than the imperial families, other German princes possessed foreign lands as well, and foreign rulers could also acquire imperial fiefs and thus become imperial princes.
This phenomenon contributed to the fragmentation of sovereignty, in which imperial vassals remained semi-sovereign, while strengthening the interconnections (and chances of mutual interference) between the Kingdom of Germany and the Empire in general with other kingdoms such as Denmark and Sweden, who accepted the status of imperial vassals on behalf of their German possessions (which were subjected to imperial laws). The two Scandinanvian monarchies honoured the obligations to come to the aid of the Empire in the wars of seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
They also imported German princely families as rulers, although in both cases, this did not produce direct unions.
Denmark consistently tried to take advantage of its influence in imperial institutions to gain new imperial fiefs along the Elbe, although these attempts generally did not succeed.
Institutions
The Holy Roman Empire was neither a centralized state nor a nation-state.
Instead, it was divided into dozens – eventually hundreds – of individual entities governed by kings,[i] dukes, counts, bishops, abbots, and other rulers, collectively known as princes.
There were also some areas ruled directly by the Emperor.
From the High Middle Ages onwards, the Holy Roman Empire was marked by an uneasy coexistence with the princes of the local territories who were struggling to take power away from it.
To a greater extent than in other medieval kingdoms such as France and England, the emperors were unable to gain much control over the lands that they formally owned.
Instead, to secure their own position from the threat of being deposed, emperors were forced to grant more and more autonomy to local rulers, both nobles and bishops.
This process began in the 11th century with the Investiture Controversy and was more or less concluded with the 1648 Peace of Westphalia.
Several Emperors attempted to reverse this steady dilution of their authority but were thwarted both by the papacy and by the princes of the Empire.
Imperial estates
Main article: Imperial Estate
The number of territories represented in the Imperial Diet was considerable, numbering about 300 at the time of the Peace of Westphalia.
Many of these Kleinstaaten ("little states") covered no more than a few square miles, and/or included several non-contiguous pieces, so the Empire was often called a Flickenteppich ("patchwork carpet").
An entity was considered a Reichsstand (imperial estate) if, according to feudal law, it had no authority above it except the Holy Roman Emperor himself.
The imperial estates comprised:
Territories ruled by a hereditary nobleman, such as a prince, archduke, duke, or count.
Territories in which secular authority was held by an ecclesiastical dignitary, such as an archbishop, bishop, or abbot.
Such an ecclesiastic or Churchman  was a prince of the Church.
In the common case of a prince-bishop, this temporal territory (called a prince-bishopric) frequently overlapped with his often larger ecclesiastical diocese, giving the bishop both civil and ecclesiastical powers.
Examples are the prince-archbishoprics of Cologne, Trier, and Mainz.
Free imperial cities and Imperial villages, which were subject only to the jurisdiction of the emperor.
The scattered estates of the free Imperial Knights and Imperial Counts, immediate subject to the Emperor but unrepresented in the Imperial Diet.
A sum total of 1,500 Imperial estates has been reckoned.
For a list of Reichsstände in 1792, see List of Imperial Diet participants (1792).
The most powerful lords of the later empire were the Austrian Habsburgs, who ruled 240,000 km2 (93,000 sq mi) of land within the Empire in the first half of the 17th century, mostly in modern-day Austria and Czechia.
At the same time the lands ruled by the electors of Saxony, Bavaria, and Brandenburg (prior to the acquisition of Prussia) were all close to 40,000 km2 (15,000 sq mi); the Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (later the Elector of Hanover) had a territory around the same size.
These were the largest of the German realms.
The Elector of the Palatinate had significantly less at 20,000 km2 (7,700 sq mi), and the ecclesiastical Electorates of Mainz, Cologne, and Trier were much smaller, with around 7,000 km2 (2,700 sq mi). Just larger than them, with roughly 7,000–10,000 km2 (2,700–3,900 sq mi), were the Duchy of Württemberg, the Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel, and the Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.
They were roughly matched in size by the prince-bishoprics of Salzburg and Münster.
The majority of the other German territories, including the other prince-bishoprics, were under 5,000 km2 (1,900 sq mi), the smallest being those of the Imperial Knights; around 1790 the Knights consisted of 350 families ruling a total of only 5,000 km2 (1,900 sq mi) collectively.
Imperial Italy was more centralized, most of it c. 1600 being divided between Savoy (Savoy, Piedmont, Nice, Aosta), the Grand Duchy of Tuscany (Tuscany, bar Lucca), the Republic of Genoa (Liguria, Corisca), the duchies of Modena-Reggio and Parma-Piacenza (Emilia), and the Spanish Duchy of Milan (most of Lombardy), each with between half a million and one and a half million people.
The Low Countries were also more coherent than Germany, being entirely under the dominion of the Spanish Netherlands as part of the Burgundian Circle, at least nominally.
Territorial shares of the Reich after the Thirty Years War[j]
Ruler
Austrian Habsburgs
Brandenburg Hohenzollerns
Other secular prince-electors[k]
Other German rulers
Total
King of the Romans
Main article: King of the Romans
The crown of the Holy Roman Empire (2nd half of the 10th century), now held in the Schatzkammer (Vienna)
A prospective Emperor first had to be elected King of the Romans (Latin: Rex Romanorum; German: römischer König). German kings had been elected since the 9th century; at that point they were chosen by the leaders of the five most important tribes (the Salian Franks of Lorraine, Ripuarian Franks of Franconia, Saxons, Bavarians, and Swabians). In the Holy Roman Empire, the main dukes and bishops of the kingdom elected the King of the Romans.
The imperial throne was transferred by election, but Emperors often ensured their own sons were elected during their lifetimes, enabling them to keep the crown for their families.
This only changed after the end of the Salian dynasty in the 12th century.
In 1356, Emperor Charles IV issued the Golden Bull, which limited the electors to seven: the King of Bohemia, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, the Margrave of Brandenburg, and the archbishops of Cologne, Mainz, and Trier.
During the Thirty Years' War, the Duke of Bavaria was given the right to vote as the eighth elector, and the Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (colloquially, Hanover) was granted a ninth electorate; additionally, the Napoleonic Wars resulted in several electorates being reallocated, but these new electors never voted before the Empire's dissolution.
A candidate for election would be expected to offer concessions of land or money to the electors in order to secure their vote.
After being elected, the King of the Romans could theoretically claim the title of "Emperor" only after being crowned by the Pope.
In many cases, this took several years while the King was held up by other tasks: frequently he first had to resolve conflicts in rebellious northern Italy or was quarreling with the Pope himself.
Later Emperors dispensed with the papal coronation altogether, being content with the styling Emperor-Elect: the last Emperor to be crowned by the Pope was Charles V in 1530.
The Emperor had to be male and of noble blood.
No law required him to be a Catholic, but as the majority of the Electors adhered to this faith, no Protestant was ever elected.
Whether and to what degree he had to be German was disputed among the Electors, contemporary experts in constitutional law, and the public.
During the Middle Ages, some Kings and Emperors were not of German origin, but since the Renaissance, German heritage was regarded as vital for a candidate in order to be eligible for imperial office.
Imperial Diet (Reichstag)
Main article: Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)
The Seven Prince-electors (Codex Balduini Trevirorum, c. 1340)
The Imperial Diet (Reichstag, or Reichsversammlung) was not a legislative body as is understood today, as its members envisioned it to be more like a central forum, where it was more important to negotiate than to decide.
The Diet was theoretically superior to the emperor himself.
It was divided into three classes.
The first class, the Council of Electors, consisted of the electors, or the princes who could vote for King of the Romans.
The second class, the Council of Princes, consisted of the other princes.
The Council of Princes was divided into two "benches", one for secular rulers and one for ecclesiastical ones.
Higher-ranking princes had individual votes, while lower-ranking princes were grouped into "colleges" by geography.
Each college had one vote.
The third class was the Council of Imperial Cities, which was divided into two colleges: Swabia and the Rhine.
The Council of Imperial Cities was not fully equal with the others; it could not vote on several matters such as the admission of new territories.
The representation of the Free Cities at the Diet had become common since the late Middle Ages.
Nevertheless, their participation was formally acknowledged only as late as 1648 with the Peace of Westphalia ending the Thirty Years' War.
Imperial courts
Reichskammergericht, around 1750.Reichshofrat, around 1700.
The Empire also had two courts: the Reichshofrat (also known in English as the Aulic Council) at the court of the King/Emperor, and the Reichskammergericht (Imperial Chamber Court), established with the Imperial Reform of 1495 by Maximillian I. The Reichskammergericht and the Auclic Council were the two highest judicial instances in the Old Empire.
The Imperial Chamber court's composition was determined by both the Holy Roman Emperor and the subject states of the Empire.
Within this court, the Emperor appointed the chief justice, always a highborn aristocrat, several divisional chief judges, and some of the other puisne judges.
The Aulic Council held standing over many judicial disputes of state, both in concurrence with the Imperial Chamber court and exclusively on their own.
The provinces Imperial Chamber Court extended to breaches of the public peace, cases of arbitrary distraint or imprisonment, pleas which concerned the treasury, violations of the Emperor's decrees or the laws passed by the Imperial Diet, disputes about property between immediate tenants of the Empire or the subjects of different rulers, and finally suits against immediate tenants of the Empire, with the exception of criminal charges and matters relating to imperial fiefs, which went to the Aulic Council.
The Aulic Council even allowed the emperors the means to depose rulers who did not live up to expectations.
Imperial circles
A map of the Empire showing division into Circles in 1512
As part of the Imperial Reform, six Imperial Circles were established in 1500; four more were established in 1512. These were regional groupings of most (though not all) of the various states of the Empire for the purposes of defense, imperial taxation, supervision of coining, peace-keeping functions, and public security.
Each circle had its own parliament, known as a Kreistag ("Circle Diet"), and one or more directors, who coordinated the affairs of the circle.
Not all imperial territories were included within the imperial circles, even after 1512; the Lands of the Bohemian Crown were excluded, as were Switzerland, the imperial fiefs in northern Italy, the lands of the Imperial Knights, and certain other small territories like the Lordship of Jever.
Army
Main article: Army of the Holy Roman Empire
Further information: Imperial Army (Holy Roman Empire)
The Army of the Holy Roman Empire (German Reichsarmee, Reichsheer or Reichsarmatur; Latin exercitus imperii) was created in 1422 and as a result of the Napoleonic Wars came to an end even before the Empire.
It must not be confused with the Imperial Army (Kaiserliche Armee) of the Emperor.
Despite appearances to the contrary, the Army of the Empire did not constitute a permanent standing army that was always at the ready to fight for the Empire.
When there was danger, an Army of the Empire was mustered from among the elements constituting it, in order to conduct an imperial military campaign or Reichsheerfahrt.
In practice, the imperial troops often had local allegiances stronger than their loyalty to the Emperor.
Administrative centres
Vienna, circa 1580 by Georg Braun and Frans Hogenberg
Throughout the first half of its history the Holy Roman Empire was reigned over by a travelling court.
Kings and emperors toured between the numerous Kaiserpfalzes (Imperial palaces), usually resided for several weeks or months and furnished local legal matters, law and administration.
Most rulers maintained one or a number of favourites Imperial palace sites, where they would advance development and spent most of their time: Charlemagne (Aachen from 794), Otto I (Magdeburg, from 955), Frederick II (Palermo 1220–1254), Wittelsbacher (Munich 1328–1347 and 1744–1745), Habsburger (Prague 1355–1437 and 1576–1611; and Vienna 1438–1576, 1611–1740 and 1745–1806).
This practice eventually ended during the 16th century, as the emperors of the Habsburg dynasty chose Vienna and Prague and the Wittelsbach rulers chose Munich as their permanent residences (Maximilian I's "true home" was still "the stirrup, the overnight rest and the saddle", although Innsbruck was probably his most important base; Charles V was also a nomadic emperor). Vienna became Imperial capital during the 1550s under Ferdinand I (reigned 1556–1564). Except for a period under Rudolf II (reigned 1570–1612) who moved to Prague, Vienna kept its primacy under his successors.  Before that, certain sites served only as the individual residence for a particular sovereign.
A number of cities held official status, where the Imperial Estates would summon at Imperial Diets, the deliberative assembly of the empire.
The Imperial Diet (Reichstag) resided variously in Paderborn, Bad Lippspringe, Ingelheim am Rhein, Diedenhofen (now Thionville), Aachen, Worms, Forchheim, Trebur, Fritzlar, Ravenna, Quedlinburg, Dortmund, Verona, Minden, Mainz, Frankfurt am Main, Merseburg, Goslar, Würzburg, Bamberg, Schwäbisch Hall, Augsburg, Nuremberg, Quierzy-sur-Oise, Speyer, Gelnhausen, Erfurt, Eger (now Cheb), Esslingen, Lindau, Freiburg, Cologne, Konstanz and Trier before it was moved permanently to Regensburg.
Until the 15th century the elected emperor was crowned and anointed by the Pope in Rome, among some exceptions in Ravenna, Bologna and Reims.
Since 1508 (emperor Maximilian I) Imperial elections took place in Frankfurt am Main, Augsburg, Rhens, Cologne or Regensburg.
In December 1497 the Aulic Council (Reichshofrat) was established in Vienna.
In 1495 the Reichskammergericht was established, which variously resided in Worms, Augsburg, Nuremberg, Regensburg, Speyer and Esslingen before it was moved permanently to Wetzlar.
Foreign relations
The Habsburg royal family had its own diplomats to represent its interests.
The larger principalities in the Holy Roman Empire, beginning around 1648, also did the same.
The Holy Roman Empire did not have its own dedicated ministry of foreign affairs and therefore the Imperial Diet had no control over these diplomats; occasionally the Diet criticised them.
When Regensburg served as the site of the Diet, France and, in the late 1700s, Russia, had diplomatic representatives there.
Denmark, Great Britain, and Sweden had land holdings in Germany and so had representation in the Diet itself.
The Netherlands also had envoys in Regensburg.
Regensburg was the place where envoys met as it was where representatives of the Diet could be reached.
Demographics
Population
Overall population figures for the Holy Roman Empire are extremely vague and vary widely.
The empire of Charlemagne may have had as many as 20 million people.
Given the political fragmentation of the later Empire, there were no central agencies that could compile such figures.
Nevertheless, it is believed the demographic disaster of the Thirty Years War meant that the population of the Empire in the early 17th century was similar to what it was in the early 18th century; by one estimate, the Empire didn't exceed 1618 levels of population until 1750.
In the early 17th century, the electors held under their rule the following number of Imperial subjects:
Habsburg Monarchy: 5,350,000 (including 3 million in the Bohemian crown lands)[full citation needed]
Electorate of Saxony: 1,200,000
Duchy of Bavaria (later Electorate of Bavaria): 800,000
Electoral Palatinate: 600,000
Electorate of Brandenburg: 350,000
Electorates of Mainz, Trier, and Cologne: 300–400,000 altogether
While not electors, the Spanish Habsburgs had the second highest number of subjects within the Empire after the Austrian Habsburgs, with over 3 million in the early 17th century in the Burgundian Circle and Duchy of Milan.[l][m]
Peter Wilson estimates the Empire's population at 25 million in 1700, of whom 5 million lived in Imperial Italy.
By 1800 he estimates the Empire's population at 29 million (excluding Italy), with another 12.6 million held by the Austrians and Prussians outside of the Empire.
According to an overgenerous contemporary estimate of the Austrian War Archives for the first decade of the 18th century, the Empire—including Bohemia and the Spanish Netherlands—had a population of close to 28 million with a breakdown as follows:
Imperial knights' territories, numbering into the several hundreds, with 2 percent of the land and 1 percent of the population.
German demographic historians have traditionally worked on estimates of the population of the Holy Roman Empire based on assumed population within the frontiers of Germany in 1871 or 1914. More recent estimates use less outdated criteria, but they remain guesswork.
One estimate based on the frontiers of Germany in 1870 gives a population of some 15–17 million around 1600, declined to 10–13 million around 1650 (following the Thirty Years' War). Other historians who work on estimates of the population of the early modern Empire suggest the population declined from 20 million to some 16–17 million by 1650.
A credible estimate for 1800 gives 27–28 million inhabitants for the Empire (which at this point had already lost the remaining Low Countries, Italy, and the Left Bank of the Rhine in the 1797 Treaty of Campo Fornio) with an overall breakdown as follows:
9 million Austrian subjects (including Silesia, Bohemia and Moravia);
4 million Prussian subjects;
There are also numerous estimates for the Italian states that were formally part of the Empire:
States of Imperial Italy by population, early 17th century
State
Population
Duchy of Milan (Spanish)
1,350,000
Piedmont-Savoy
1,200,000[n]
Republic of Genoa
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
Duchy of Parma-Piacenza
Duchy of Modena-Reggio
County of Gorizia and Gradisca (Austrian)
Republic of Lucca
Total
c. 4,600,000
States of Imperial Italy by population, late 18th century
State
Population
Piedmont-Savoy
2,400,000[o]
Duchy of Milan (Austrian)
1,100,000[p]
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
1,000,000
Republic of Genoa
Duchy of Parma-Piacenza
Duchy of Modena-Reggio
Republic of Lucca
Total
c. 6,000,000
Largest cities
Largest cities or towns of the Empire by year:
Rome 35,000. Mainz 30,000. Speyer 25,000. Cologne 21,000. Trier 20,000. Worms 20,000. Lyon 20,000. Verona 20,000. Florence 15,000.
Cologne 54,000 people.
Aachen 21,000 people.
Magdeburg 20,000 people.
Nuremberg 20,000 people.
Vienna 20,000 people.
Danzig (now Gdańsk) 20,000 people.
Straßburg (now Strasbourg) 20,000 people.
Lübeck 15,000 people.
Regensburg 11,000 people.
Religion
Front page of the Peace of Augsburg, which laid the legal groundwork for two co-existing religious confessions (Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism) in the German-speaking states of the Holy Roman Empire
Catholicism constituted the single official religion of the Empire until 1555. The Holy Roman Emperor was always a Catholic.
Lutheranism was officially recognized in the Peace of Augsburg of 1555, and Calvinism in the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. Those two constituted the only officially recognized Protestant denominations, while various other Protestant confessions such as Anabaptism, Arminianism, etc. coexisted illegally within the Empire.
Anabaptism came in a variety of denominations, including Mennonites, Schwarzenau Brethren, Hutterites, the Amish, and multiple other groups.
Following the Peace of Augsburg, the official religion of a territory was determined by the principle cuius regio, eius religio according to which a ruler's religion determined that of his subjects.
The Peace of Westphalia abrogated that principle by stipulating that the official religion of a territory was to be what it had been on 1 January 1624, considered to have been a "normal year". Henceforth, the conversion of a ruler to another faith did not entail the conversion of his subjects.
In addition, all Protestant subjects of a Catholic ruler and vice versa were guaranteed the rights that they had enjoyed on that date.
While the adherents of a territory's official religion enjoyed the right of public worship, the others were allowed the right of private worship (in chapels without either spires or bells). In theory, no one was to be discriminated against or excluded from commerce, trade, craft or public burial on grounds of religion.
For the first time, the permanent nature of the division between the Christian churches of the empire was more or less assumed.
A Jewish minority existed in the Holy Roman Empire.[citation needed]
See also
List of states in the Holy Roman Empire
Succession of the Roman Empire
Family tree of German monarchs
List of state leaders in the 10th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 11th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 12th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 13th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 14th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 15th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 16th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 17th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 18th-century Holy Roman Empire
List of state leaders in the 19th-century Holy Roman Empire
References
Notes
a b c Some historians refer to the beginning of the Holy Roman Empire as 800, with the crowning of Frankish king Charlemagne considered as the first Holy Roman Emperor.
Others refer to the beginning as the coronation of Otto I in 962.
Regensburg, seat of the 'Eternal Diet' after 1663, came to be viewed as the unofficial capital of the Empire by several European powers with a stake in the Empire – France, England, the Netherlands, Russia, Sweden, Denmark – and they kept more or less permanent envoys there because it was the only place in the Empire where the delegates of all the major and mid-size German states congregated and could be reached for lobbying, etc.
The Habsburg emperors themselves used Regensburg in the same way. (Härter 2011, pp. 122–123, 132)
German, Low German, Italian, Czech, Polish, Dutch, French, Frisian, Romansh, Slovene, Sorbian, Yiddish and other languages.
According to the Golden Bull of 1356 the sons of prince-electors were recommended to learn the languages of German, Latin, Italian and Czech. 
German "Roman" Empire: Due to feudal organization the realm controlled by the emperor is hard to define, much less measure.
It is estimated to peak around 1050 at about 1.0 Mm2. (Taagepera 1997, p. 494) 
While Charlemagne and his successors assumed variations of the title emperor, none termed themselves Roman emperor until Otto II in 983. "Nature of the empire". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 15 February 2014. 
"transfer of rule"
Translation of the grant of privileges to merchants in 1229: "Medieval Sourcebook: Privileges Granted to German Merchants at Novgorod, 1229". Fordham.edu.
Retrieved 13 April 2020. 
Quapropter statuimus, ut illustrium principum, puta regis Boemie, comitis palatini Reni, ducis Saxonie et marchionis Brandemburgensis electorum filii vel heredes et successores, cum verisimiliter Theutonicum ydioma sibi naturaliter inditum scire presumantur et ab infancia didicisse, incipiendo a septimo etatis sue anno in gramatica, Italica ac Sclavica lingwis instruantur, ita quod infra quartum decimum etatis annum existant in talibus iuxta datam sibi a Deo graciam eruditi. (Zeumern 1908) 
The only prince allowed to call himself "king" of a territory in the Empire was the King of Bohemia (after 1556 usually the Emperor himself). Some other princes were kings by virtue of kingdoms they controlled outside of the Empire
Going by the given areas, Wilson's figures only include the German and Czech speaking parts of the Reich, thus excluding the French (e.g.
Austrian Netherlands, Franche-Comté) and Italian (e.g.
Tuscany, Piedmont-Savoy) parts.
This is evident in how the territories of the electors and "other German rulers" adds up to the stated total of the Reich, and in how the Reich's area does not change from the given 687,338 km2 (265,383 sq mi) total from 1648 to 1792, despite many French territories of the Burgundian Circle being lost in this time.
The figures also exclude lands held outside of the Empire (including German ones), such as the Hohenzollern Prussian territories.
In 1648: Saxony, Bavaria, and the Electoral Palatinate.
At later dates: Saxony, Bavaria, the Electoral Palatinate, and Hanover.
1.35 million population given for the Duchy of Milan. (Smith 1920, p. 19) 
Populations of 1.6 million and 1.5 million given for the areas within the borders of modern Belgium and the Netherlands, respectively, around 1600; the Spanish holdings in the Burgundian Circle also included Franche-Comte, Luxembourg, and other  small territories. (Avakov 2015) 
A figure of 800,000  is given by Smith for "Savoy in Italy", with no clarification as to whether that refers to the whole Savoyard state or just its Italian territories of Piedmont and the Aosta Valley (thus excluding Savoy proper and the County of Nice). However Hanlon 2014, p. 87 gives early 17th century Piedmont's population as 700,000, and Savoy proper's as 400,000, with no numbers given for Aosta or Nice; indicating that Smith's use of "Savoy of Italy" does indeed only refer to Piedmont and Aosta.
Excluding the 500,000 inhabitants of the island of Sardinia, which was not part of the Empire.
Referred to in the source as "Austrian Lombardy." A large portion of the former duchy had been annexed by the Venetian Republic earlier in the 18th century.
Citations
von Aretin, Karl Otmar Freiherr (31 December 1983).  Schieder, Theodor; Brunn, Gerhard (eds.). "Das Reich ohne Hauptstadt? Die Multizentralitat der Hauptstadtfunktionen im Reich bis 1806". Hauptstädte in europäischen Nationalstaaten: 5–14. doi:10.1515/9783486992878-003. ISBN 9783486992878.
"UNIO REGNI AD IMPERIUM in "Federiciana"". Treccani.it.
Retrieved 4 May 2022.
"Enrico Vi, Re Di Sicilia E Imperatore In "Federiciana"". Treccani.it.
Retrieved 4 May 2022.
Lorem ipsum. "Federico Ii Di Svevia, Imperatore, Re Di Sicilia E Di Gerusalemme, Re Dei Romani In "Federiciana"". Treccani.it.
Retrieved 4 May 2022.
a b c Brady 2009, p. 211.
a b Pavlac & Lott 2019, p. 249.
Wissenschaften, Neuhausener Akademie der (14 July 2021). Beiträge zur bayerischen Geschichte, Sprache und Kultur (in German). BoD – Books on Demand. p. 106. ISBN 978-3-00-069644-2. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Schmitt, Oliver Jens (5 July 2021). Herrschaft und Politik in Südosteuropa von 1300 bis 1800 (in German). Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. p. 659. ISBN 978-3-11-074443-9. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Buchmann, Bertrand Michael (2002). Hof, Regierung, Stadtverwaltung: Wien als Sitz der österreichischen Zentralverwaltung von den Anfängen bis zum Untergang der Monarchie (in German). Verlag für Geschichte und Politik. p. 37. ISBN 978-3-486-56541-6. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb (1974). Werke und Briefe: historisch-kritische Ausgabe (in German). W. de Gruyter. p. 999. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Pihlajamäki, Heikki; Dubber, Markus D.; Godfrey, Mark (4 July 2018). The Oxford Handbook of European Legal History.
Oxford University Press. p. 762. ISBN 978-0-19-108838-4. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Johnston, William M. (23 March 1983). The Austrian Mind: An Intellectual and Social History, 1848–1938. University of California Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-520-04955-0. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Pavlac & Lott 2019, p. 278.
a b Žůrek 2014.
Wilson 2016, pp. v–xxvi.
a b c Wilson 2016, p. 496.
Hardy 2018, p. 3.
Coy, Jason Philip; Marschke, Benjamin; Sabean, David Warren (1 October 2010). The Holy Roman Empire, Reconsidered.
Berghahn Books. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-84545-992-5. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
"Holy Roman Empire". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 15 February 2014.
Peters, Edward (1977). Europe: the World of the Middle Ages.
Prentice-Hall. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-13-291898-5. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Holt, Andrew (5 June 2019). The World of the Crusades: A Daily Life Encyclopedia [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. p. 360. ISBN 978-1-4408-5462-0. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Schneidmüller, Bernd (2000). "Konsensuale Herrschaft.
Ein Essay über Formen und Konzepte politischer Ordnung im Mittelalter".  In Heinig, Paul-Joachim; Jahns, Sigrid; Schmidt, Hans-Joachim; Schwinges, Rainer Christoph; Wefers, Sabine (eds.). Reich, Regionen und Europa in Mittelalter und Neuzeit (in German). Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp. 53–87. doi:10.11588/heidok.00012062.
Weiler, Björn K. U.; MacLean, Simon (2006). Representations of Power in Medieval Germany 800-1500. Isd. p. 126. ISBN 978-2-503-51815-2. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Loud, Graham A.; Schenk, Jochen (6 July 2017). The Origins of the German Principalities, 1100-1350: Essays by German Historians.
Taylor & Francis. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-317-02200-8. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Streissguth, Tom (24 June 2009). The Middle Ages.
Greenhaven Publishing LLC. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-7377-4636-5. Retrieved 29 June 2022.
Wilson 1999, p. 18.
"Charlemagne". History. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 6 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022.
Breverton 2014, p. 104.
a b Cantor 1993, pp. 212–215.
a b Gascoigne, Bamber. "History of the Holy Roman Empire". HistoryWorld.
Davies 1996, pp. 316–317.
a b Bryce 1899, pp. 2–3.
Heer 1967, pp. 1–8.
Davies 1996, pp. 317, 1246.
Kleinhenz 2004, p. 810.
Pavlac & Lott 2019, p. 229.
Eskildsen, Kasper Risbjerg (24 February 2022). Modern Historiography in the Making: The German Sense of the Past, 1700-1900. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 56. ISBN 978-1-350-27150-0. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Lotito, Mark A. (16 September 2019). The Reformation of Historical Thought.
BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-34795-3.
a b c d Whaley 2012a, pp. 17–21.
a b Garipzanov 2008.
Wilson 2016b, p. 79.
a b Brady 2009, pp. 104–106.
Brady 2009, pp. 128, 129, 144.
Brady 2009, pp. 128, 129.
a b Johnson 1996, p. 23.
a b Wilson 1999, p. 2.
a b Whaley 2011, p. 17
Moraw 1999, col. 2025–2028.
Whaley 2011, pp. 19–20
Schulze 1998, pp. 52–55.
"német-római birodalom – Magyar Katolikus Lexikon". lexikon.katolikus.hu.
Retrieved 3 August 2022.
Wilson 2006, p. 719.
Voltaire 1773, p. 338.
Jorio & Braun 2016.
Lauryssens 1999, p. 102.
Bachrach, David S. (2014). Warfare in Tenth-Century Germany.
Boydell & Brewer Ltd. pp. 3, 5, 12, 60, 73, 103, 180, 254. ISBN 978-1-84383-927-9. Retrieved 31 July 2022.
Brown, Warren (February 2015). "Warfare in Tenth-Century Germany [Book Review]". Early Medieval Europe. 23 (1): 117–120. doi:10.1111/emed.12090. Retrieved 31 July 2022.
Brown, Warren (February 2015). "Warfare in Tenth-Century Germany [Book Review]". Early Medieval Europe. 23 (1): 117–120. doi:10.1111/emed.12090. Retrieved 31 July 2022.
Bryce 1899, p. 183.
"Italy in the 14th and 15th centuries". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 18 December 2020.
Innes 2000, pp. 167–170.
Bryce (1913), p. 35.
Davies 1996, pp. 232, 234.
Bryce (1913), pp. 35–36, 38.
McKitterick 2018, pp. 48–50.
"France: History, Map, Flag, Capital, & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Bryce (1913), pp. 38–42.
Johnson 1996, p. 22.
Kohn 2006, pp. 113–114.
Duffy 1997, pp. 62–63.
a b Bryce, pp. 44, 50–52
a b McKitterick 2018, p. 70.
a b Collins 2014, p. 131.
Chambers, Mortimer (1974). The Western Experience.
Knopf. p. 204. ISBN 978-0-394-31806-6. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Witt, Ronald G. (19 March 2012). The Two Latin Cultures and the Foundation of Renaissance Humanism in Medieval Italy.
Cambridge University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-521-76474-2. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Taylor & Hansen-Taylor 1894, p. 117.
Taylor & Hansen-Taylor 1894, p. 118.
Taylor & Hansen-Taylor 1894, p. 121.
Hoyt & Chodorow 1976, p. 197.
Magill 1998, p. 706.
Cantor 1993, pp. 212–213.
Bernhardt, John W. (22 August 2002). Itinerant Kingship and Royal Monasteries in Early Medieval Germany, C.936–1075. Cambridge University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-521-52183-3. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Wickham, Chris (15 October 2016). Medieval Europe.
Yale University Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-300-22221-0. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Cantor 1993, pp. 214–15.
a b Magill 1998, p. 707.
Tucker, Spencer C. (23 December 2009). A Global Chronology of Conflict: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East [6 volumes]: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East.
ABC-CLIO. p. 412. ISBN 978-1-85109-672-5. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Geanakoplos, Deno John (1979). Medieval Western Civilization and the Byzantine and Islamic Worlds: Interaction of Three Cultures. D. C. Heath. p. 207. ISBN 978-0-669-00868-5. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
"Otto I - Legacy Britannica". 
Biographie, Deutsche. "Otto I. - Deutsche Biographie". (in German). Retrieved 5 March 2022.
Davids, Adelbert (15 August 2002). The Empress Theophano: Byzantium and the West at the Turn of the First Millennium.
Cambridge University Press. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-521-52467-4. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Jansen, S. (17 October 2002). The Monstrous Regiment of Women: Female Rulers in Early Modern Europe.
Springer. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-230-60211-3. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
MacLean, Simon (2017). Ottonian Queenship.
Oxford University Press. p. 169. ISBN 978-0-19-880010-1. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Digby, Kenelm Henry (1891). Mores Catholici: Books VII-IX. P. O'Shea. p. 939. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Magill 1998, p. 708.
McBrien 2000, p. 138.
Sladen 1914.
Cantor 1993, pp. 215–17.
Bideleux, Robert; Jeffries, Ian (10 April 2006). A History of Eastern Europe: Crisis and Change.
Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 978-1-134-71985-3. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Lewis, Archibald Ross (1988). Nomads and Crusaders, A.D. 1000-1368. Georgetown University Press. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-253-34787-9. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Fried, Johannes (13 January 2015). The Middle Ages.
Harvard University Press. p. 138. ISBN 978-0-674-74467-7. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Rowland, Christopher; Barton, John (2002). Apocalyptic in History and Tradition.
Bloomsbury Academic. p. 173. ISBN 978-0-8264-6208-4. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Arnason, Johann P.; Wittrock, Björn (1 January 2005). Eurasian Transformations, Tenth to Thirteenth Centuries: Crystallizations, Divergences, Renaissances.
BRILL. p. 100. ISBN 978-90-474-1467-4. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
German Polish Dialogue: Letters of the Polish and German Bishops and International Statements.
Ed.
Atlantic-Forum. 1966. p. 9. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Emmerson, Richard K. (18 October 2013). Key Figures in Medieval Europe: An Encyclopedia.
Routledge. p. 497. ISBN 978-1-136-77518-5. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
Muldoon, J. (19 August 1999). Empire and Order: The Concept of Empire, 800–1800. Springer. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-230-51223-8. Retrieved 30 May 2022.
a b Barraclough 1984, pp. 101–134.
a b Barraclough 1984, p. 109.
Barraclough 1984, pp. 122–124.
Barraclough 1984, p. 123.
Barraclough 1984, pp. 123–134.
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Silesia" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Herrmann 1970, p. 530.
Haffner 2019, pp. 6–10.
Smail & Gibson 2009.
Arnold 1995, p. 398.
Hunyadi & Laszlovszky 2001, p. 129.
Rothstein 1995, pp. 9-.
Szepesi 2015.
Rothbard 2009.
Schwartzwald, Jack L. (20 November 2015). The Collapse and Recovery of Europe, AD 476–1648. McFarland. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-4766-6230-5. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Brady 2009, p. 73.
Mahoney, William (18 February 2011). The History of the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
ABC-CLIO. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-313-36306-1. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Brady 2009, pp. 73, 74.
a b Whaley 2011, p. 278.
Whaley, Joachim (24 November 2011). Germany and the Holy Roman Empire: Volume II: The Peace of Westphalia to the Dissolution of the Reich, 1648–1806. OUP Oxford. p. 278. ISBN 978-0-19-162822-1. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Hardy 2018.
Brady 2009, pp. 75–81.
Wilson, Peter H. (2016b). The Holy Roman Empire: A Thousand Years of Europe's History.
Penguin Books Limited. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-14-195691-6. Retrieved 21 January 2022.
Smith, William Bradford (2008). Reformation and the German Territorial State: Upper Franconia, 1300–1630. University Rochester Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-58046-274-7. Retrieved 21 January 2022.
Wilson 2016, p. 79.
Tracy, James D. (29 July 2016). Balkan Wars: Habsburg Croatia, Ottoman Bosnia, and Venetian Dalmatia, 1499–1617. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 163. ISBN 978-1-4422-1360-9. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Ágoston, Gábor (22 June 2021). The Last Muslim Conquest: The Ottoman Empire and Its Wars in Europe.
Princeton University Press. p. 312. ISBN 978-0-691-20538-0. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Whaley 2012a, p. .
a b Pavlac & Lott 2019, p. 143.
a b c Brady 2009, p. 429.
a b Erbe 2000, pp. 19–30.
Whaley 2011, p. 61.
Berenger & Simpson 2014, p. 132.
Gosman, Martin; Alasdair, A.; MacDonald, A.; Macdonald, Alasdair James; Vanderjagt, Arie Johan (2003). Princes and Princely Culture: 1450–1650. BRILL. p. 298. ISBN 9789004135727. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021.
Hodnet, Andrew Arthur (2018). The Othering of the Landsknechte.
North Carolina State University. p. 81.
Burdick, William Livesey (2004). The Principles of Roman Law and Their Relation to Modern Law.
The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd. pp. 19, 20. ISBN 978-1-58477-253-8. Retrieved 19 November 2021.
Lee, Daniel (19 February 2016). Popular Sovereignty in Early Modern Constitutional Thought.
Oxford University Press. p. 243. ISBN 978-0-19-106244-5. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
Thornhill, Chris (24 January 2007). German Political Philosophy: The Metaphysics of Law.
Routledge. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-134-38280-4. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
Haivry, Ofir (29 June 2017). John Selden and the Western Political Tradition.
Cambridge University Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-107-01134-2. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
Mousourakis, George (2 March 2017). The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law.
Routledge. p. 435. ISBN 978-1-351-88840-0. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
Zoller, Élisabeth (2008). Introduction to Public Law: A Comparative Study.
BRILL. p. 64. ISBN 978-90-04-16147-4. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
Hodnet 2018, pp. 79–81.
Spence, Lewis (1993). An Encyclopedia of Occultism.
Kensington Publishing Corporation. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8065-1401-7. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Palgrave, Francis (5 December 2013). The Collected Historical Works of Sir Francis Palgrave, K.H. Cambridge University Press. pp. xiv, 203, 204. ISBN 978-1-107-62636-2. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Beccaria, Cesare marchese di; Beccaria, Cesare; Stevenson, Bryan (1 January 2008). On Crimes and Punishments and Other Writings.
University of Toronto Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8020-8990-8. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Ripley, George; Dana, Charles Anderson (1869). The New American Cyclopædia: A Popular Dictionary of General Knowledge. D. Appleton. p. 43. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Strieder, Peter (8 May 2017). "Zur Entstehungsgeschichte von Dürers Ehrenpforte für Kaiser Maximilian". Anzeiger des Germanischen Nationalmuseums: 128–142 Seiten. doi:10.11588/azgnm.1954.0.38143. Retrieved 7 February 2022.
Hirschi, Caspar (8 December 2011). The Origins of Nationalism: An Alternative History from Ancient Rome to Early Modern Germany.
Cambridge University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-139-50230-6. Retrieved 7 February 2022.
Brandt, Bettina (2010). Germania und ihre Söhne: Repräsentationen von Nation, Geschlecht und Politik in der Moderne (in German). Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. p. 37. ISBN 978-3-525-36710-0. Retrieved 8 February 2022.
Albert, Rabil Jr. (11 November 2016). Renaissance Humanism, Volume 2: Foundations, Forms, and Legacy.
University of Pennsylvania Press.
ISBN 978-1-5128-0576-5. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Quevedo, Francisco de; Britton, R. K. (1 January 1989). Francisco de Quevedo: Dreams and Discourses.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-1-80034-588-1. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Wilson 2016, p. 263.
Whaley, Joachim (2009). "Whaley on Silver, 'Marketing Maximilian: the Visual Ideology of a Holy Roman Emperor' | H-German | H-Net". Networks.h-net.org.
Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Tennant, Elaine C.; Johnson, Carroll B. (1985). The Habsburg Chancery Language in Perspective, Volume 114. University of California Press. pp. 1, 3, 9. ISBN 9780520096943. Archived from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2021.
Wiesinger, Peter. "Die Entwicklung der deutschen Schriftsprache vom 16. bis 18. Jahrhundert unter dem Einfluss der Konfessionen". Zeitschrift der Germanisten Rumäniens (ZGR) (17–18 / 2000 (9th year)): 155–162. doi:10.1515/jbgsg-2018-0014. S2CID 186566355. Retrieved 8 November 2021.
Meinel, Christoph; Sack, Harald (2014). Digital Communication: Communication, Multimedia, Security.
Springer Science & Business Media. p. 31. ISBN 9783642543319. Archived from the original on 26 September 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2021.
Metzig, Gregor (21 November 2016). Kommunikation und Konfrontation: Diplomatie und Gesandtschaftswesen Kaiser Maximilians I. (1486–1519) (in German). Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. pp. 98, 99. ISBN 978-3-11-045673-8. Retrieved 29 January 2022.
Scott, Hamish M. (2015). The Oxford Handbook of Early Modern European History, 1350-1750. Oxford University Press. p. 173. ISBN 978-0-19-959725-3. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Headrick, Daniel R. (28 December 2000). When Information Came of Age: Technologies of Knowledge in the Age of Reason and Revolution, 1700–1850. Oxford University Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-19-803108-6. Retrieved 12 December 2021.
Whaley 2011, p. 370.
"H-German Roundtable on Smith, Germany: A Nation in Its Time Before, During, and After Nationalism, 1500–2000 | H-German | H-Net". networks.h-net.org.
Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Brady 2009, pp. 110, 128.
Forster, Marc R. "Forster on Brady Jr., 'German Histories in the Age of Reformations, 1400–1650' | H-German | H-Net". Networks.h-net.org.
Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Whaley 2012a, p. 75.
Curtis 2013, pp. 46–52.
Asch, Ronald G. (28 October 2021). "Monarchs". Monarchs.
Early Modern Court Culture. pp. 17–36. doi:10.4324/9780429277986-3. ISBN 9780429277986. S2CID 240193601.
Thackeray, Frank W.; Findling, John E. (31 May 2012). Events That Formed the Modern World: From the European Renaissance through the War on Terror [5 volumes]: From the European Renaissance through the War on Terror.
ABC-CLIO. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-59884-902-8. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Holleger 2012, p. 34.
Brady, Thomas A.; Jr, Thomas A. Brady (13 July 2009). German Histories in the Age of Reformations, 1400–1650. Cambridge University Press. p. 112. ISBN 978-0-521-88909-4. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Wilson 2004, p. 27.
Mullett 2010, p. 81.
Tracy, James D. (23 October 2018). Holland Under Habsburg Rule, 1506–1566: The Formation of a Body Politic.
Univ of California Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-520-30403-1. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Nexon, Daniel H. (20 April 2009). The Struggle for Power in Early Modern Europe: Religious Conflict, Dynastic Empires, and International Change.
Princeton University Press. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-691-13793-3. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Whaley 2011, p. 326.
Holborn, Hajo (21 December 1982). A History of Modern Germany: The Reformation.
Princeton University Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-691-00795-3. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Whaley 2012a, p. 334.
MacCulloch, Diarmaid (25 March 2005). The Reformation.
Penguin. p. 362. ISBN 978-1-101-56395-3. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Isom-Verhaaren, Christine (30 May 2011). Allies with the Infidel: The Ottoman and French Alliance in the Sixteenth Century.
Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-85773-227-9. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Wilson 2016, pp. 69.
Wilson 1999, pp. 52, 53.
Wilson 2016, pp. lxxv.
Brady 2009, p. 72.
Johnson 1996, p. 52.
Populer, Michèle (1993). "Mályusz (Elemér). Kaiser Sigismund in Ungarn 1387-1437". Revue belge de Philologie et d'Histoire. 71 (4): 953–957. Retrieved 5 July 2022.
Whaley 2012a, pp. 18, 19.
Amati, Roberto (3 February 2022). History of european integration in 2500 years: Ancient origins are renewed in the present aeternitas.
Tektime. p. 85. ISBN 978-88-354-3496-2. Retrieved 6 August 2022.
Irgang, Winfried. "SEHEPUNKTE - Rezension von: Kaiser Sigismund (1368-1437) - Ausgabe 14 (2014), Nr. 11". sehepunkte.de.
Whaley, Joachim (19 July 2018). The Holy Roman Empire: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-106563-7. Retrieved 6 August 2022.
Whaley 2012a, pp. 18, 19, 69.
Wanders, Patrick.
Maximilian I and the Holy Roman Empire: The Authority of a King of the Romans (1486-1490) (Thesis). pp. 1–39. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Leustean, Lucian N. (2 July 2014). Orthodox Christianity and Nationalism in Nineteenth-Century Southeastern Europe.
Fordham Univ Press. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-8232-5608-2. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Simms, Brendan (30 April 2013). Europe: The Struggle for Supremacy, from 1453 to the Present.
Basic Books. p. 1737. ISBN 978-0-465-06595-0. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Wilson 2016, p. 221.
Wilson 2016, p. ii.
Evans 2006, p. 82. sfn error: no target: CITEREFEvans2006 (help)
Whaley 2011a, p. 370. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWhaley2011a (help)
Evans, Robert; Wilson, Peter (25 July 2012). The Holy Roman Empire, 1495-1806: A European Perspective.
BRILL. p. 126. ISBN 978-90-04-20683-0. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
Anderson, Perry (12 March 2013). Lineages of the Absolutist State.
Verso Books. p. 303. ISBN 978-1-78168-010-0. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Zmora, Hillay (4 January 2002). Monarchy, Aristocracy and State in Europe 1300-1800. Routledge. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-134-74798-6. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Ninness, Richard J. (1 December 2020). German Imperial Knights: Noble Misfits between Princely Authority and the Crown, 1479–1648. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-000-28502-4. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Tracy, James D. (29 July 2016). Balkan Wars: Habsburg Croatia, Ottoman Bosnia, and Venetian Dalmatia, 1499–1617. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 163. ISBN 978-1-4422-1360-9. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Ágoston, Gábor (22 June 2021). The Last Muslim Conquest: The Ottoman Empire and Its Wars in Europe.
Princeton University Press. p. 312. ISBN 978-0-691-20538-0. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
Wilson 2016, p. ii-IA30.
"Whaley on Silver, 'Marketing Maximilian: the Visual Ideology of a Holy Roman Emperor' | H-German | H-Net". networks.h-net.org.
Retrieved 26 February 2022.
Downey, Kirstin (28 October 2014). Isabella: The Warrior Queen.
Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 307. ISBN 978-0-385-53412-3. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Dandelet, Thomas James (14 April 2014). The Renaissance of Empire in Early Modern Europe.
Cambridge University Press. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-521-76993-8. Retrieved 6 September 2022.
Wilson 2016, p. ii-IA29.
Gumpelzhaimer 1796.
Whaley 2012b, p. 188.
a b Smith 1920, p. 19.
Wilson 2004, p. 307.
Hirschi 2005, pp. 393–399.
Malettke 2001, p. 22.
"Society for Imperial Chamber Court Research, Wetzlar". Museum and Research Center for the Imperial Chamber Court (Reichskammergericht). 4 July 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2021.
Corvisier & Childs 1994, p. 306.
Tullner, Mathias (9 March 2013). Geschichte des Landes Sachsen-Anhalt (in German). Springer-Verlag. p. 27. ISBN 978-3-322-97346-7. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Ehlers et al. 2016, pp. 31-.
"Seven German cities you never knew were once capitals". The Local. 18 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 20 June 2019.
a b Pavlac & Lott 2019, p. 27.
Benecke, Gerhard (26 June 2019). Maximilian I (1459–1519): An Analytical Biography.
Routledge. p. 25. ISBN 978-1-000-00840-1. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Grant, Neil (1970). Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor. F. Watts. p. 74. ISBN 978-0-531-00937-6. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Patrouch, Joseph F. (2010). Queen's Apprentice: Archduchess Elizabeth, Empress María, the Habsburgs, and the Holy Roman Empire, 1554–1569. BRILL. p. 11. ISBN 978-90-04-18030-7. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Gagliardo 1980, pp. 22–23.
Brockmann 2006, p. 15.
Schindling 1986, p. 64.
Angermeier 1984.
Hochedlinger, Mata & Winkelbauer 2019.
Barker 1911, p. 341.
a b Wilson 1999, p. 70.
Wilson 1999, p. 69.
Härter 2011, pp. 122–123, 132.
Fried 2016, p. 56.
Parker 2008, p. 1058.
Wilson 2009, pp. 18–23.
a b Wilson, p. 788
Wilson 2009, p. 17.
Benecke 1974, p. 162.
Whaley 2012a, p. 633.
Whaley 2012b, p. 351.
de Las Cases 1824, p. 197.
Puga, Diego; Trefler, Daniel, "International trade and institutional change: A death in Venice" (PDF), Venice Seminar MIT, archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2015
Tellier 2009, p. 290.
Claus 1997.
Kurian 2010, p. 587.
Legauy 1995, p. 104.
a b Flood 2011, p. 118.
Cipolla 1981.
a b Whaley 2012a, pp. 624–625.
Sources
Angermeier, Heinz (1984). Die Reichsreform 1410–1555: die Staatsproblematik in Deutschland zwischen Mittelalter und Gegenwart (in German). C.H. Beck.
ISBN 978-3-406-30278-7.
Arnold, Benjamin (1995). "14 The Western Empire 1125-1197".  In Luscombe, David; Riley-Smith, Jonathan (eds.). The New Cambridge Medieval History, Volume 4: C.1024-c.1198, Part 2. Vol. 4. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521414111.016. ISBN 9780521414111.
Avakov, Alexander V. (2015). Two Thousand Years of Economic Statistics.
Vol. 1. New York: Algora.
Barker, Ernest (1911). "Imperial Chamber" .  In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 341–342.
Barraclough, Geoffrey (1984). The Origins of Modern Germany.
New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Inc.
ISBN 978-0-393-30153-3.
Benecke, G. (1974). Society and Politics in Germany, 1500–1750. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Berenger, Jean; Simpson, C.A. (2014). A History of the Habsburg Empire 1273–1700. Routledge. pp. 120, 121. ISBN 9781317895701. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021.
Brady, Thomas A. Jr (2009). German Histories in the Age of Reformations, 1400–1650. Cambridge University Press. pp. 104–106, 116. ISBN 978-1-139-48115-1. Retrieved 5 February 2022.
Breverton, Terry (2014). Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About the Tudors but Were Afraid to Ask.
Amberley Publishing.
ISBN 9781445638454.
Brockmann, Stephen (2006). Nuremberg: The imaginary capital.
Rochester, NY: Camden House.
ISBN 978-1-57113-345-8.
Bryce, James (1899). The Holy Roman Empire.
Macmillan.
Cantor, Norman F. (1993). The Civilization of the Middle Ages.
Harper Perennial.
ISBN 978-0-06-092553-6.
Cipolla, Carlo M. (1981). Fighting the Plague in Seventeenth Century Italy.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Claus, Edda (1997). The Rebirth of a Communications Network: Europe at the Time of the Carolingians (M.Sc). hdl:1866/803.
Collins, Paul (2014). The Birth of the West: Rome, Germany, France, and the Creation of Europe in the Tenth Century.
ISBN 9781610393683.
Curtis, Benjamin (2013). The Habsburgs: The History of a Dynasty.
Bloomsbury. p. 36.
Corvisier, André; Childs, John (1994). 'A dictionary of military history and the art of war.
Davies, Norman (1996). A History of Europe.
Oxford.
de Las Cases, E.A.D. (1824). Journal of the Private Life and Conversations of the Emperor Napoleon at Saint Helena. H. Colburn.
Duffy, Eamon (1997). Saints & Sinners: A History of the Popes.
Yale University Press.
Ehlers, Caspar; Flachenecker, Helmut; Päffgen, Bernd; Schieffer, Rudolf (2016). Die deutschen Königspfalzen.
Vol. Band 5: Bayern: Teilband 3: Bayerisch-Schwaben.
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
ISBN 978-3-647-36523-7.
Erbe, Michael (2000). "Urban". Die Habsburger 1493–1918. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag.
ISBN 3-17-011866-8.
Flood, John (2011). Poets Laureate in the Holy Roman Empire: A Bio-bibliographical Handbook.
ISBN 9783110912746.
Fried, Johannes (2016). Charlemagne.
Harvard University Press.
Gagliardo, John H. (1980). Reich and Nation.
The Holy Roman Empire as Idea and Reality, 1763–1806. Indiana University Press.
Garipzanov, Ildar H. (2008). The Symbolic Language of Authority in the Carolingian World (c.751–877). Leiden: Brill.
Gumpelzhaimer, H.S.G. (1796). Reichs Matrikel aller Kreise: nebst Usual-Matrikeln des Kaiserlichen und ReichsKammergerichts, mit beygefügten Veränderungen (in German). Ulm.
Haffner, S. (2019). The Rise and Fall of Prussia.
Plunkett Lake.
Hanlon, Gregory (2014). The Hero of Italy: Odoardo Farnese, Duke of Parma, his Soldiers, and his Subjects in the Thirty Years' War.
Routledge.
Hardy, D. (2018). Associative Political Culture in the Holy Roman Empire: Upper Germany, 1346–1521. Oxford Historical Monographs.
OUP Oxford.
ISBN 978-0-19-256217-3.
Härter, Karl (2011). "The Permanent Imperial Diet in European Context, 1663–1806"".  In R.J.W. Evans; Michael Schaich; Peter H. Wilson (eds.). The Holy Roman Empire, 1495–1806. US: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-960297-1.
Herrmann, Joachim (1970). Die Slawen in Deutschland (in German). Berlin: Akademie-Verlag GmbH.
Heer, Friedrich (1967). The Holy Roman Empire.
New York: Frederick A. Praeger.
ISBN 978-0-297-17672-5.
Hirschi, Caspar (2005). Wettkampf der Nationen.
Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag.
Hochedlinger, Michael; Mata, Petr; Winkelbauer, Thomas (2019). Verwaltungsgeschichte der Habsburgermonarchie in der Frühen Neuzeit.
Vol. Band 1: Hof und Dynastie, Kaiser und Reich, Zentralverwaltungen, Kriegswesen und landesfürstliches Finanzwesen.
Vienna: Böhlau Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-205-23246-9.
Holleger, Manfred (2012). "Personality and reign The biography of Emperor Maximilian I".  In Michel, Eva; Sternat, Maria Luise (eds.). Emperor Maximilian I and the Age of Durer (PDF). Prestel; Albertina. pp. 32–33. ISBN 9783791351728. Retrieved 2 December 2021.
Hoyt, Robert S.; Chodorow, Stanley (1976). Europe in the Middle Ages.
Harcourt brace Jovanovich.
Hunyadi, Zsolt; Laszlovszky, József (2001). The Crusades and the Military Orders: Expanding the Frontiers of Medieval Latin Christianity.
ISBN 9789639241428.
Innes, Matthew (2000). State and Society in the Early Middle Ages: The Middle Rhine Valley, 400–1000. ISBN 9781139425582.
Johnson, Lonnie (1996). Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, Friends.
ISBN 9780198026075.
Jorio, Marco; Braun, Bettina (25 April 2016), "Heiliges Römisches Reich", Historisches Lexikon der Schweiz (HLS), retrieved 7 September 2021
Kleinhenz, Christopher (2004). Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia.
ISBN 9781135948801. Otto can be considered the first ruler of the Holy Roman empire, though that term was not used until the twelfth century.
Kohn, George C. (2006). Dictionary of Wars.
ISBN 9781438129167.
Kurian, George Thomas (2010). The Encyclopedia of Christian Literature.
ISBN 9780810872837.
Lauryssens, Stan (1999). The Man Who Invented the Third Reich: The Life and Times of Arthur Moeller van den Bruck.
Stroud: Sutton.
ISBN 978-0-7509-1866-4.
Legauy, Jean Pierre (1995). "6. Urban Life".  In Jones, Michael C. E. (ed.). The New Cambridge Medieval History, Volume 6, C.1300-c.1415. Vol. 6. ISBN 9780521362900.
Magill, Frank (1998). Dictionary of World Biography.
Vol. II. London: Fitzroy Dearborn.
Malettke, Klaus (2001). Les relations entre la France et le Saint-Empire au XVIIe siècle (in French). Paris: Honoré Champion.
McBrien, Richard P. (2000). Lives of the Popes: The Pontiffs from St.
Peter to Benedict XVI. HarperCollins.
McKitterick, R. (2018). The Frankish Kingdoms Under the Carolingians 751–987. Taylor & Francis.
ISBN 978-1-317-87248-1.
Moraw, Peter (1999) . "Heiliges Reich". Lexikon des Mittelalters.
Vol. 4. Munich & Zürich: Artemis.
Mullett, Michael (2010). Historical Dictionary of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation.
ISBN 9780810873933.
Parker, Geoffrey (2008). "Crisis and catastrophe: The global crisis of the seventeenth century reconsidered". American Historical Review. 113 (4): 1053–1079. doi:10.1086/ahr.113.4.1053.
Pavlac, Brian A.; Lott, Elizabeth S. (2019). The Holy Roman Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. p. 143. ISBN 9781440848568. Archived from the original on 21 September 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2021.
Rothbard, Murray N. (23 November 2009). "The Great Depression of the 14th Century". Mises Institute.
Retrieved 14 March 2019.
Rothstein, Stanley William (1995). Class, Culture, and Race in American Schools: A Handbook.
Greenwood.
ISBN 978-0-313-29102-9.
Schindling, Anton (1986). "The Development of the Eternal Diet in Regensburg". The Journal of Modern History. 58: 64–75. doi:10.1086/243149. S2CID 144471373.
Schulze, Hans K. (1998). Grundstrukturen der Verfassung im Mittelalter [Basic structures of the constitution in the Middle Ages] (in German). Vol. Bd. 3 (Kaiser und Reich). Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag.
Smail, Daniel Lord; Gibson, Kelly (2009). Vengeance in Medieval Europe: A Reader. p. 156. ISBN 9781442601260.
Sladen, Douglas Brooke Wheelton (1914). How to See the Vatican  – via Wikisource.
Smith, Preserved (1920). The Social Background of the Reformation.
Collier.
Szepesi, Istvan (2015). "Reflecting the Nation: The Historiography of Hanseatic Institutions" (PDF). Waterloo Historical Review. 7. doi:10.15353/whr.v7.33. S2CID 148667574.
Taagepera, Rein (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia" (PDF). International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 494. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. JSTOR 2600793.
Tellier, Luc-Normand (2009). Urban World History: An Economic and Geographical Perspective.
ISBN 9782760522091.
Taylor, Bayard; Hansen-Taylor, Marie (1894). A history of Germany from the earliest times to the present day.
New York: D. Appleton & Co. p. 117.
Voltaire (1773) . "Chapitre lxx". Essais sur les mœurs et l'ésprit des nations.
Vol. 3 (nouvelle ed.). Neuchâtel. p. 338. Ce corps qui s'appelait, & qui s'appelle encore, le Saint-Empire Romain, n'était en aucune manière, ni saint, ni romain, ni empire
Whaley, Joachim (2012a). Germany and the Holy Roman Empire, Volume I: Maximilian I to the Peace of Westphalia, 1493–1648. Vol. I. Oxford: OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-873101-6.
Whaley, Joachim (2012b). Germany and the Holy Roman Empire, Volume II: The Peace of Westphalia to the Dissolution of the Reich, 1648–1806. Vol. II. Oxford: OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-969307-8.
Wilson, Peter H. (23 July 1999). The Holy Roman Empire 1495-1806. Bloomsbury Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-349-27649-3.
Wilson, Peter H. (2004). From Reich To Revolution: German History, 1558-1806.
Wilson, Peter H. (December 2006). "Bolstering the Prestige of the Habsburgs: The End of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806". The International History Review. 28 (4): 709–736. doi:10.1080/07075332.2006.9641109. S2CID 154316830.
Wilson, Peter H. (2009). Europe's Tragedy: A History of the Thirty Years War.
Allen Lane.
Wilson, Peter H. (2016). Heart of Europe: A History of the Holy Roman Empire.
Belknap Press.
ISBN 978-0674058095.
Zeumern, Karl, ed. (1908), Goldene Bulle, Hermann Böhlaus
Žůrek, Václav (31 December 2014). "Les langues du roi.
Le rôle de la langue dans la communication de propagande dynastique à l'époque de Charles IV" [The languages of the king.
The role of language in dynastic propaganda communication during the time of Charles IV]. Revue de l'Institut Français d'Histoire en Allemagne (in French) (6). doi:10.4000/ifha.8045.=
Further reading
Arnold, Benjamin, Princes and Territories in Medieval Germany. (Cambridge University Press, 1991)
Bryce, James (1864). The Holy Roman Empire.
Macmillan. very old scholarly survey
Coy, Jason Philip et al.  The Holy Roman Empire, Reconsidered, (Berghahn Books, 2010)
Donaldson, George.
Germany: A Complete History (Gotham Books, New York, 1985)
Evans,  R.J.W., and Peter H. Wilson, eds.
The Holy Roman Empire 1495–1806 (2011); specialized topical essays by scholars
Hahn, Hans Joachim.
German thought and culture: From the Holy Roman Empire to the present day (Manchester UP, 1995).
Renna, Thomas (2015). "The Holy Roman Empire was Neither Holy, Nor Roman, Nor an Empire". Michigan Academician. 42 (1): 60–75. doi:10.7245/0026-2005-42.1.60. ISSN 0026-2005. deals with Voltaire's statement
Scribner, Bob.
Germany: A New Social and Economic History, Vol. 1: 1450–1630 (1995)
Treasure, Geoffrey.
The Making of Modern Europe, 1648–1780 (3rd ed. 2003). pp. 374–426.
Voltaire; Balechou, Jean-Joseph (1756). Essay sur l'histoire générale, et sur les moeurs et l'esprit des nations, depuis Charlemagne jusqu'à nos jours.
Cramer.
Zophy, Jonathan W., ed.
The Holy Roman Empire: A Dictionary Handbook (Greenwood Press, 1980)
In German
Heinz Angermeier.
Das Alte Reich in der deutschen Geschichte.
Studien über Kontinuitäten und Zäsuren, München 1991
Karl Otmar Freiherr von Aretin.
Das Alte Reich 1648–1806. 4 vols.
Stuttgart, 1993–2000
Peter Claus Hartmann.
Kulturgeschichte des Heiligen Römischen Reiches 1648 bis 1806. Wien, 2001
Georg Schmidt.
Geschichte des Alten Reiches.
München, 1999
Deutsche Reichstagsakten
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Holy Roman Empire.
Library resources about  Holy Roman Empire 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
The constitutional structure of the Reich Archived 21 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine
List of Wars of the Holy Roman Empire
Books and articles on the Reich
The Holy Roman Empire
Comparison of the Holy Roman Empire and the European Union in 2012 by The Economist
Maps
Deutschland beim Tode Kaiser Karls IV. 1378 (Germany at the death of emperor Charles IV.) taken from "Meyers Kleines Konversationslexikon in sechs Bänden.
Bd. 2. Leipzig u.
Wien : Bibliogr.
Institut 1908", map inserted after page 342
The Holy Roman Empire, 1138–1254
The Holy Roman Empire c. 1500
The Holy Roman Empire in 1648
The Holy Roman Empire in 1789 (interactive map)
Links to related articles
Holy Roman Emperors
Charlemagne (Charles I)
Louis I
Lothair I
Louis II
Charles II
Charles III
Guy
Lambert
Arnulf
Louis III
Berengar
Otto I
Otto II
Otto III
Henry II
Conrad II
Henry III
Henry IV
Henry V
Lothair III
Frederick I
Henry VI
Otto IV
Frederick II
Henry VII
Louis IV
Charles IV
Sigismund
Frederick III
Maximilian I
Charles V
Ferdinand I
Maximilian II
Rudolph II
Matthias
Ferdinand II
Ferdinand III
Leopold I
Joseph I
Charles VI
Charles VII
Francis I
Joseph II
Leopold II
Francis II
Category
Circles of the Holy Roman Empire after the Imperial ReformCreated in 1500
Bavarian
Franconian
Westphalian (Lower Rhenish-Westphalian)
Lower Saxon
Swabian
Upper Rhenish
Created in 1512
Austrian
Burgundian
Electoral Rhenish
Upper Saxon
and
Territories of the Holy Roman Empire outside the Imperial Circles
Free imperial cities of the  Holy Roman EmpireBy 1792
Aachen
Aalen
Augsburg
Biberach
Bopfingen
BremenH
Buchau
Buchhorn
CologneH
Dinkelsbühl
DortmundH
Eßlingen
Frankfurt
Friedberg
Gengenbach
Giengen
GoslarH
HamburgH
Heilbronn
Isny
Kaufbeuren
Kempten
Kessenich
Leutkirch
Lindau
LübeckH
Memmingen
Mühlhausen
MülhausenD, S
Nordhausen
Nördlingen
Nuremberg
Offenburg
Pfullendorf
Ravensburg
Regensburg
Reutlingen
Rothenburg
RottweilS
Schwäbisch Gmünd
Schwäbisch Hall
Schweinfurt
Speyer
Überlingen
Ulm
Wangen
Weil
Weißenburg in Bayern
Wetzlar
Wimpfen
Windsheim
Worms
Zell
Free Imperial Cities as of 1648Lost imperial immediacy or no longer part of the Holy Roman Empire by 1792
BaselS
BernS
Besançon
Brakel
Cambrai
Diessenhofen
Donauwörth
Duisburg
Düren
Gelnhausen
HagenauD
Herford
KaysersbergD
KolmarD
Konstanz
LandauD
Lemgo
LucerneS
Mainz
Metz
MunsterD
ObernaiD
Pfeddersheim
Rheinfelden
RosheimD
St.
GallenS
Sarrebourg
SchaffhausenS
Schmalkalden
SchlettstadtD
SeltzD
SoestH
SolothurnS
Straßburg
Toul
TurckheimD
Verden
Verdun
Warburg
Weißenburg in ElsaßD
ZürichS
D Member of the Décapole
H Member of the Hanseatic League
S Member or associate of the Swiss Confederacy
EmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Old Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Spring and Autumn
Warring States
Qin
Eighteen Kingdoms
Han
Three Kingdoms
Jin
Sixteen Kingdoms
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Hittite
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Indo-greek
Bactrian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Hunnic
White
Asian
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese Empire
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
Jīn
Yuan
Uyghur
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Egyptian Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Eastern
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Despotate of Epirus
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese Empire
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Darawiish
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish–Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish
Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire
History of EuropePrehistory
Paleolithic Europe
Neolithic Europe
Bronze Age Europe
Iron Age Europe
Classical antiquity
Classical Greece
Roman Republic
Hellenistic period
Roman Empire
Early Christianity
Christianity in late antiquity
Crisis of the Third Century
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
Migration Period
Christianity in the Middle Ages
Christianization
Francia
Anglo-Saxon England
Byzantine Empire
Papal States
Bulgarian Empire
First
Second
Maritime republics
Venice
Genoa
Pisa
Amalfi
Viking Age
Kievan Rus'
Crown of Aragon
Holy Roman Empire
High Middle Ages
Republic of Florence
Feudalism
Crusades
Mongol invasion
Serbian Empire
Late Middle Ages
Black Death
Hundred Years' War
Kalmar Union
Early modern
Renaissance
Christianity in the modern era
Reformation
Age of Discovery
Baroque
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
Thirty Years' War
Absolute monarchy
Ottoman Empire
Portuguese Empire
Spanish Empire
Early modern France
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Cossack Hetmanate
Swedish Empire
Dutch Republic
British Empire
Habsburg monarchy
Russian Empire
Age of Enlightenment
Late modern
Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
Nationalism
Revolutions of 1848
World War I
Russian Revolution
Interwar period
World War II
Cold War
European integration
COVID-19 pandemic
See also
Art of Europe
Genetic history of Europe
History of Christianity
History of the Mediterranean region
History of the European Union
History of Western civilization
Maritime history of Europe
Military history of Europe
Crusading movement
Western world and cultureFoundations
Cradle of civilization
Old World
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Rome
Roman Empire
Western
Eastern
Roman legacy
Romanization
Romano-Germanic culture
Christendom
History
European Bronze Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
early
high
late
Renaissance
Early modern period
Age of Discovery
Reformation
Age of Enlightenment
Scientific Revolution
Late modern period
Age of Revolution
Abolitionism
Emancipation
Capitalism
Industrial Revolution
Great Divergence
Modern era
World War I
Interwar period
Universal suffrage
World War II
Cold War
Post–Cold War era
Information age
War on terror
Second Cold War
Culture
Alphabet
Greek
Latin
Cyrillic
Architecture
Art
Periods
Calendar
Cuisine
Diet
Classical tradition
Studies
Clothing
History
Dance
Esotericism
Astrology
Folklore
Law
Languages
Eurolinguistics
Standard Average European
Literature
Canon
Media
Internet
Music
Chant
Classical
Folk
Mythology
Painting (contemporary)
Philosophy
Science
Values
Religion
East–West Schism
Western Christianity
Decline
Secularism
Philosophy
Hellenistic philosophy
Judeo-Christian ethics
Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Christian existentialism
Humanism
Christian humanism
Secular humanism
Liberalism
Conservatism
Socialism
Continental philosophy
Analytic philosophy
Post-structuralism
Tolerance
Paradox
Relativism
Peritrope
Atlanticism
Religion
Judaism
Culture
Christianity
Culture
Western/Eastern
Catholic Church
Latin Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Paganism
Baltic
Celtic
Finnish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Frankish
Gothic
Old Norse
Hellenistic
Roman
Slavic
Neo
Agnosticism
Atheism
Law
Natural law
Rule of law
Equality before the law
Constitutionalism
Human rights
Life
Thought
Speech
Press
Religion
Property
Democracy
International law
Contemporaryintegration
ABCANZ Armies
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
ANZUS
Arctic Council
AUKUS
Baltic Assembly
Benelux
British–Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
EEA
EFTA
ESA
EU
EU Customs Union
Eurozone
EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Five Eyes
G7
Lancaster House Treaties
Lublin Triangle
NATO
Nordic Council
OSCE
Pacific Islands Forum
PROSUL/PROSUR
Rio Treaty
Schengen
Special Relationship
Three Seas Initiative
USMCA
Visegrád Group
West Nordic Council
Western Bloc
Western European and Others Group
Westernization
Portals: Holy Roman Empire Middle Ages Monarchy
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Sweden
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 17:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
