Ibn Khaldun - Wikipedia
Ibn Khaldun
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Arab historiographer and historian (1332–1406)
For the horse, see Ibn Khaldun (horse).
Ibn KhaldunBust of Ibn Khaldun in the entrance of the Kasbah of Bejaia, AlgeriaPersonalBorn27 May 1332Tunis, Hafsid SultanateDied17 March 1406 (1406-03-18) (aged 73)Cairo, EgyptReligionIslamDenominationSunniJurisprudenceMalikiCreedAsh'ariMain interest(s)Historiographysociologyeconomicsdemographypolitical scienceNotable idea(s)
Asabiyyah
Conquest theory of state formation
Cyclical theory of empires
Economic growth theory
Supply and demand theory
Muslim leader
Influenced by
Al-Farabi
Al-Ghazali
Al-Jahiz
Al-Razi
Al-Tusi
Aristotle
At-Turtushi
Avempace
Averroes
Avicenna
Ibn Abi Zar
Ibn Hazm
Ibn Jarir
Influenced
Ibn al-Khatib
Ibn al-Sakkak
Al-Maqrizi
Ibn al-Azraq
Çelebi
Mustafa Naima
Ahmed Cevdet
Toynbee
Orowan
Reagan
Amel
Laffer
Ibn Khaldun (/ˈɪbən xælˈduːn/; Arabic: أبو زيد عبد الرحمن بن محمد بن خلدون الحضرمي, Abū Zayd ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn al-Ḥaḍramī; 27 May 1332 – 17 March 1406, 732-808 AH) was an Arab sociologist, philosopher, and historian widely acknowledged to be one of the greatest social scientists of the Middle Ages, who made major contributions in the areas of historiography, sociology, economics, and demography.[note 1][note 2]
His best-known book, the Muqaddimah or Prolegomena ("Introduction"), which he wrote in six months as he states in his autobiography, influenced 17th-century and 19th-century Ottoman historians such as Kâtip Çelebi, Mustafa Naima and Ahmed Cevdet Pasha, who used its theories to analyze the growth and decline of the Ottoman Empire.
Ibn Khaldun interacted with Tamerlane, the founder of the Timurid Empire.
Recently, Ibn Khaldun's works have been compared with those of influential European philosophers such as Niccolò Machiavelli, Giambattista Vico, David Hume, G.W.F. Hegel, Karl Marx, and Auguste Comte as well as the economists David Ricardo and Adam Smith, suggesting that their ideas found precedent (although not direct influence) in his.
He has also been influential on certain modern Islamic thinkers (e.g. those of the traditionalist school), as well as on Reaganomics.
Contents
Family
Ibn Khaldun – Life-size bronze bust sculpture of Ibn Khaldun that is part of the collection at the Arab American National Museum (Catalog Number 2010.02). Commissioned by The Tunisian Community Center and Created by Patrick Morelli of Albany, NY in 2009. It was inspired by the statue of Ibn Khaldun erected at the Avenue Habib Bourguiba in Tunis.
Ibn Khaldun's life is relatively well-documented, as he wrote an autobiography (التعريف بابن خلدون ورحلته غربا وشرقا, at-Taʻrīf bi-ibn Khaldūn wa-Riḥlatih Gharban wa-Sharqan) ("Presenting Ibn Khaldun and his Journey West and East") in which numerous documents regarding his life are quoted word-for-word.
Abdurahman bin Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Al-Hasan bin Jabir bin Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Abdurahman bin Ibn Khaldun al-Hadrami, generally known as "Ibn Khaldūn" after a remote ancestor, was born in Tunis in AD 1332 (732 AH) into an upper-class Andalusian family of Arab descent, the family's ancestor was a Hadhrami who shared kinship with Waíl ibn Hujr, a companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.
His family, which held many high offices in Al-Andalus, had emigrated to Tunisia after the fall of Seville to the Reconquista in AD 1248. Although some of his family members had held political office in the Tunisian Hafsid dynasty, his father and grandfather later withdrew from political life and joined a mystical order.
His brother, Yahya Khaldun, was also a historian who wrote a book on the Abdalwadid dynasty and was assassinated by a rival for being the official historiographer of the court.
In his autobiography, Khaldun traces his descent back to the time of Muhammad through an Arab tribe from the south of the Arabian Peninsula, specifically the Hadhramaut, which came to the Iberian Peninsula in the 8th century, at the beginning of the Islamic conquest: "And our ancestry is from Hadhramaut, from the Arabs of Arabian Peninsula, via Wa'il ibn Hujr also known as Hujr ibn 'Adi, from the best of the Arabs, well-known and respected." (p. 2429, Al-Waraq's edition).
However, the modern biographer Mohammad Enan emphasised the unclear origins of Ibn Khaldun relying on the fact that Ibn Khaldun's criticism of Arabs might be a valid reason to cast doubt on his Arab origin.
On the other hand, Ibn Khaldun's insistence and attachment to his claim of Arab ancestry at a time of Berber dynasties domination is also a valid reason to believe his claim.
Education
His family's high rank enabled Ibn Khaldun to study with prominent teachers in Maghreb.
He received a classical Islamic education, studying the Quran, which he memorized by heart, Arabic linguistics; the basis for understanding the Qur'an, hadith, sharia (law) and fiqh (jurisprudence). He received certification (ijazah) for all of those subjects.
The mathematician and philosopher Al-Abili of Tlemcen introduced him to mathematics, logic and philosophy, and he studied especially the works of Averroes, Avicenna, Razi and Tusi.
At the age of 17, Ibn Khaldūn lost both his parents to the Black Death, an intercontinental epidemic of the plague that hit Tunis in 1348–1349.
Following family tradition, he strove for a political career.
In the face of a tumultuous political situation in North Africa, that required a high degree of skill in developing and dropping alliances prudently to avoid falling with the short-lived regimes of the time.
Ibn Khaldūn's autobiography is the story of an adventure, in which he spends time in prison, reaches the highest offices and falls again into exile.
Political career
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Birth home of Ibn Khaldun at Tunis
The mosque in which Ibn Khaldun studied
At the age of 20, he began his political career in the chancellery of the Tunisian ruler Ibn Tafrakin with the position of Kātib al-'Alāmah (seal-bearer), which consisted of writing in fine calligraphy the typical introductory notes of official documents.
In 1352, Abū Ziad, the sultan of Constantine, marched on Tunis and defeated it.
Ibn Khaldūn, in any case unhappy with his respected but politically meaningless position, followed his teacher Abili to Fez.
There, the Marinid sultan, Abū Inan Fares I, appointed him as a writer of royal proclamations, but Ibn Khaldūn still schemed against his employer, which, in 1357, got the 25-year-old a 22-month prison sentence.
Upon the death of Abū Inan in 1358, Vizier al-Hasān ibn-Umar granted him freedom and reinstated him to his rank and offices.
Ibn Khaldūn then schemed against Abū Inan's successor, Abū Salem Ibrahim III, with Abū Salem's exiled uncle, Abū Salem.
When Abū Salem came to power, he gave Ibn Khaldūn a ministerial position, the first position to correspond with Ibn Khaldūn's ambitions.
The treatment that Ibn Khaldun received after the fall of Abū Salem through Ibn-Amar ʻAbdullah, a friend of Ibn Khaldūn's, was not to his liking, as he received no significant official position.
At the same time, Amar successfully prevented Ibn Khaldūn, whose political skills he knew well, from allying with the Abd al-Wadids in Tlemcen.
Ibn Khaldūn, therefore, decided to move to Granada.
He could be sure of a positive welcome there since at Fez, he had helped the Sultan of Granada, the Nasrid Muhammad V, regain power from his temporary exile.
In 1364, Muhammad entrusted him with a diplomatic mission to the king of Castile, Pedro the Cruel, to endorse a peace treaty.
Ibn Khaldūn successfully carried out this mission and politely declined Pedro's offer to remain at his court and have his family's Spanish possessions returned to him.
In Granada, Ibn Khaldūn quickly came into competition with Muhammad's vizier, Ibn al-Khatib, who viewed the close relationship between Muhammad and Ibn Khaldūn with increasing mistrust.
Ibn Khaldūn tried to shape the young Muhammad into his ideal of a wise ruler, an enterprise that Ibn al-Khatib thought foolish and a danger to peace in the country.
History proved al-Khatib right, and at his instigation, Ibn Khaldūn was eventually sent back to North Africa.
Al-Khatib himself was later accused by Muhammad of having unorthodox philosophical views and murdered despite an attempt by Ibn Khaldūn to intercede on behalf of his old rival.
In his autobiography, Ibn Khaldūn tells little about his conflict with Ibn al-Khatib and the reasons for his departure.
Orientalist Muhsin Mahdi interprets that as showing that Ibn Khaldūn later realised that he had completely misjudged Muhammad V.
Back in Ifriqiya, the Hafsid sultan of Bougie, Abū ʻAbdallāh, who had been his companion in prison, received him with great enthusiasm and made Ibn Khaldūn his prime minister.
Ibn Khaldūn carried out a daring mission to collect taxes among the local Berber tribes.
After the death of Abū ʻAbdallāh in 1366, Ibn Khaldūn changed sides once again and allied himself with the Sultan of Tlemcen, Abū l-Abbas.
A few years later, he was taken prisoner by Abu Faris Abdul Aziz, who had defeated the sultan of Tlemcen and seized the throne.
He then entered a monastic establishment and occupied himself with scholastic duties until 1370. In that year, he was sent for to Tlemcen by the new sultan.
After the death of ʻAbdu l-Azīz, he resided at Fez, enjoying the patronage and confidence of the regent.
Ibn Khaldūn's political skills and, above all, his good relationship with the wild Berber tribes were in high demand among the North African rulers, but he had begun to tire of politics and constantly switching allegiances.
In 1375, he was sent by Abū Hammu, the ʻAbdu l Wadid Sultan of Tlemcen, on a mission to the Dawadida Arabs tribes of Biskra.
After his return to the West, Ibn Khaldūn sought refuge with one of the Berber tribes in the west of Algeria, in the town of Qalat Ibn Salama.
He lived there for over three years under their protection, taking advantage of his seclusion to write the Muqaddimah "Prolegomena", the introduction to his planned history of the world.
In Ibn Salama, however, he lacked the necessary texts to complete the work.
Therefore, in 1378, he returned to his native Tunis, which had meanwhile been conquered by Abū l-Abbas, who took Ibn Khaldūn back into his service.
There, he devoted himself almost exclusively to his studies and completed his history of the world.
His relationship with Abū l-Abbas remained strained, as the latter questioned his loyalty.
That was brought into sharp contrast after Ibn Khaldūn presented him with a copy of the completed history that omitted the usual panegyric to the ruler.
Under pretence of going on the Hajj to Mecca, something for which a Muslim ruler could not simply refuse permission, Ibn Khaldūn was able to leave Tunis and to sail to Alexandria.
Later life
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Ibn Khaldun Statue and Square, Mohandessin, Cairo
Ibn Khaldun said of Egypt, "He who has not seen it does not know the power of Islam." While other Islamic regions had to cope with border wars and inner strife, Mamluk Egypt enjoyed prosperity and high culture.
In 1384, the Egyptian Sultan, al-Malik udh-Dhahir Barquq, made Khaldun professor of the Qamhiyyah Madrasah and appointed him as the Grand qadi of the Maliki school of fiqh (one of four schools, the Maliki school was widespread primarily in Western Africa). His efforts at reform encountered resistance, however, and within a year, he had to resign his judgeship.
Also in 1384, a ship carrying Khaldun's wife and children sank off of Alexandria.
After his return from a pilgrimage to Mecca in May 1388, Ibn Khaldūn concentrated on teaching at various Cairo madrasas.
At the Mamluk court he fell from favor because during revolts against Barquq, he had, apparently under duress, with other Cairo jurists, issued a fatwa against Barquq.
Later relations with Barquq returned to normal, and he was once again named the Maliki qadi.
Altogether, he was called six times to that high office, which, for various reasons, he never held long.
In 1401, under Barquq's successor, his son Faraj, Ibn Khaldūn took part in a military campaign against the Mongol conqueror, Timur, who besieged Damascus in 1400. Ibn Khaldūn cast doubt upon the viability of the venture and really wanted to stay in Egypt.
His doubts were vindicated, as the young and inexperienced Faraj, concerned about a revolt in Egypt, left his army to its own devices in Syria and hurried home.
Ibn Khaldūn remained at the besieged city for seven weeks, being lowered over the city wall by ropes to negotiate with Timur, in a historic series of meetings that he reported extensively in his autobiography.
Timur questioned him in detail about conditions in the lands of the Maghreb.
At his request, Ibn Khaldūn even wrote a long report about it.
As he recognized Timur's intentions, he did not hesitate, on his return to Egypt, to compose an equally-extensive report on the history of the Tatars, together with a character study of Timur, sending them to the Merinid rulers in Fez (Maghreb).
Ibn Khaldūn spent the next five years in Cairo completing his autobiography and his history of the world and acting as teacher and judge.
Meanwhile, he was alleged to have joined an underground party, Rijal Hawa Rijal, whose reform-oriented ideals attracted the attention of local political authorities.
The elderly Ibn Khaldun was placed under arrest.
He died on 17 March 1406, one month after his sixth selection for the office of the Maliki qadi (Judge).
Works
Kitāb al-ʻIbar
Kitāb al-ʻIbar, (full title: Kitāb al-ʻIbar wa-Dīwān al-Mubtadaʼ wa-l-Khabar fī Taʼrīkh al-ʻArab wa-l-Barbar wa-Man ʻĀṣarahum min Dhawī ash-Shaʼn al-Akbār "Book of Lessons, Record of Beginnings and Events in the History of the Arabs and the Berbers and Their Powerful Contemporaries");  begun as a history of the Berbers and expanded to a universal history in seven books.
Book 1; Al-Muqaddimah ('The Introduction'),  a socio-economic-geographical universal history of empires, and the best known of his works.
Books 2–5; World History up to the author's own time.
Books 6–7; Historiography of the Berbers and the Maghreb.  Khaldun departs from the classical style of Arab historians[note 3] by synthesising multiple, sometimes contradictory, sources without citations.  He reproduces some errors originating probably from his 14th-century Fez source, the work Rawḍ al-Qirṭās by Ibn Abi Zar, yet  Al-'Ibar remains an invaluable source of Berber history.
Businesses owned by responsible and organized merchants shall eventually surpass those owned by wealthy rulers.
Ibn Khaldun on economic growth and the ideals of Platonism
Concerning the discipline of sociology, he described the dichotomy of sedentary life versus nomadic life as well as the inevitable loss of power that occurs when warriors conquer a city.
According to the Arab scholar Sati' al-Husri, the Muqaddimah may be read as a sociological work.
The work is based around Ibn Khaldun's central concept of 'aṣabiyyah, which has been translated as "social cohesion", "group solidarity", or "tribalism". This social cohesion arises spontaneously in tribes and other small kinship groups; it can be intensified and enlarged by a religious ideology.
Ibn Khaldun's analysis looks at how this cohesion carries groups to power but contains within itself the seeds – psychological, sociological, economic, political – of the group's downfall, to be replaced by a new group, dynasty or empire bound by a stronger (or at least younger and more vigorous) cohesion.
Some of Ibn Khaldun's views, particularly those concerning the Zanj people of sub-Saharan Africa, have been cited as racist, though they were not uncommon for their time.
According to the scholar Abdelmajid Hannoum, Ibn Khaldun's description of the distinctions between Berbers and Arabs were misinterpreted by the translator William McGuckin de Slane, who wrongly inserted a "racial ideology that sets Arabs and Berbers apart and in opposition" into his translation of part of`Ibar translated under the title Histoire des Berbères .
Perhaps the most frequently cited observation drawn from Ibn Khaldūn's work is the notion that when a society becomes a great civilization, its high point is followed by a period of decay.
This means that the next cohesive group that conquers the diminished civilization is, by comparison, a group of barbarians.
Once the barbarians solidify their control over the conquered society, however, they become attracted to its more refined aspects, such as literacy and arts, and either assimilate into or appropriate such cultural practices.
Then, eventually, the former barbarians will be conquered by a new set of barbarians, who will repeat the process.
Georgetown University Professor Ibrahim Oweiss, an economist and historian, notes that Schumpeter and David Hume both proposed a labor theory of value, though Khaldun did not refer to it as either a labor theory of value or theory.
Ibn Khaldun also called for the creation of a science to explain society and went on to outline these ideas in his major work, the Muqaddimah, which states that “Civilization and its well-being, as well as business prosperity, depend on productivity and people’s efforts in all directions in their own interest and profit”.
Ibn Khaldun diverged from norms that Muslim historians followed and rejected their focus on the credibility of the transmitter and focused instead on the validity of the stories and encouraged critical thinking.
Ibn Khaldun also outlines early theories of division of labor, taxes, scarcity, and economic growth.
He argued that poverty was a result of the destruction of morality and human values.
He also looked at what factors contribute to wealth, such as consumption, government, and investment.
Khaldun also argued that poverty was not necessarily a result of poor financial decision-making but of external consequences and therefore the government should be involved in alleviating poverty.
Researchers from Malaysia's Insaniah University College and Indonesia's Tazkia University College of Islamic Economics created a dynamics model based upon Ibn Khaldun's writings to measure poverty in the Muslim nations of South Asia and Southeast Asia.
Ibn Khaldun also believed that the currency of an Islamic monetary system should have intrinsic value and therefore be made of gold and silver (such as the dirham). He emphasized that the weight and purity of these coins should be strictly followed: the weight of one dinar should be one mithqal (the weight of 72 grains of barley, roughly 4.25 grams) and the weight of 7 dinar should be equal to weight of 10 dirhams (7/10 of a mithqal or 2.96 grams).
Ibn Khaldun's writings regarding the division of labor are often compared to Adam Smith's writings on the topic.
The individual being cannot by himself obtain all the necessities of life.
All human beings must co-operate to that end in their civilization.
But what is obtained by the cooperation of a group of human beings satisfies the need of a number many times greater than themselves.
For instance, no one by himself can obtain the share of the wheat he needs for food.
But when six or ten persons, including a smith and a carpenter to make the tools, and others who are in charge of the oxen, the ploughing of, the harvesting of the ripe grain, and all other agricultural activities, undertake to obtain their food and work toward that purpose either
separately or collectively and thus obtain through their labour a certain amount of food, that amount will be food for a number of people many times their own.
The combined labour produces more than the needs and necessities of the workers (Ibn Khaldun 1958, vol.II 271 -272)
In every other art and manufacture, the effects of the division of labour are similar to what they are in this very trifling one [pin production]; though, in many of them, the labour can either be so much subdivided, nor reduced to so great a simplicity of operation.
The division of labour, however, so far as it can be introduced, occasions, in every art, a proportionable increase of the productive powers of labour (Smith 1976a, vol. I, 13–24)
Both Ibn Khaldun and Smith shared the idea that the division of labor is fundamental to economic growth, however, the motivations and context for such division differed between them.
For Ibn Khaldun, asabiyyah or social solidarity was the underlying motive and context behind the division of labor; for Smith it was self-interest and the market economy.
Social thought
Ibn Khaldun's epistemology attempted to reconcile mysticism with theology by dividing science into two different categories, the religious science that regards the sciences of the Qur'an and the non-religious science.
He further classified the non-religious sciences into intellectual sciences such as logic, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, etc. and auxiliary sciences such as language, literature, poetry, etc.
He also suggested that possibly more divisions will appear in the future with different societies.
He tried to adapt to all possible societies’ cultural behavior and influence in education, economics and politics.
Nonetheless, he didn't think that laws were chosen by just one leader or a small group of individual but mostly by the majority of the individuals of a society.
To Ibn Khaldun, the state was a necessity of human society to restrain injustice within the society, but the state means is force, thus itself an injustice.
All societies must have a state governing them in order to establish a society.
He attempted to standardize the history of societies by identifying ubiquitous phenomena present in all societies.
To him, civilization was a phenomenon that will be present as long as humans exist.
He characterized the fulfillment of basic needs as the beginning of civilization.
At the beginning, people will look for different ways of increasing productivity of basic needs and expansion will occur.
Later the society starts becoming more sedentary and focuses more on crafting, arts and the more refined characteristics.
By the end of a society, it will weaken, allowing another small group of individuals to come into control.
The conquering group is described as an unsatisfied group within the society itself or a group of desert bandits that constantly attack other weaker or weakened societies.
In the Muqaddimah, his most important work, he discusses an introduction of philosophy to history in a general manner, based on observable patterns within a theoretical framework of known historical events of his time.
He described the beginnings, development, cultural trends and the fall of all societies, leading to the rise of a new society which would then follow the same trends in a continuous cycle.
Also, he recommended the best political approaches to develop a society according to his knowledge of history.
He heavily emphasized that a good society would be one in which a tradition of education is deeply rooted in its culture.
Ibn Khaldun (1987) introduced the word asabiya (solidarity, group feeling, or group consciousness), to explain tribalism.
The concept of asabiya has been translated as "social cohesion," "group solidarity," or "tribalism." This social cohesion arises spontaneously in tribes and other small kinship groups (Rashed,2017).
Ibn Khaldun believed that too much bureaucracy, such as taxes and legislations, would lead to the decline of a society, since it would constrain the development of more specialized labor (increase in scholars and development of different services). He believed that bureaucrats cannot understand the world of commerce and do not possess the same motivation as a businessman.
In his work the Muqaddimah, Ibn Khaldun emphasizes human beings' faculty to think (fikr) as what determines human behavior and ubiquitous patterns.
This faculty is also what inspires human beings to form into a social structure to co-operate in division of labor and organization.  According to Zaid Ahmand in Epistemology and the Human Dimension in Urban Studies, the fikr faculty is the supporting pillar for all philosophical aspects of Ibn Khaldun's theory related to human beings’ spiritual, intellectual, physical, social and political tendencies.
Another important concept he emphasizes in his work is the mastery of crafts, habits and skills.
This takes place after a society is established and according to Ibn Khaldun the level of achievement of a society can be determined by just analyzing these three concepts.
A society in its earliest stages is nomadic and primarily concerned with survival, while a society at a later stage is sedentary, with greater achievement in crafts.
A society with a sedentary culture and stable politics would be expected to have greater achievements in crafts and technology.
Ibn Khaldun also emphasized in his epistemology the important aspect that educational tradition plays to ensure the new generations of a civilization continuously improve in the sciences and develop culture.
Ibn Khaldun argued that without the strong establishment of an educational tradition, it would be very difficult for the new generations to maintain the achievements of the earlier generations, let alone improve them.
Another way to distinguish the achievement of a society would be the language of a society, since for him the most important element of a society would not be land, but the language spoken.
He was surprised that many non-Arabs were really successful in the Arabic society, had good jobs and were well received by the community. "These people were non-Arab by descent, but they grew up among the Arabs who possessed the habit of Arabic," Ibn Khaldun once recalled, "[b]ecause of this, they were able to master Arabic so well that they cannot be surpassed." He believed that the reason why non-Arabs were accepted as part of Arab society was due to their mastery of the Arabic language.
Advancements in literary works such as poems and prose were another way to distinguish the achievement of a civilization, but Ibn Khaldun believed that whenever the literary facet of a society reaches its highest levels it ceases to indicate societal achievements anymore, but is an embellishment of life.
For logical sciences he established knowledge at its highest level as an increase of scholars and the quality of knowledge.
For him the highest level of literary productions would be the manifestation of prose, poems and the artistic enrichment of a society.
Minor works
From other sources we know of several other works, primarily composed during the time he spent in North Africa and Al-Andalus.
His first book, Lubābu l-Muhassal, a commentary on the Islamic theology of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, was written at the age of 19 under the supervision of his teacher al-Ābilī in Tunis.
A work on Sufism, Shifā'u l-Sā'il, was composed around 1373 in Fes, Morocco.
Whilst at the court of Muhammed V, Sultan of Granada, Ibn Khaldūn composed a work on logic, ʻallaqa li-s-Sulṭān.
Legacy
A Laffer Curve with a maximum revenue point at around a 70%, as estimated by Trabandt and Uhlig (2009). Laffer cites Ibn Khaldun's observation that "at the beginning of the dynasty, taxation yields a large revenue from small assessments.
At the end of the dynasty, taxation yields a small revenue from large assessments." as a predecessor.
Egypt
Ibn Khaldun's historical method had very few precedents or followers in his time.
While Ibn Khaldun is known to have been a successful lecturer on jurisprudence within religious sciences, only very few of his students were aware of, and influenced by, his Muqaddimah.
One such student, Al-Maqrizi, praised the Muqaddimah, although some scholars have found his praise, and that of others, to be generally empty and lacking understanding of Ibn Khaldun's methods.
Ibn Khaldun also faced primarily criticism from his contemporaries, particularly Ibn Hajar al-`Asqalani.
These criticisms included accusations of inadequate historical knowledge, an inaccurate title, disorganization, and a style resembling that of the prolific Arab literature writer, Al-Jahiz.
Al-Asqalani also noted that Ibn Khaldun was not well-liked in Egypt because he opposed many respected traditions, including the traditional judicial dress, and suggested that this may have contributed to the reception of Ibn Khaldun's historical works.
The notable exception to this consensus was Ibn al-Azraq, a jurist who lived shortly after Ibn Khaldun and quoted heavily from the first and fourth books of the Kitab al-‘Ibar, in developing a work of mirrors for princes.
Ottoman Empire
Ibn Khaldun's work found some recognition with Ottoman intellectuals in the 17th century.
The first references to Ibn Khaldun in Ottoman writings appeared in the middle of the 17th century, with historians such as Kâtip Çelebi naming him as a great influence, while another Turkish Ottoman historian, Mustafa Naima, attempted to use Ibn Khaldun's cyclical theory of the rise and fall of empires to describe the Ottoman Empire.
Increasing perceptions of the decline of the Ottoman Empire also caused similar ideas to appear independently of Ibn Khaldun in the 16th century, and may explain some of the influence of his works.
Europe
In Europe, Ibn Khaldun was first brought to the attention of the Western world in 1697, when a biography of him appeared in Barthélemy d'Herbelot de Molainville's Bibliothèque Orientale.
However, some scholars believe that Ibn Khaldun's work may have first been introduced to Europe via Ibn Arabshah's biography of Tamerlane, translated to Latin, which covers a meeting between Ibn Khaldun and Tamerlane.
According to Ibn Arabshah, during this meeting, Ibn Khaldun and Tamerlane discussed the Maghrib in depth, as well as Tamerlane's genealogy and place in history.
Ibn Khaldun began gaining more attention from 1806, when Silvestre de Sacy's Chrestomathie Arabe included his biography together with a translation of parts of the Muqaddimah as the Prolegomena.
In 1816, de Sacy again published a biography with a more detailed description on the Prolegomena.
More details on and partial translations of the Prolegomena emerged over the years until the complete Arabic edition was published in 1858. Since then, the work of Ibn Khaldun has been extensively studied in the Western world with special interest.
Reynold A. Nicholson praised Ibn Khaldun as a uniquely brilliant Muslim sociologist, but discounted Khaldun's influence.
Spanish Philosopher José Ortega y Gasset viewed the conflicts of North Africa as a problem that stemmed from a lack of African thought, and praised Ibn Khaldun for making sense of the conflict by simplifying it to the relationship between the nomadic and sedentary modes of life.
Modern historians
British historian Arnold J. Toynbee has called Ibn Khaldun's Muqaddimah "the greatest work of its kind." Ernest Gellner, once a professor of philosophy and logic at the London School of Economics, considered Khaldun's definition of government[note 4] the best in the history of political theory.
More moderate views on the scope of Ibn Khaldun's contributions have also emerged. 
Arthur Laffer, for whom the Laffer curve is named, acknowledged that Ibn Khaldun's ideas, as well as others, precede his own work on that curve.
Economist Paul Krugman described Ibn Khaldun as "a 14th-century Islamic philosopher who basically invented what we would now call the social sciences".
Plato, Aristotle, and Augustine were not his peers, and all others were unworthy of being even mentioned along with him". Ibn Khaldun's work on evolution of societies also influenced Egon Orowan, who termed the concept of socionomy.
While Ibn Khaldun's record-keeping is usually passed over in favor of recognizing his contributions to the science of history, Abderrahmane Lakhsassi wrote "No historian of the Maghreb since and particularly of the Berbers can do without his historical contribution."
Public recognition
Public recognition of Ibn Khaldun has increased in recent years.
In 2004, the Tunisian Community Center launched the first Ibn Khaldun Award to recognize a Tunisian/American high achiever whose work reflects Ibn Khaldun's ideas of kinship and solidarity.
The Award was named after Ibn Khaldun for the convergence of his ideas with the organization's objectives and programs.
In 2006, the Atlas Economic Research Foundation launched an annual essay contest for students named in Ibn Khaldun's honor.
The theme of the contest is "how individuals, think tanks, universities and entrepreneurs can influence government policies to allow the free market to flourish and improve the lives of its citizens based on Islamic teachings and traditions." In 2006, Spain commemorated the 600th anniversary of the death of Ibn Khaldun by orchestrating an exhibit titled "Encounter of Civilizations:  Ibn Khaldun."
In 2007, İbn Haldun Üniversitesi has opened in Istanbul, Turkey to commemorate his name.
The university promotes a policy of trilingualism.
The languages in question are English, Modern Turkish, and Arabic and its emphasis is on teaching social sciences.
In 1981 U.S. President Ronald Reagan cited Ibn Khaldun as an influence on his supply-side economic policies, also known as Reaganomics.
He paraphrased Ibn Khaldun, who said that "in the beginning of the dynasty, great tax revenues were gained from small assessments," and that "at the end of the dynasty, small tax revenues were gained from large assessments." Reagan said his goal is "trying to get down to the small assessments and the great revenues."
Bibliography
Kitāb al-ʻIbar wa-Dīwān al-Mubtadaʼ wa-l-Khabar fī Taʼrīkh al-ʻArab wa-l-Barbar wa-Man ʻĀṣarahum min Dhawī ash-Shaʼn al-Akbār
Lubābu-l-Muhassal fee Uswoolu-d-Deen
Shifā'u-s-Sā'il
ʻAl-Laqaw li-s-Sulṭān
Ibn Khaldun. 1951 التعريف بإبن خلدون ورحلته غربا وشرقا Al-Taʻrīf bi Ibn-Khaldūn wa Riħlatuhu Għarbān wa Sharqān.
Published by Muħammad ibn-Tāwīt at-Tanjī. Cairo (Autobiography in Arabic).
Ibn Khaldūn. 1958 The Muqaddimah : An introduction to history.
Translated from the Arabic by Franz Rosenthal. 3 vols.
New York: Princeton.
Ibn Khaldūn. 1967 The Muqaddimah : An introduction to history.
Trans.
Franz Rosenthal, ed. N.J. Dawood. (Abridged).
Ibn Khaldun, 1332–1406. 1905 'A Selection from the Prolegomena of Ibn Khaldūn'. Trans.
Duncan Macdonald
See also
Society portal
Philosophy portal
Islam portal
History portal
Middle Ages portal
Biography portal
List of pre-modern Arab scientists and scholars
Asabiyyah
Chanakya
Egon Orowan
List of Muslim historians
Historiography of early Islam
Laffer curve
Muqaddimah
Science in medieval Islam
Social cycle theory
Averroes
Abulcasis
Ibn Arabi
Ibn Tufail
Sayyid Husayn Ahlati
Notes
"...regarded by some Westerners as the true father of historiography and sociology".
"Ibn Khaldun has been claimed the forerunner of a great number of European thinkers, mostly sociologists, historians, and philosophers".(Boulakia 1971) harv error: no target: CITEREFBoulakia1971 (help)
"The founding father of Eastern Sociology".
"This grand scheme to find a new science of society makes him the forerunner of many of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries system-builders such as Vico, Comte and Marx." "As one of the early founders of the social sciences...".
"He is considered by some as a father of modern economics, or at least a major forerunner.
The Western world recognizes Khaldun as the father of sociology but hesitates in recognizing him as a great economist who laid its very foundations.
He was the first to systematically analyze the functioning of an economy, the importance of technology, specialization and foreign trade in economic surplus and the role of government and its stabilization policies to increase output and employment.
Moreover, he dealt with the problem of optimum taxation, minimum government services, incentives, institutional framework, law and order, expectations, production, and the theory of value".Cosma, Sorinel (2009). "Ibn Khaldun's Economic Thinking". Ovidius University Annals of Economics (Ovidius University Press) XIV:52–57
For classical style of Arab historians see Ibrahim ibn ar-Raqīq (~d.1028) and al-Mālikī.
"an institution which prevents injustice other than such as it commits itself"
References
Citations
"Ibn Khaldun – His Life and Work". Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2017.
Ahmad, Zaid (2010). "Ibn Khaldun".  In Oliver Leama (ed.). The Biographical Encyclopaedia of Islamic Philosophy.
Continuum. doi:10.1093/acref/9780199754731.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-975473-1.
Doniger, Wendy (1999). Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions.
Merriam-Webstar Inc. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0.
a b c d e "Ibn Khaldun on Philosophy:
After clarifying what was meant precisely by philosophy in the Islamic tradition, namely the various schools of peripatetic philosophy represented either by Ibn Rushd or Ibn Sina, it should be clear why Ibn Khaldun was opposed to them.
His critique of philosophy is an Ash’ari critique, completely in line with the Ash’aris before him, including Ghazali and Fakhr al-din al-Razi, both of whom Ibn Khaldun recommends for those who wish to learn how to refute the philosophers"
Muqaddimah 2:272–73 quoted in Weiss (1995) p 30
Weiss 1995, p. 31 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWeiss1995 (help) quotes Muqaddimah 2:276–78
Moss, Laurence S., ed. (1996). Joseph A. Schumpeter: Historian of Economics: Perspectives on the History of Economic Thought.
Routledge. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-134-78530-8. Ibn Khaldun drited away from Al-Farabi's political idealism.
Shah, Muhammad Sultan. "Pre-Darwinian Muslim Scholars’ Views on Evolution." (2017).
In al-Muqaddima, Ibn Khaldun cites him as a pioneer in sociology
a b 
Savant, Sarah Bowen (2014). Genealogy and Knowledge in Muslim Societies: Understanding the Past.
Edinburgh University Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-7486-4497-1. Banu Khaldun al-Hadrami (Yemen, but not Qahtan), to which belonged the famous historian Ibn Khaldun.
The family's ancestor was 'Uthman ibn Bakr ibn Khalid, called Khaldun, a Yemeni Arab among the conquerors who shared kinship with the Prophet's Companian Wa'il ibn Hujr and who settled first in Carmona and then in Seville.
The Historical Muhammad, Irving M. Zeitlin, (Polity Press, 2007), p. 21; "It is, of course, Ibn Khaldun as an Arab here speaking, for he claims Arab descent through the male line.".
The Arab World: Society, Culture, and State, Halim Barakat (University of California Press, 1993), p. 48;"The renowned Arab sociologist-historian Ibn Khaldun first interpreted Arab history in terms of badu versus hadar conflicts and struggles for power."
Ibn Khaldun, M. Talbi, The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol.
III, ed. B. Lewis, V.L. Menage, C. Pellat, J. Schacht, (Brill, 1986), 825; "Ibn Khaldun was born in Tunis, on I Ramadan 732/27 May 1332, in an Arab family which came originally from the Hadramawt and had been settled at Seville since the beginning of the Muslim conquest...." Ibn Khaldun's Philosophy of History: A Study in the Philosophic Foundation of the Science of Culture, Muhsin Mahdi, Routledge; "His family claimed descent from a Yemenite tribe originating in Hadramawt" Issawi, Charles. "Ibn Khaldūn". Encyclopedia Britannica, 13 March 2021; "the greatest Arab historian", "the family claimed descent from Khaldūn, who was of South Arabian stock, and had come to Spain in the early years of the Arab conquest and settled in Carmona." Cheddadi, Abdesselam, “Ibn Khaldūn, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān”, Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE; "was one of the greatest Arab historians, a philosopher, and a sociologist"
Muhammad Hozien. "Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Work". Islamic Philosophy Online.
Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2008.
"Ibn Khaldūn – The Muqaddimah: Ibn Khaldūn's philosophy of history". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 22 December 2020.
Bernard Lewis: "Ibn Khaldun in Turkey", in: Ibn Khaldun: The Mediterranean in the 14th Century: Rise and Fall of Empires, Foundation El Legado Andalusí, 2006, ISBN 978-84-96556-34-8, pp. 376–80 (376) S.M. Deen (2007) Science under Islam: rise, decline and revival. p. 157. ISBN 1-84799-942-5
Farid Alatas, Syed (2015). Applying Ibn Khaldūn: The Recovery of a Lost Tradition in Sociology.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-138-12596-4. OCLC 914395509.
Sulkunen, Pekka (2 September 2014). "The proto-sociology of Mandeville and Hume". Distinktion: Journal of Social Theory. 15 (3): 361–365. doi:10.1080/1600910X.2014.897639. ISSN 1600-910X. S2CID 144222817.
• Joseph J. Spengler (1964).  "Economic Thought of Islam: Ibn Khaldun", Comparative Studies in Society and History, 6(3), pp. 268-306.  • Jean David C. Boulakia (1971). "Ibn Khaldûn: A Fourteenth-Century Economist", Journal of Political Economy, 79(5), pp. 1105–18.
Ali Zaidi, Islam, Modernity, and the Human Sciences, Springer, 2011, p. 84
Lewis, Bernard (1986). "Ibn Khaldūn in Turkey".  In Ayalon, David; Sharon, Moshe (eds.). Studies in Islamic history and civilization: in honour of Professor David Ayalon.
Brill. pp. 527–30. ISBN 978-965-264-014-7.
"Arab American National Museum : Online Collections". Retrieved 25 February 2017.
Published by Muḥammad ibn Tāwīt aṭ-Ṭanjī, Cairo 1951
"Lettre à Monsieur Garcin de Tassy". Journal Asiatique (in French). Paris: Société asiatique. 3 (12): 491. 1841.
Hozien, Muhammad. "Notes on Ibn Khaludn's Life". You are being directed to the new muslim philosophy Website has moved to muslimphilosophy.org.
Enan, Mohammad Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldūn: His Life and Works.
The Other Press.
ISBN 978-983-9541-53-3.
Muhammad Hozien. "Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Work". Islamic Philosophy Online.
Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2008.
"Saudi Aramco World: Ibn Khaldun and the Rise and Fall of Empires". archive.aramcoworld.com.
Retrieved 6 December 2017.
"Ibn Khaldun – His Life and Work". 
a b c d "Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works | Muslim Heritage". muslimheritage.com.
Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
Ibn Khaldun's Political and Economic Realism. 26 March 2016.
"Ibn Khaldūn | Muslim historian".
Bent, Josephine van den (3 May 2016). ""None of the Kings on Earth is Their Equal in ʿaṣabiyya:" The Mongols in Ibn Khaldūn's Works". Al-Masāq. 28 (2): 171–86. doi:10.1080/09503110.2016.1198535. ISSN 0950-3110.
Ibn Khaldun the Muqaddimah.
An Introduction to History.
Translated from the Arabic by Franz Rosenthal.
In Three Volumes.
First Volume. 606 pages.
Bollingen Foundation Series xliii.
Princeton University Press. 1958. Prof.
Dr.
Darcy Carvalho.
Feausp.
Sao Paulo.
Brazil. 2016
The Muqaddimah Volume 1
Schmidt, Nathaniel.
Ibn Khaldun: Historian, Sociologist and Philosopher.
Universal Books, 1900.
See articles by Modéran and Benabbès in Identités et Cultures dans l'Algérie Antique, University of Rouen, 2005 (ISBN 2-87775-391-3).
Muqaddimah 2 1995 p 30
Southgate, Minoo (1984). "The Negative Images of Blacks in Some Medieval Iranian Writings". Iranian Studies. 17 (1): 15. doi:10.1080/00210868408701620. JSTOR 4310424.
Kevin Reilly; Stephen Kaufman; Angela Bodino, eds. (2003). Racism: A Global Reader. M.E. Sharpe. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-7656-1059-1.
Hannoum, Abdelmajid (2003). "Translation and the Colonial Imaginary: Ibn Khaldûn Orientalist". History and Theory. 42 (1): 77–80. doi:10.1111/1468-2303.00230. JSTOR 3590803.
Oweiss, Ibrahim M. “Ibn Khaldun, the Father of Economics.” Georgetown University, State University of New York Press, 1988, faculty.georgetown.edu/imo3/ibn.htm.
Khaldun, Ibn, et al.
Muqaddimah – an Introduction to History.
Princeton University Press, 2015.
"The Amazing Arab Scholar Who Beat Adam Smith by Half a Millennium – Evonomics". Evonomics. 9 June 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
Irwin, Robert.
Ibn Khaldun: an Intellectual Biography.
Princeton University Press., 2018.
Affandi, Akhmad, and Dewi Puji Astuti. “Dynamic Model of Ibn Khaldun Theory on Poverty.” Humanomics, vol. 30, no. 2, 2014, pp. 136–161.
Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, ch. 3 pt. 34–35
Labor in an Islamic setting : theory and practice (1 ed.). New York. 2017. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-1-315-59127-8.
Labor in an Islamic setting : theory and practice (1 ed.). New York. 2017. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-1-315-59127-8.
Labor in an Islamic setting : theory and practice (1 ed.). New York. 2017. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-1-315-59127-8.
Ahmad, Zaid (2003). The epistemology of Ibn Khaldun.
New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
ISBN 978-0-415-61275-3.
Umar Ibn Al Khattab (2 Volumes), Umar Ibn Al Khattab (5 February 2017). Umar Ibn Al Khattab (2 Volumes).
"Full text of "Ibn Khaldun's Historiography"". archive.org.
Retrieved 25 April 2018.
"How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, NBER Working Paper No. 15343, September 2009.
Laffer, Arthur. "The Laffer Curve: Past, Present, and Future". The Heritage Foundation.
Retrieved 4 July 2012.
Brederode, Robert F. van (2009). Systems of general sales taxation : theory, policy and practice.
Austin [Tex.]: Wolters Kluwer Law & Business. p. 117. ISBN 978-90-411-2832-4.
a b c d e f Simon, Robert (2002). Ibn Khaldun: History as Science and the Patrimonial Empire.
Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. pp. 18–20, 22–24. ISBN 978-963-05-7934-6.
a b c Alatas, Syed Farid (2013). Ibn Khaldun.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press. pp. 106–09. ISBN 978-0-19-809045-8.
Fischel, Walter (1952). Ibn Khaldun and Tamerlane: Their Historic Meeting in Damascus, A.D. 1401 (A.H. 803). Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works.
The Other Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-983-9541-53-3.
Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works.
The Other Press. pp. 118–19. ISBN 978-983-9541-53-3.
Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works.
The Other Press. pp. 119–20. ISBN 978-983-9541-53-3.
Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th ed., vol. 9, p. 148.
Ernest Gellner, Plough, Sword and Book (1988), p. 239
Arthur Laffer (1 June 2004). "The Laffer Curve, Past, Present and Future". Heritage Foundation.
Archived from the original on 1 December 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2007.
Krugman, Paul (26 August 2013). "Opinion | The Decline of E-Empires". The New York Times.
F.R.N. Nabarro; A.S. Argon (1996). Egon Orowan. 1901–1989. A Biographical Memoir (PDF). Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
A. Lakhsassi (1996). "25 – Ibn Khaldun".  In S.H. Nasr; O. Leaman (eds.). History of Islamic Philosophy.
London: Routledge. pp. 350–64.
a b "2008 Ibn-Khaldun Essay Contest". 
"Encounter of Civilizations: Ibn Khaldun Exhibit Opens at Headquarters". un.org.
United Nations.
Retrieved 25 April 2018.
McFadden, Robert D. (2 October 1981). "Reagan Cites Islamic Scholar". The New York Times.
Gates, Warren E. (1967). "The Spread of Ibn Khaldûn's Ideas on Climate and Culture". Journal of the History of Ideas. 28 (3): 415–22. doi:10.2307/2708627. JSTOR 2708627.
Dhaouadi, M. (1 September 1990). "Ibn Khaldun: The Founding Father Of Eastern Sociology". International Sociology. 5 (3): 319–35. doi:10.1177/026858090005003007. S2CID 143508326.
Haddad, L. (1 May 1977). "A Fourteenth-Century Theory of Economic Growth And Development". Kyklos. 30 (2): 195–213. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6435.1977.tb02006.x.
Sources
Fuad Baali. 2005 The science of human social organization : Conflicting views on Ibn Khaldun's (1332–1406) Ilm al-umran.
Mellen studies in sociology.
Lewiston/NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Walter Fischel. 1967 Ibn Khaldun in Egypt : His public functions and his historical research, 1382–1406; a study in Islamic historiography.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Allen Fromherz. 2010 "Ibn Khaldun : Life and Times". Edinburgh University Press, 2010.
Ana Maria C. Minecan, 2012 "El vínculo comunitario y el poder en Ibn Jaldún" in José-Miguel Marinas (Ed.), Pensar lo político: Ensayos sobre comunidad y conflicto, Biblioteca Nueva, Madrid, 2012.
Mahmoud Rabi'. 1967 The political theory of Ibn Khaldun.
Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Róbert Simon. 2002 Ibn Khaldūn : History as science and the patrimonial empire.
Translated by Klára Pogátsa.
Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. Original edition, 1999.
Further reading
Malise Ruthven, "The Otherworldliness of Ibn Khaldun" (review of Robert Irwin, Ibn Khaldun:  An Intellectual Biography, Princeton University Press, 2018, ISBN 9780691174662, 243 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol.
LXVI, no. 2 (7 February 2019), pp. 23–24, 26.  "More than six centuries after Ibn Khaldun's death the modern world has much to learn from studying him.  After the Muqaddima itself, Irwin's intellectual biography... is an excellent place to begin."
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ibn Khaldun.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Ibn Khaldun.
Arabic Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Ibn Khaldun 
English
Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Work, by Muhammad Hozien
Ibn Khaldun on In Our Time at the BBC
Rosenthal, Franz (2008) [1970–80]. "Ibn Khaldūn". Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography.
Encyclopedia.com.
Complete Muqaddimah/Kitab al-Ibar in English (without Chapter V, 13)
The Tunisian American Center (US)
Ibn Khaldun on the Web
Muslim Scientists and Scholars – Ibn Khaldun
Ibn Khaldun’s Philosophy of Management and Work
Ibn Khaldun (al-Muqaddimah): Methodology & concepts of economic sociology
Ibn Khaldun.
The Mediterranean in the 14th century: Rise and fall of Empires.
Andalusian Legacy exhibition in the Alcazar of Seville
The Ibn Khaldun Community Service Award©
Ibn Khaldun meets Al Saud
The Ibn Khaldun Institute
The Tunisian American Day©
Non-English
Multilingual tunisian academic web site on Ibn Khaldun
(in French) Exposé simplifié sur la théologie scolastique
Chapters from the Muqaddimah and the History of Ibn Khaldun (in Arabic)
Ismail Küpeli: Ibn Khaldun und das politische System Syriens – Eine Gegenüberstellung, München, 2007, ISBN 978-3-638-75458-3 (German e-book about the politics of Syria with reference to the political theory of Ibn Khaldun)
Kuchinov A.M. Ibn Khaldun influence on social thought development // Lomonosov-2013. – Moscow, 2013. In Russian.
Master's thesis on Ibn Khaldun published by FFLCH-USP in 2017 Roschel, Renato – São Paulo, 2017. In Portuguese.
Muslim historiansHistorians7th century
Aban bin Uthman
Urwah ibn Zubayr
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri
Hisham ibn al-Kalbi
Ibn Ishaq
Al-Waqidi
Abu Mikhnaf
Sayf ibn Umar
Al-Mada'ini
Ibn Lahi'a
Ibn ʽAbd al-Hakam
Khalifah ibn Khayyat
Ibn Hisham
Ya'qubi
Al-Tabari
Al-Baladhuri
Ibn Sa'd
Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar
Al-Azraqi
Abu Hanifa Dinawari
Ibn Qutaybah
Al-Mada'ini
Ibn al-Nadim
Ibn Duraid
Ibn al-Qūṭiyya
Al-Masudi
Miskawayh
al-Suli
Al-Qadi al-Nu'man
Abu al-Arab
Abu Muhammad al-Hamdani
Al-Musabbihi
al-Kindi
Arabic
Ibn Faradi
Ibn Hayyan
Said al-Andalusi
Al-Udri
Al-Bakri
Ibn Hazm
Hilal al-Sabi'
Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi
Al-Quda'i
Ibn Bassam
Persian
Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi
Abu Sa'id Gardezi
Arabic
Mohammed al-Baydhaq
Ibn al-Jawzi
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi
Ibn al-Qalanisi
Ibn ʽAsakir
Usama ibn Munqidh
Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani
Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad
Ibn Hammad
Al-Jawwani
Ibn al-Sam'ani
Persian
Muhammad bin Ali Rawandi
Arabic
Yaqut al-Hamawi
Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi
Ibn Amira
Ibn Jubayr
Ibn al-Kardabūs
Ibn al-Adim
Ibn al-Athir
Sibt ibn al-Jawzi
Ibn Khallikan
Al-Qifti
Ibn Abi Zar
Persian
Ibn Bibi
Muhammad Aufi
Ibn Isfandiyar
Minhaj-i-Siraj
Ata-Malik Juvayni
Rashid-al-Din Hamadani
Arabic
Abu'l-Fida
Ibn Idhari
Al-Dhahabi
Ibn Battuta
Ibn al-Khatib
Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari
Ibn Kathir
Ibn al-Tiqtaqa
Ibn al-Furat
Al-Mufaddal
Ibn Khaldun
al-ʽAsqalani
Persian
Hamdallah Mustawfi
Wassaf
Ziauddin Barani
Hafiz-i Abru
Arabic
al-Maqrizi
Ibn Taghribirdi
Al-Sakhawi
Al-Suyuti
Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi
Persian
Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi
Mirkhvand
Mullah Nadiri
Zahir al-Din Mar'ashi
Fazlallah Khunji Isfahani
Idris Bitlisi
Yahya bin Ahmad Sirhindi
Turkish
Oruç Bey
Aşıkpaşazade
Enveri
Ibn Kemal
Neshri
Tursun Beg
Arabic
Ibn Iyas
Mujir al-Din
Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali
Ibn al-Qadi
Mar'i al-Karmi
Persian
Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak
Muhammad Khwandamir
ʽAbd al-Qadir Badayuni
Nizamuddin Ahmad
Firishta
Iskandar Beg Munshi
Sharafkhan Bidlisi
Turkish
Mustafa Âlî
Lûtfi Pasha
Matrakçı Nasuh
Sadeddin Effendi
Mustafa Selaniki
Taşköprüzade
Arabic
Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari
Katib Çelebi
Ibn al-Imad al-Hanbali
Persian
Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh
Muhammad Saleh Kamboh
Abd al-Fattah Fumani
Mohsin Fani
Turkish
Ottoman
Ibrahim Petchevi
Solakzade Mehmed Hemdemi
Kâtip Çelebi
Munejjim Bashi
Silahdar Findiklili Mehmed Agha
Osman Aga of Temesvar
Mustafa Naima
Al-Hasan al-Burini
Abdi Pasha
Chagatai
Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur
Kurdish
Ahmad Khani
Arabic
Mohammed al-Ifrani
Mohammed al-Qadiri
Khalil al-Muradi
al-Zayyani
al-Jabarti
Persian
Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi
Abol-Hasan Golestaneh
Turkish
Ahmed Resmî Efendi
Arabic
Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Nasiri
Mohammad Farid
Ahmad ibn Abi Diyaf
Jurji Zaydan
Persian
Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar
Agha Ahmad Ali
Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat
Turkish
Ottoman
Ali Amiri
Ahmed Cevdet Pasha
Ahmed Cevad Pasha
Azerbaijani
Mirza Adigozal bey
Ahmad bey Javanshir
Karim agha Shakikhanov
Kurdish
Mahmud Bayazidi
Mastoureh Ardalan
Notable works
The Meadows of Gold
History of the Prophets and Kings
Mu'jam al-Buldan
Concise History of Humanity
The Complete History
Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya
The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries
Futuh al-Buldan
Kitab al-I'tibar
Al-Milal wa al-Nihal
History of the Caliphs
Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar
Tarikh al-Yaqubi
Muqaddimah
Book of Idols
Rihla
Concepts
Isnad
Islamic calendar
Biographical evaluation
Biographical dictionary
Hadith studies
Tabaqat
Isra'iliyyat
Muslim scholars of the Maliki School
by century (AH
CE)
Malik ibn Anas (founder of the school)
Ibn al-Qasim
Ibn Wahb
Ali ibn Ziyad
Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
Asad ibn al-Furat
Yahya ibn Yahya al-Laythi
Sahnun
Ahmad ibn Abi Bakr al-Zuhri
Abu Imran al-Fasi
Ibn Abi Zayd
Sidi Mahrez
Abu al-Arab
Al-Baqillani
Ibn 'Abd al-Barr
Al-Baji
Al-Lakhmi
Qadi 'Abd al-Wahhab
Al-Lamti
At-Turtushi
Al-Maziri
Qadi Ayyad
Averroes
Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi
Ibn Barrajan
Al-Suhayli
Al-Tamimi
Ibn Ata Allah
Al-Qurtubi
Al-Qarafi
Al-Azafi
Al-Qattan
Ibn Rushayd
Al-Zarwili
Ibn al-Haj
Ibn Farhun
Ash-Shatibi
Ibn Juzayy
Khalil ibn-Ishaq
Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Fasi
Al-Sakkak
Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi
Ibn Marzuq
Ibn al-Azraq
Ibn 'Arafa
Ibn Khaldun
Ibn Faïd
Ahmad Zarruq
Ibn Hilal al-Sijilmasi
Al-Akhdari
Al-Hattab
Ali ibn Qasim al-Zaqqaq
Al-Wansharisi
Ibn Abi Jum'ah
Al-Miknasi
Al-Mandjur
Al-Tamgruti
Al-Laqani
Az-Zurqani
Ibn Ashir
Mayyara
Muhammad al-Zurqani
Al-Dila'i
Al-Rahman al-Fasi
Al-Qadir al-Fasi
Al-Bannani
Ad-Dardir
Al-Hajj al-Fasi
Al-Tawudi ibn Suda
Ibn al-Tayyib
Al-Qasim al-Sijilmasi
M'Hamed Al-Azhari
Ahmad ibn 'Ajiba
Ad-Desouki
Al Alawi
Muhammad 'Ilish
Ahmed Harrak Srifi
Ahmed Skirej
Usman dan Fodio
Abdallah bin Bayyah
Muhammad al-Yaqoubi
Muhammad ibn 'Alawi al-Maliki
Muhammad al-Tahir ibn Ashur
Mohamed Fadhel Ben Achour
Hamza Yusuf
Othman Battikh
Rashid Al Marikhi
Ahmed el-Tayeb
Ahmad Karima
Scholars of other Sunni Islamic schools of jurisprudence
Hanafi
Hanbali
Shafi'i
Zahiri
Islamic philosophyFields
Alchemy
Aqidah (theology)
'Aql (intellect)
Cosmology
astrology
medieval astronomy
Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam (dialectic)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)
Logic
Metaphysics
Natural philosophy (physics)
Peace
Madrasah (education)
Medieval science
Medieval psychology
Sufism (mysticism)
Schools
Early
Farabism
Avicennism
Averroism
Illuminationism
Sufi
cosmology
metaphysics
psychology
Transcendent theosophy
Traditionalist
Contemporary
Concepts
ʻAṣabīya
Ḥāl
Iʻjaz
ʼIjtihād
ʻIlm
ʻIrfān
Ijmāʿ
Maslaha
Nafs
Qadar
Qalb
Qiyās
Shūrā
Tawḥīd
Ummah
Philosophers by century (CE)9th–10th
Al-Kindi
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri
Zakariya Razi
Apharabius
Abu Hatim al-Razi
Al Amiri
Ikhwan al-Safa
Abu Sulayman Sijistani
Ibn Masarrah
Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani
Al-Ghazali
Ibn Miskawayh
Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Bahmanyār
Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi
Nasir Khusraw
Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Afdal al-Din Kashani
Ahi Evren
Ahmad Yasavi
Ayn-al-Quzat
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Omar Khayyám
Suhrawardi
Shams Tabrizi
Hajji Bektash Wali
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi
Ibn Sab’in
Ibn Arabi
al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din Tusi
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun
Yunus Emre
Hajji Bayram
Jalaladdin Davani
Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki
Aziz Mahmud Hudayi
Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi
Mahmud Shabistari
Sayyid Haydar Amuli
Dawūd al-Qayṣarī
Jami
Mir Damad
Mir Fendereski
Mulla Sadra
Mohsen Fayz Kashani
Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji
Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani
Rajab Ali Tabrizi
Qazi Sa’id Qumi
Shah Waliullah Dehlawi
Hādī Sabzavārī
Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei
Muhammad Iqbal
Gohar Shahi
Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr
René Guénon
Frithjof Schuon
Martin Lings
Hossein Nasr
Naquib al-Attas
Abdolkarim Soroush
Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani
Taha Abdurrahman
Mohammed Abed al-Jabri
Mohammed Arkoun
Fouad Zakariyya
Reza Davari Ardakani
Ahmad Fardid
Mostafa Malekian
Hasanzadeh Amoli
Javadi Amoli
Partawi Shah
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
RERO (Switzerland)
SUDOC (France)
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 October 2022, at 05:24 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
