Indo-European languages - Wikipedia
Indo-European languages
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Language family native to western and southern Eurasia
"Indo-European" redirects here.
For Eurasian people living in or connected with Indonesia, see Indo people.
For other uses, see Indo-European (disambiguation).
Indo-EuropeanGeographicdistributionPre-colonial era: Eurasia and northern Africa
Today: Worldwidec. 3.2 billion native speakersLinguistic classificationOne of the world's primary language familiesProto-languageProto-Indo-EuropeanSubdivisions
Albanian
Anatolian †
Armenian
Balto-Slavic
Celtic
Dacian †
Germanic
Greek
Illyrian †
Indo-Iranian
Italic
Liburnian †
Lusitanian †
Messapic †
Phrygian †
Thracian †
Tocharian †
ISO 639-2 / 5ineGlottologindo1319Present-day distribution of Indo-European languages in Eurasia: 
Albanian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic (Baltic and Slavic)  Celtic (Brittonic and Goidelic)
Germanic (North and West)
Greek
Indo-Iranian (Indo-Aryan, Iranian, Nuristani)
Italic
Non-Indo-European languages
Dotted/striped areas indicate where multilingualism is common (more visible upon full enlargement of the map).Notes† indicates this branch of the language family is extinct
Part of a series onIndo-European topics
Languages
List of Indo-European languages
Extant
Albanian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic
Baltic
Slavic
Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic
Greek
Indo-Iranian
Indo-Aryan
Iranian
Nuristani
Italic
Romance
Extinct
Anatolian
Tocharian
Paleo-Balkan
Dacian
Illyrian
Liburnian
Messapian
Mysian
Paeonian
Phrygian
Thracian
Reconstructed
Proto-Indo-European language
Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut
Hypothetical
Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Indo-Hittite
Italo-Celtic
Thraco-Illyrian
Grammar
Vocabulary
Root
Verbs
Nouns
Pronouns
Numerals
Particles
Other
Proto-Albanian
Proto-Anatolian
Proto-Armenian
Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse)
Proto-Italo-Celtic (Proto-Celtic · Proto-Italic)
Proto-Greek
Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic · Proto-Baltic)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian)
Philology
Hittite texts
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Linear B
Rigveda
Avesta
Homer
Behistun
Gaulish epigraphy
Latin epigraphy
Runic epigraphy
Ogam
Gothic Bible
Armenian Bible
Slanting Brahmi
Old Irish glosses
Origins
Homeland
Proto-Indo-Europeans
Society
Religion
Mainstream
Kurgan hypothesis
Indo-European migrations
Eurasian nomads
Alternative and fringe
Anatolian hypothesis
Armenian hypothesis
Beech argument
Indigenous Aryans
Baltic homeland
Paleolithic Continuity Theory
Archaeology
Chalcolithic (Copper Age)
Pontic Steppe
Domestication of the horse
Kurgan
Kurgan stelae
Kurgan culture
Steppe cultures
Bug–Dniester
Sredny Stog
Dnieper–Donets
Samara
Khvalynsk
Yamnaya
Mikhaylovka culture
Novotitorovka culture
Caucasus
Maykop
East Asia
Afanasievo
Eastern Europe
Usatovo
Cernavodă
Cucuteni
Northern Europe
Corded ware
Baden
Middle Dnieper
Bronze Age
Pontic Steppe
Chariot
Yamnaya
Catacomb
Multi-cordoned ware
Poltavka
Srubna
Northern/Eastern Steppe
Abashevo culture
Andronovo
Sintashta
Europe
Globular Amphora
Corded ware
Beaker
Unetice
Trzciniec
Nordic Bronze Age
Terramare
Tumulus
Urnfield
Lusatian
South Asia
BMAC
Yaz
Gandhara grave
Iron Age
Steppe
Chernoles
Europe
Thraco-Cimmerian
Hallstatt
Jastorf
Caucasus
Colchian
India
Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware
Peoples and societies
Bronze Age
Anatolian peoples (Hittites) 
Armenians
Mycenaean Greeks
Indo-Iranians
Iron Age
Indo-Aryans
Indo-Aryans
Iranians
Iranians
Persians
Medes
Parthians
Scythians
Saka
Sarmatians
Massagetae
Alans
East Asia
Wusun
Yuezhi
Europe
Celts
Gauls
Celtiberians
Insular Celts
Cimmerians
Hellenic peoples
Italic peoples
Germanic peoples
Paleo-Balkan/Anatolia
Thracians
Dacians
Illyrians
Paeonians
Phrygians
Middle Ages
East Asia
Tocharians
Europe
Albanians
Balts
Slavs
Norsemen/Medieval Scandinavians
Medieval Europe
Indo-Aryan
Medieval India
Iranian
Greater Persia
Religion and mythology
Reconstructed
Proto-Indo-European mythology
Proto-Indo-Iranian religion
Ancient Iranian religion
Historical
Hittite
Indo-Aryan
Vedic
Hinduism
Buddhism
Jainism
Sikhism
Iranian
Persian
Zoroastrianism
Kurdish
Yazidism
Yarsanism
Scythian
Ossetian
Others
Armenian
Europe
Paleo-Balkan (Albanian · Illyrian · Thracian · Dacian)
Greek
Roman
Celtic
Irish
Scottish
Breton
Welsh
Cornish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse
Baltic
Latvian
Lithuanian
Slavic
Practices
Fire sacrifice
Horse sacrifice
Sati
Winter solstice/Yule
Indo-European studies
Scholars
Marija Gimbutas
J. P. Mallory
Institutes
Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European
Publications
Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture
The Horse, the Wheel and Language
Journal of Indo-European Studies
Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch
Indo-European Etymological Dictionary
The Indo-European languages are a language family native to the overwhelming majority of Europe, the Iranian plateau, and the northern Indian subcontinent.
Some European languages of this family, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Dutch, and Spanish, have expanded through colonialism in the modern period and are now spoken across several continents.
The Indo-European family is divided into several branches or sub-families, of which there are eight groups with languages still alive today: Albanian, Armenian, Balto-Slavic, Celtic, Germanic, Hellenic, Indo-Iranian, and Italic; and another nine subdivisions that are now extinct. 
Today, the individual Indo-European languages with the most native speakers are English, Hindi–Urdu, Spanish, Bengali, French, Russian, Portuguese, German, and Punjabi, each with over 100 million native speakers; many others are small and in danger of extinction.
In total, 46% of the world's population (3.2 billion people) speaks an Indo-European language as a first language — by far the highest of any language family.
There are about 445 living Indo-European languages, according to an estimate by Ethnologue, with over two-thirds (313) of them belonging to the Indo-Iranian branch.
All Indo-European languages are descended from a single prehistoric language, linguistically reconstructed as Proto-Indo-European, spoken sometime in the Neolithic to Early Bronze Age.
The geographical location where it was spoken, the Proto-Indo-European homeland, has been the object of many competing hypotheses; the academic consensus supports the Kurgan hypothesis, which posits the homeland to be the Pontic–Caspian steppe in what is now Ukraine and southern Russia, associated with the Yamnaya culture and other related archaeological cultures during the 4th millennium BC to early 3rd millennium BC. By the time the first written records appeared, Indo-European had already evolved into numerous languages spoken across much of Europe, South Asia, and part of Western Asia.
Written evidence of Indo-European appeared during the Bronze Age in the form of Mycenaean Greek and the Anatolian languages of Hittite and Luwian.
The oldest records are isolated Hittite words and names — interspersed in texts that are otherwise in the unrelated Akkadian language, a Semitic language — found in texts of the Assyrian colony of Kültepe in eastern Anatolia dating to the 20th century BC. Although no older written records of the original Proto-Indo-European population remain, some aspects of their culture and their religion can be reconstructed from later evidence in the daughter cultures.
The Indo-European family is significant to the field of historical linguistics as it possesses the second-longest recorded history of any known family, after the Afroasiatic family in the form of the pre-Arab Egyptian language and the Semitic languages.
The analysis of the family relationships between the Indo-European languages, and the reconstruction of their common source, was central to the development of the methodology of historical linguistics as an academic discipline in the 19th century.
The Indo-European family is not known to be linked to any other language family through any more distant genetic relationship, although several disputed proposals to that effect have been made.
Contents
History of Indo-European linguistics
See also: Indo-European studies § History
During the 16th century, European visitors to the Indian subcontinent began to notice similarities among Indo-Aryan, Iranian, and European languages.
In 1583, English Jesuit missionary and Konkani scholar Thomas Stephens wrote a letter from Goa to his brother (not published until the 20th century) in which he noted similarities between Indian languages and Greek and Latin.
Another account was made by Filippo Sassetti, a merchant born in Florence in 1540, who travelled to the Indian subcontinent.
Writing in 1585, he noted some word similarities between Sanskrit and Italian (these included devaḥ/dio "God", sarpaḥ/serpe "serpent", sapta/sette "seven", aṣṭa/otto "eight", and nava/nove "nine"). However, neither Stephens' nor Sassetti's observations led to further scholarly inquiry.
In 1647, Dutch linguist and scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn noted the similarity among certain Asian and European languages and theorized that they were derived from a primitive common language which he called Scythian.
He included in his hypothesis Dutch, Albanian, Greek, Latin, Persian, and German, later adding Slavic, Celtic, and Baltic languages.
However, Van Boxhorn's suggestions did not become widely known and did not stimulate further research.
Franz Bopp was a pioneer in the field of comparative linguistic studies.
Ottoman Turkish traveler Evliya Çelebi visited Vienna in 1665–1666 as part of a diplomatic mission and noted a few similarities between words in German and in Persian.
Gaston Coeurdoux and others made observations of the same type.
Coeurdoux made a thorough comparison of Sanskrit, Latin and Greek conjugations in the late 1760s to suggest a relationship among them.
Meanwhile, Mikhail Lomonosov compared different language groups, including Slavic, Baltic ("Kurlandic"), Iranian ("Medic"), Finnish, Chinese, "Hottentot" (Khoekhoe), and others, noting that related languages (including Latin, Greek, German and Russian) must have separated in antiquity from common ancestors.
The hypothesis reappeared in 1786 when Sir William Jones first lectured on the striking similarities among three of the oldest languages known in his time: Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit, to which he tentatively added Gothic, Celtic, and Persian, though his classification contained some inaccuracies and omissions.
In one of the most famous quotations in linguistics, Jones made the following prescient statement in a lecture to the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1786, conjecturing the existence of an earlier ancestor language, which he called "a common source" but did not name:
The Sanscrit  [sic] language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists.[note 1]— Sir William Jones, Third Anniversary Discourse delivered 2 February 1786, ELIOHS
Thomas Young first used the term Indo-European in 1813, deriving it from the geographical extremes of the language family: from Western Europe to North India.
A synonym is Indo-Germanic (Idg. or IdG.), specifying the family's southeasternmost and northwesternmost branches.
This first appeared in French (indo-germanique) in 1810 in the work of Conrad Malte-Brun; in most languages this term is now dated or less common than Indo-European, although in German indogermanisch remains the standard scientific term.
A number of other synonymous terms have also been used.
Franz Bopp wrote in 1816 On the conjugational system of the Sanskrit language compared with that of Greek, Latin, Persian and Germanic and between 1833 and 1852 he wrote Comparative Grammar.
This marks the beginning of Indo-European studies as an academic discipline.
The classical phase of Indo-European comparative linguistics leads from this work to August Schleicher's 1861 Compendium and up to Karl Brugmann's Grundriss, published in the 1880s.
Brugmann's neogrammarian reevaluation of the field and Ferdinand de Saussure's development of the laryngeal theory may be considered the beginning of "modern" Indo-European studies.
The generation of Indo-Europeanists active in the last third of the 20th century (such as Calvert Watkins, Jochem Schindler, and Helmut Rix) developed a better understanding of morphology and of ablaut in the wake of Kuryłowicz's 1956 Apophony in Indo-European, who in 1927 pointed out the existence of the Hittite consonant ḫ. Kuryłowicz's discovery supported Ferdinand de Saussure's 1879 proposal of the existence of coefficients sonantiques, elements de Saussure reconstructed to account for vowel length alternations in Indo-European languages.
This led to the so-called laryngeal theory, a major step forward in Indo-European linguistics and a confirmation of de Saussure's theory.[citation needed]
Classification
See also: Indo-European migrations
The various subgroups of the Indo-European language family include ten major branches, listed below in alphabetical order:
Albanian, attested from the 13th century AD; Proto-Albanian evolved from an ancient Paleo-Balkan language, traditionally thought to be Illyrian, or otherwise a totally unattested Balkan Indo-European language that was closely related to Illyrian and Messapic.
Anatolian, extinct by Late Antiquity, spoken in Anatolia, attested in isolated terms in Luwian/Hittite mentioned in Semitic Old Assyrian texts from the 20th and 19th centuries BC, Hittite texts from about 1650 BC.
Armenian, attested from the early 5th century AD.
Balto-Slavic, believed by most Indo-Europeanists to form a phylogenetic unit, while a minority ascribes similarities to prolonged language-contact.
Slavic (from Proto-Slavic), attested from the 9th century AD (possibly earlier), earliest texts in Old Church Slavonic.
Slavic languages include Bulgarian, Russian, Polish, Czech, Slovak, Silesian, Kashubian, Macedonian, Serbo-Croatian (Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, Serbian), Sorbian, Slovenian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Rusyn.
Baltic, attested from the 14th century AD; although attested relatively recently, they retain many archaic features attributed to Proto-Indo-European (PIE). Living examples are Lithuanian and Latvian.
Celtic (from Proto-Celtic), attested since the 6th century BC; Lepontic inscriptions date as early as the 6th century BC; Celtiberian from the 2nd century BC; Primitive Irish Ogham inscriptions from the 4th or 5th century AD, earliest inscriptions in Old Welsh from the 7th century AD. Modern Celtic languages include Welsh, Cornish, Breton, Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Manx.
Germanic (from Proto-Germanic), earliest attestations in runic inscriptions from around the 2nd century AD, earliest coherent texts in Gothic, 4th century AD. Old English manuscript tradition from about the 8th century AD. Includes English, Frisian, German, Dutch, Scots, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Afrikaans, Yiddish, Low German, Icelandic, Elfdalian, and Faroese.
Hellenic (from Proto-Greek, see also History of Greek); fragmentary records in Mycenaean Greek from between 1450 and 1350 BC have been found.
Homeric texts date to the 8th century BC.
Indo-Iranian, attested circa 1400 BC, descended from Proto-Indo-Iranian (dated to the late 3rd millennium BC).
Indo-Aryan, attested from around 1400 BC in Hittite texts from Anatolia, showing traces of Indo-Aryan words.
Epigraphically from the 3rd century BC in the form of Prakrit (Edicts of Ashoka). The Rigveda is assumed to preserve intact records via oral tradition dating from about the mid-second millennium BC in the form of Vedic Sanskrit.
Includes a wide range of modern languages from Northern India, Eastern Pakistan and Bangladesh, including Hindustani (Hindi, Urdu), Bengali, Odia, Assamese, Punjabi, Kashmiri, Gujarati, Marathi, Sindhi and Nepali, as well as Sinhala of Sri Lanka and Dhivehi of the Maldives and Minicoy.
Iranian or Iranic, attested from roughly 1000 BC in the form of Avestan.
Epigraphically from 520 BC in the form of Old Persian (Behistun inscription). Includes Persian, Pashto, Kurdish Balochi, Luri, and Ossetian.
Nuristani (includes Kamkata-vari, Vasi-vari, Askunu, Waigali, Tregami, and Zemiaki).
Italic (from Proto-Italic), attested from the 7th century BC. Includes the ancient Osco-Umbrian languages, Faliscan, as well as Latin and its descendants, the Romance languages, such as Italian, Venetian, Galician, Sardinian, Neapolitan, Sicilian, Spanish, Asturleonese, French, Romansh, Occitan, Portuguese, Romanian, and Catalan.
Tocharian, with proposed links to the Afanasevo culture of Southern Siberia.
Extant in two dialects (Turfanian and Kuchean, or Tocharian A and B), attested from roughly the 6th to the 9th century AD. Marginalized by the Old Turkic Uyghur Khaganate and probably extinct by the 10th century.
In addition to the classical ten branches listed above, several extinct and little-known languages and language-groups have existed or are proposed to have existed:
Ancient Belgian: hypothetical language associated with the proposed Nordwestblock cultural area.
Speculated to be connected to Italic or Venetic, and to have certain phonological features in common with Lusitanian.
Cimmerian: possibly Iranic, Thracian, or Celtic
Dacian: possibly very close to Thracian
Elymian: Poorly-attested language spoken by the Elymians, one of the three indigenous (i.e. pre-Greek and pre-Punic) tribes of Sicily.
Indo-European affiliation widely accepted, possibly related to Italic or Anatolian.]
Illyrian: possibly related to Albanian, Messapian, or both
Liburnian: evidence too scant and uncertain to determine anything with certainty
Ligurian: possibly close to or part of Celtic.
Lusitanian: possibly related to (or part of) Celtic, Ligurian, or Italic
Ancient Macedonian: proposed relationship to Greek.
Messapian: not conclusively deciphered
Paionian: extinct language once spoken north of Macedon
Phrygian: language of the ancient Phrygians.  Very likely, but not certainly, a sister group to Hellenic.
Sicel: an ancient language spoken by the Sicels (Greek Sikeloi, Latin Siculi), one of the three indigenous (i.e. pre-Greek and pre-Punic) tribes of Sicily.
Proposed relationship to Latin or proto-Illyrian (Pre-Indo-European) at an earlier stage.
Sorothaptic: proposed, pre-Celtic, Iberian language
Thracian: possibly including Dacian
Venetic: shares several similarities with Latin and the Italic languages, but also has some affinities with other IE languages, especially Germanic and Celtic.
Indo-European family tree in order of first attestation Indo-European language family tree based on "Ancestry-constrained phylogenetic analysis of Indo-European languages" by Chang et al. 
Membership of languages in the Indo-European language family is determined by genealogical relationships, meaning that all members are presumed descendants of a common ancestor, Proto-Indo-European.
Membership in the various branches, groups and subgroups of Indo-European is also genealogical, but here the defining factors are shared innovations among various languages, suggesting a common ancestor that split off from other Indo-European groups.
For example, what makes the Germanic languages a branch of Indo-European is that much of their structure and phonology can be stated in rules that apply to all of them.
Many of their common features are presumed innovations that took place in Proto-Germanic, the source of all the Germanic languages.
In the 21st century, several attempts have been made to model the phylogeny of Indo-European languages using Bayesian methodologies similar to those applied to problems in biological phylogeny.
Although there are differences in absolute timing between the various analyses, there is much commonality between them, including the result that the first known language groups to diverge were the Anatolian and Tocharian language families, in that order.
Tree versus wave model
See also: Language change
The "tree model" is considered an appropriate representation of the genealogical history of a language family if communities do not remain in contact after their languages have started to diverge.
In this case, subgroups defined by shared innovations form a nested pattern.
The tree model is not appropriate in cases where languages remain in contact as they diversify; in such cases subgroups may overlap, and the "wave model" is a more accurate representation.
Most approaches to Indo-European subgrouping to date have assumed that the tree model is by-and-large valid for Indo-European; however, there is also a long tradition of wave-model approaches.
In addition to genealogical changes, many of the early changes in Indo-European languages can be attributed to language contact.
It has been asserted, for example, that many of the more striking features shared by Italic languages (Latin, Oscan, Umbrian, etc.) might well be areal features.
More certainly, very similar-looking alterations in the systems of long vowels in the West Germanic languages greatly postdate any possible notion of a proto-language innovation (and cannot readily be regarded as "areal", either, because English and continental West Germanic were not a linguistic area). In a similar vein, there are many similar innovations in Germanic and Balto-Slavic that are far more likely areal features than traceable to a common proto-language, such as the uniform development of a high vowel (*u in the case of Germanic, *i/u in the case of Baltic and Slavic) before the PIE syllabic resonants *ṛ, *ḷ, *ṃ, *ṇ, unique to these two groups among IE languages, which is in agreement with the wave model.
The Balkan sprachbund even features areal convergence among members of very different branches.
An extension to the Ringe-Warnow model of language evolution, suggests that early IE had featured limited contact between distinct lineages, with only the Germanic subfamily exhibiting a less treelike behaviour as it acquired some characteristics from neighbours early in its evolution.
The internal diversification of especially West Germanic is cited to have been radically non-treelike.
Proposed subgroupings
Hypothetical Indo-Europeanphylogenetic clades
Balkan
Paleo-Balkan
Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Armeno-Phrygian
Thraco-Illyrian
Other
Italo-Celtic
Indo-Hittite
Indo-Uralic
Specialists have postulated the existence of higher-order subgroups such as Italo-Celtic, Graeco-Armenian, Graeco-Aryan or Graeco-Armeno-Aryan, and Balto-Slavo-Germanic.
However, unlike the ten traditional branches, these are all controversial to a greater or lesser degree.
The Italo-Celtic subgroup was at one point uncontroversial, considered by Antoine Meillet to be even better established than Balto-Slavic.
The main lines of evidence included the genitive suffix -ī; the superlative suffix -m̥mo; the change of /p/ to /kʷ/ before another /kʷ/ in the same word (as in penkʷe > *kʷenkʷe > Latin quīnque, Old Irish cóic); and the subjunctive morpheme -ā-. This evidence was prominently challenged by Calvert Watkins, while Michael Weiss has argued for the subgroup.
Evidence for a relationship between Greek and Armenian includes the regular change of the second laryngeal to a at the beginnings of words, as well as terms for "woman" and "sheep". Greek and Indo-Iranian share innovations mainly in verbal morphology and patterns of nominal derivation.
Relations have also been proposed between Phrygian and Greek, and between Thracian and Armenian.
Some fundamental shared features, like the aorist (a verb form denoting action without reference to duration or completion) having the perfect active particle -s fixed to the stem, link this group closer to Anatolian languages and Tocharian.
Shared features with Balto-Slavic languages, on the other hand (especially present and preterit formations), might be due to later contacts.
The Indo-Hittite hypothesis proposes that the Indo-European language family consists of two main branches: one represented by the Anatolian languages and another branch encompassing all other Indo-European languages.
Features that separate Anatolian from all other branches of Indo-European (such as the gender or the verb system) have been interpreted alternately as archaic debris or as innovations due to prolonged isolation.
Points proffered in favour of the Indo-Hittite hypothesis are the (non-universal) Indo-European agricultural terminology in Anatolia and the preservation of laryngeals.
However, in general this hypothesis is considered to attribute too much weight to the Anatolian evidence.
According to another view, the Anatolian subgroup left the Indo-European parent language comparatively late, approximately at the same time as Indo-Iranian and later than the Greek or Armenian divisions.
A third view, especially prevalent in the so-called French school of Indo-European studies, holds that extant similarities in non-satem languages in general—including Anatolian—might be due to their peripheral location in the Indo-European language-area and to early separation, rather than indicating a special ancestral relationship.
Hans J. Holm, based on lexical calculations, arrives at a picture roughly replicating the general scholarly opinion and refuting the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.
Satem and centum languages
Main article: Centum and satem languages
Some significant isoglosses in Indo-European daughter languages at around 500 BC.   Blue: centum languages   Red: satem languages   Orange: languages with augment   Green: languages with PIE *-tt- > -ss-   Tan: languages with PIE *-tt- > -st-   Pink: languages with instrumental, dative and ablative plural endings (and some others) in *-m- rather than *-bh-
The division of the Indo-European languages into satem and centum groups was put forward by Peter von Bradke in 1890, although Karl Brugmann did propose a similar type of division in 1886. In the satem languages, which include the Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian branches, as well as (in most respects) Albanian and Armenian, the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European palatovelars remained distinct and were fricativized, while the labiovelars merged with the 'plain velars'. In the centum languages, the palatovelars merged with the plain velars, while the labiovelars remained distinct.
The results of these alternative developments are exemplified by the words for "hundred" in Avestan (satem) and Latin (centum)—the initial palatovelar developed into a fricative [s] in the former, but became an ordinary velar [k] in the latter.
Rather than being a genealogical separation, the centum–satem division is commonly seen as resulting from innovative changes that spread across PIE dialect-branches over a particular geographical area; the centum–satem isogloss intersects a number of other isoglosses that mark distinctions between features in the early IE branches.
It may be that the centum branches in fact reflect the original state of affairs in PIE, and only the satem branches shared a set of innovations, which affected all but the peripheral areas of the PIE dialect continuum.
Kortlandt proposes that the ancestors of Balts and Slavs took part in satemization before being drawn later into the western Indo-European sphere.
Proposed external relations
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
From the very beginning of Indo-European studies, there have been attempts to link the Indo-European languages genealogically to other languages and language families.
However, these theories remain highly controversial, and most specialists in Indo-European linguistics are sceptical or agnostic about such proposals.
Proposals linking the Indo-European languages with a single language family include:
Indo-Uralic, joining Indo-European with Uralic
Pontic, postulated by John Colarusso, which joins Indo-European with Northwest Caucasian
Other proposed families include:
Nostratic, comprising all or some of the Eurasiatic languages and the Kartvelian, Dravidian (or wider, Elamo-Dravidian) and Afroasiatic language families
Eurasiatic, a theory championed by Joseph Greenberg, comprising the Uralic, Altaic and various 'Paleosiberian' families (Ainu, Yukaghir, Nivkh, Chukotko-Kamchatkan, Eskimo–Aleut) and possibly others
Nostratic and Eurasiatic, in turn, have been included in even wider groupings, such as Borean, a language family separately proposed by Harold C. Fleming and Sergei Starostin that encompasses almost all of the world's natural languages with the exception of those native to sub-Saharan Africa, New Guinea, Australia, and the Andaman Islands.
Objections to such groupings are not based on any theoretical claim about the likely historical existence or nonexistence of such macrofamilies; it is entirely reasonable to suppose that they might have existed.
The serious difficulty lies in identifying the details of actual relationships between language families, because it is very hard to find concrete evidence that transcends chance resemblance or is not equally likely explained as being due to borrowing, including Wanderwörter, which can travel very long distances.
Because the signal-to-noise ratio in historical linguistics declines over time, at great enough time-depths it becomes open to reasonable doubt that one can even distinguish between signal and noise.
Evolution
Proto-Indo-European
Main article: Proto-Indo-European language
Scheme of Indo-European language dispersals from c. 4000 to 1000 BCE according to the widely held Kurgan hypothesis.– Center: Steppe cultures1 (black): Anatolian languages (archaic PIE)2 (black): Afanasievo culture (early PIE)3 (black) Yamnaya culture expansion (Pontic-Caspian steppe, Danube Valley) (late PIE)4A (black): Western Corded Ware4B-C (blue & dark blue): Bell Beaker; adopted by Indo-European speakers5A-B (red): Eastern Corded ware5C (red): Sintashta (proto-Indo-Iranian)6 (magenta): Andronovo7A (purple): Indo-Aryans (Mittani)7B (purple): Indo-Aryans (India)[NN] (dark yellow): proto-Balto-Slavic8 (grey): Greek9 (yellow):Iranians– [not drawn]: Armenian, expanding from western steppe
The proposed Proto-Indo-European language (PIE) is the reconstructed common ancestor of the Indo-European languages, spoken by the Proto-Indo-Europeans.
From the 1960s, knowledge of Anatolian became certain enough to establish its relationship to PIE. Using the method of internal reconstruction, an earlier stage, called Pre-Proto-Indo-European, has been proposed.
PIE was an inflected language, in which the grammatical relationships between words were signaled through inflectional morphemes (usually endings). The roots of PIE are basic morphemes carrying a lexical meaning.
By addition of suffixes, they form stems, and by addition of endings, these form grammatically inflected words (nouns or verbs). The reconstructed Indo-European verb system is complex and, like the noun, exhibits a system of ablaut.
Diversification
See also: Indo-European migrations
Possible expansion of Indo-European languages according to the Kurgan hypothesis
IE languages c. 3500 BC
IE languages c. 2500 BC
IE languages c. 1500 BC
IE languages c. 500 AD
BMAC in "IE languages c. 1500 BC" is Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex
The diversification of the parent language into the attested branches of daughter languages is historically unattested.
The timeline of the evolution of the various daughter languages, on the other hand, is mostly undisputed, quite regardless of the question of Indo-European origins.
Using a mathematical analysis borrowed from evolutionary biology, Donald Ringe and Tandy Warnow propose the following evolutionary tree of Indo-European branches:
Pre-Anatolian (before 3500 BC)
Pre-Tocharian
Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (before 2500 BC)
Pre-Armenian and Pre-Greek (after 2500 BC)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (2000 BC)
Pre-Germanic and Pre-Balto-Slavic; proto-Germanic c. 500 BC[incomplete short citation]
David Anthony proposes the following sequence:
Pre-Anatolian (4200 BC)
Pre-Tocharian (3700 BC)
Pre-Germanic (3300 BC)
Pre-Italic and Pre-Celtic (3000 BC)
Pre-Armenian (2800 BC)
Pre-Balto-Slavic (2800 BC)
Pre-Greek (2500 BC)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (2200 BC); split between Iranian and Old Indic 1800 BC
From 1500 BC the following sequence may be given:[citation needed]
Migration of the Proto-Italic speakers into the Italian peninsula (Bagnolo stele). Redaction of the Rigveda and rise of the Vedic civilization in the Punjab.
The Mycenaean civilization gives way to the Greek Dark Ages.
Hittite goes extinct.
Baltic languages are spoken in a huge area from present-day Poland to the Ural Mountains.
Proto Germanic.
Homer and the beginning of Classical Antiquity.
The Vedic Civilization gives way to the Mahajanapadas.
Siddhartha Gautama preaches Buddhism.
Zoroaster composes the Gathas, rise of the Achaemenid Empire, replacing the Elamites and Babylonia.
Separation of Proto-Italic into Osco-Umbrian and Latin-Faliscan.
Genesis of the Greek and Old Italic alphabets.
A variety of Paleo-Balkan languages are spoken in Southern Europe.
Kushan Empire, Mauryan Empire.
Proto-Germanic.
Proto-Slavic.
The Roman Empire and then the Migration period marginalize the Celtic languages to the British Isles.
Sogdian, an Eastern Iranian language, becomes the lingua franca of the Silk Road in Central Asia leading to China, due to the proliferation of Sogdian merchants there.
The last of the Anatolian languages are extinct.
The Viking Age forms an Old Norse koine spanning Scandinavia, the British Isles and Iceland.
The Islamic conquest and the Turkic expansion results in the Arabization and Turkification of significant areas where Indo-European languages were spoken.
Tocharian is extinct in the course of the Turkic expansion while Northeastern Iranian (Scytho-Sarmatian) is reduced to small refugia.
Slavic languages spread over wide areas in central, eastern and southeastern Europe, largely replacing Romance in the Balkans (with the exception of Romanian) and whatever was left of the paleo-Balkan languages with the exception of Albanian.
Important languages for reconstruction
In reconstructing the history of the Indo-European languages and the form of the Proto-Indo-European language, some languages have been of particular importance.
These generally include the ancient Indo-European languages that are both well-attested and documented at an early date, although some languages from later periods are important if they are particularly linguistically conservative (most notably, Lithuanian). Early poetry is of special significance because of the rigid poetic meter normally employed, which makes it possible to reconstruct a number of features (e.g. vowel length) that were either unwritten or corrupted in the process of transmission down to the earliest extant written manuscripts.
Most noticeable of all:
Vedic Sanskrit (c. 1500–500 BC). This language is unique in that its source documents were all composed orally, and were passed down through oral tradition (shakha schools) for c. 2,000 years before ever being written down.
The oldest documents are all in poetic form; oldest and most important of all is the Rigveda (c. 1500 BC).
Ancient Greek (c. 750–400 BC). Mycenaean Greek (c. 1450 BC) is the oldest recorded form, but its value is lessened by the limited material, restricted subject matter, and highly ambiguous writing system.
More important is Ancient Greek, documented extensively beginning with the two Homeric poems (the Iliad and the Odyssey, c. 750 BC).
Hittite (c. 1700–1200 BC). This is the earliest-recorded of all Indo-European languages, and highly divergent from the others due to the early separation of the Anatolian languages from the remainder.
It possesses some highly archaic features found only fragmentarily, if at all, in other languages.
At the same time, however, it appears to have undergone many early phonological and grammatical changes which, combined with the ambiguities of its writing system, hinder its usefulness somewhat.
Other primary sources:
Latin, attested in a huge amount of poetic and prose material in the Classical period (c. 200 BC – 100 AD) and limited older material from as early as c. 600 BC.
Gothic (the most archaic well-documented Germanic language, c. 350 AD), along with the combined witness of the other old Germanic languages: most importantly, Old English (c. 800–1000 AD), Old High German (c. 750–1000 AD) and Old Norse (c. 1100–1300 AD, with limited earlier sources dating to c. 200 AD).
Old Avestan (c. 1700–1200 BC) and Younger Avestan (c. 900 BC). Documentation is sparse, but nonetheless quite important due to its highly archaic nature.
Modern Lithuanian, with limited records in Old Lithuanian (c. 1500–1700 AD).
Old Church Slavonic (c. 900–1000 AD).
Other secondary sources, of lesser value due to poor attestation:
Luwian, Lycian, Lydian and other Anatolian languages (c. 1400–400 BC).
Oscan, Umbrian and other Old Italic languages (c. 600–200 BC).
Old Persian (c. 500 BC).
Old Prussian (c. 1350–1600 AD); even more archaic than Lithuanian.
Other secondary sources, of lesser value due to extensive phonological changes and relatively limited attestation:
Old Irish (c. 700–850 AD).
Tocharian (c. 500–800 AD), underwent large phonetic shifts and mergers in the proto-language, and has an almost entirely reworked declension system.
Classical Armenian (c. 400–1000 AD).
Albanian (c. 1450–current time).
Sound changes
Main article: Indo-European sound laws
As the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) language broke up, its sound system diverged as well, changing according to various sound laws evidenced in the daughter languages.
PIE is normally reconstructed with a complex system of 15 stop consonants, including an unusual three-way phonation (voicing) distinction between voiceless, voiced and "voiced aspirated" (i.e. breathy voiced) stops, and a three-way distinction among velar consonants (k-type sounds) between "palatal" ḱ ǵ ǵh, "plain velar" k g gh and labiovelar kʷ gʷ gʷh. (The correctness of the terms palatal and plain velar is disputed; see Proto-Indo-European phonology.) All daughter languages have reduced the number of distinctions among these sounds, often in divergent ways.
As an example, in English, one of the Germanic languages, the following are some of the major changes that happened:
As in other centum languages, the "plain velar" and "palatal" stops merged, reducing the number of stops from 15 to 12.As in the other Germanic languages, the Germanic sound shift changed the realization of all stop consonants, with each consonant shifting to a different one:
bʰ  b  p  f
dʰ  d  t  θ
gʰ  g  k  x (Later initial x h)
gʷʰ  gʷ  kʷ  xʷ (Later initial xʷ hʷ)
Each original consonant shifted one position to the right.  For example, original dʰ became d, while original d became t and original t became θ (written th in English).  This is the original source of the English sounds written f, th, h and wh.  Examples, comparing English with Latin, where the sounds largely remain unshifted:
For PIE p: piscis vs. fish; pēs, pēdis vs. foot; pluvium "rain" vs. flow; pater vs. father
For PIE t: trēs vs. three; māter vs. mother
For PIE d: decem vs. ten; pēdis vs. foot; quid vs. what
For PIE k: centum vs. hund(red); capere "to take" vs. have
For PIE kʷ: quid vs. what; quandō vs. whenVarious further changes affected consonants in the middle or end of a word:
The voiced stops resulting from the sound shift were softened to voiced fricatives (or perhaps the sound shift directly generated fricatives in these positions).
Verner's law also turned some of the voiceless fricatives resulting from the sound shift into voiced fricatives or stops.  This is why the t in Latin centum ends up as d in hund(red) rather than the expected th.
Most remaining h sounds disappeared, while remaining f and th became voiced.  For example, Latin decem ends up as ten with no h in the middle (but note taíhun "ten" in Gothic, an archaic Germanic language).  Similarly, the words seven and have have a voiced v (compare Latin septem, capere), while father and mother have a voiced th, although not spelled differently (compare Latin pater, māter).
None of the daughter-language families (except possibly Anatolian, particularly Luvian) reflect the plain velar stops differently from the other two series, and there is even a certain amount of dispute whether this series existed at all in PIE. The major distinction between centum and satem languages corresponds to the outcome of the PIE plain velars:
The "central" satem languages (Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Albanian, and Armenian) reflect both "plain velar" and labiovelar stops as plain velars, often with secondary palatalization before a front vowel (e i ē ī). The "palatal" stops are palatalized and often appear as sibilants (usually but not always distinct from the secondarily palatalized stops).
The "peripheral" centum languages (Germanic, Italic, Celtic, Greek, Anatolian and Tocharian) reflect both "palatal" and "plain velar" stops as plain velars, while the labiovelars continue unchanged, often with later reduction into plain labial or velar consonants.
The three-way PIE distinction between voiceless, voiced and voiced aspirated stops is considered extremely unusual from the perspective of linguistic typology—particularly in the existence of voiced aspirated stops without a corresponding series of voiceless aspirated stops.
None of the various daughter-language families continue it unchanged, with numerous "solutions" to the apparently unstable PIE situation:
The Indo-Aryan languages preserve the three series unchanged but have evolved a fourth series of voiceless aspirated consonants.
The Iranian languages probably passed through the same stage, subsequently changing the aspirated stops into fricatives.
Greek converted the voiced aspirates into voiceless aspirates.
Italic probably passed through the same stage, but reflects the voiced aspirates as voiceless fricatives, especially f (or sometimes plain voiced stops in Latin).
Celtic, Balto-Slavic, Anatolian, and Albanian merge the voiced aspirated into plain voiced stops.
Germanic and Armenian change all three series in a chain shift (e.g. with bh b p becoming b p f (known as Grimm's law in Germanic)).
Among the other notable changes affecting consonants are:
The Ruki sound law (s becomes /ʃ/ before r, u, k, i) in the satem languages.
Loss of prevocalic p in Proto-Celtic.
Development of prevocalic s to h in Proto-Greek, with later loss of h between vowels.
Verner's law in Proto-Germanic.
Grassmann's law (dissimilation of aspirates) independently in Proto-Greek and Proto-Indo-Iranian.
The following table shows the basic outcomes of PIE consonants in some of the most important daughter languages for the purposes of reconstruction.
For a fuller table, see Indo-European sound laws.
Proto-Indo-European consonants and their reflexes in selected Indo-European daughter languages
PIE
Skr.
O.C.S.
Lith.
Greek
Latin
Old Irish
Gothic
English
Examples
PIE
Eng.
Skr.
Gk.
Lat.
Lith. etc.
Prs.
*p
p; phH
Ø;chT [x]
f;`-b- [β]
f;-v/f-
*pṓds ~ *ped-
foot
pád-
poús (podós)
pēs (pedis)
pãdas
Piáde
*t
t; thH
t;-th- [θ]
þ [θ];`-d- [ð];tT-
th;`-d-;tT-
*tréyes
three
tráyas
treĩs
trēs
trỹs
thri (old Persian)
*ḱ
ś [ɕ]
š [ʃ]
c [k]
c [k];-ch- [x]
h;`-g- [ɣ]
h;-Ø-;`-y-
*ḱm̥tóm
hund(red)
śatám
he-katón
centum
šimtas
sad
*k
k; cE [tʃ];khH
k;čE [tʃ];cE' [ts]
*kreuh₂ "raw meat"
OE hrēaw raw
kravíṣ-
kréas
cruor
kraûjas
xoreš
*kʷ
p;tE;k(u)
qu [kʷ];c(O) [k]
ƕ [ʍ];`-gw/w-
wh;`-w-
*kʷid, kʷod
what
kím
tí
quid, quod
kas, kad
ce, ci
*kʷekʷlom
wheel
cakrá-
kúklos
kãklas
carx
*b
b; bhH
b [b];-[β]-
*d
d; dhH
d [d];-[ð]-
*déḱm̥(t)
ten,Goth. taíhun
dáśa
déka
decem
dẽšimt
dah
*ǵ
j [dʒ];hH [ɦ]
ž [ʒ]
g [ɡ];-[ɣ]-
c / k;chE'
*ǵénu, *ǵnéu-
OE cnēo knee
jā́nu
gónu
genu
zánu
*g
g; jE [dʒ];ghH; hH,E [ɦ]
g;žE [ʒ];dzE'
*yugóm
yoke
yugám
zugón
iugum
jùngas
yugh
*gʷ
b;de;g(u)
u [w > v];gun− [ɡʷ]
b [b];-[β]-
q [kʷ]
qu
*gʷīw-
quick"alive"
jīvá-
bíos,bíotos
vīvus
gývas
ze-
*bʰ
bh; b..Ch
ph; p..Ch
f-;b
b [b];-[β]-;-f
b;-v/f-(rl)
*bʰéroh₂
bear "carry"
bhar-
phérō
ferō
OCS berǫ
bar-
*dʰ
dh; d..Ch
th; t..Ch
f-;d;b(r),l,u-
d [d];-[ð]-
d [d];-[ð]-;-þ
*dʰwer-, dʰur-
door
dhvā́raḥ
thurā́
forēs
dùrys
dar
*ǵʰ
h [ɦ]; j..Ch
ž [ʒ]
kh; k..Ch
h;h/gR
g [ɡ];-[ɣ]-
g;-g- [ɣ];-g [x]
g;-y/w-(rl)
*ǵʰans-
goose, OHG gans
haṁsáḥ
khḗn
(h)ānser
žąsìs
gház
*gʰ
gh;hE [ɦ]; g..Ch; jE..Ch
g;žE [ʒ];dzE'
*gʷʰ
ph;thE;kh(u); p..Ch;tE..Ch;k(u)..Ch
f-;g /-u- [w];ngu [ɡʷ]
g;b-;-w-;ngw
g;b-;-w-
*sneigʷʰ-
snow
sneha-
nípha
nivis
sniẽgas
barf
*gʷʰerm-
??warm
gharmáḥ
thermós
formus
Latv. gar̂me
garm
*s
h-;-s;s(T);-Ø-;[¯](R)
s;-r-
s [s];-[h]-
s;`-z-
s;`-r-
*septḿ̥
seven
saptá
heptá
septem
septynì
haft
ṣruki- [ʂ]
xruki- [x]
šruki- [ʃ]
*h₂eusōs"dawn"
east
uṣā́ḥ
āṓs
aurōra
aušra
báxtar
*m
m [m];-[w̃]-
*mūs
mouse
mū́ṣ-
mũs
mūs
OCS myšĭ
muš
*-m
-m
-˛ [˜]
-n
-m
-n
-Ø
*ḱm̥tóm
hund(red)
śatám
(he)katón
centum
OPrus simtan
sad
*n
n;-˛ [˜]
*nokʷt-
night
nákt-
núkt-
noct-
naktis
náštá
*l
r (dial. l)
*leuk-
light
rócate
leukós
lūx
laũkas
ruz
*r
*h₁reudʰ-
red
rudhirá-
eruthrós
ruber
raũdas
sorx
*i̯
y [j]
j [j]
z [dz > zd, z] /h;-Ø-
i [j];-Ø-
*yugóm
yoke
yugám
zugón
iugum
jùngas
yugh
*u̯
v [ʋ]
v [ʋ]
w > h / Ø
u [w > v]
f;-Ø-
*h₂weh₁n̥to-
wind
vā́taḥ
áenta
ventus
vėtra
bád
PIE
Skr.
O.C.S.
Lith.
Greek
Latin
Old Irish
Gothic
English
Notes:
C- At the beginning of a word.
-C- Between vowels.
-C At the end of a word.
`-C- Following an unstressed vowel (Verner's law).
-C-(rl) Between vowels, or between a vowel and r, l (on either side).
CT Before a (PIE) stop (p, t, k).
CT− After a (PIE) obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s).
C(T) Before or after an obstruent (p, t, k, etc.; s).
CH Before an original laryngeal.
CE Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e).
CE' Before secondary (post-PIE) front-vowels.
Ce Before e.
C(u) Before or after a (PIE) u (boukólos rule).
C(O) Before or after a (PIE) o, u (boukólos rule).
Cn− After n.
CR Before a sonorant (r, l, m, n).
C(R) Before or after a sonorant (r, l, m, n).
C(r),l,u− Before r, l or after r, u.
Cruki− After r, u, k, i (Ruki sound law).
C..Ch Before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).
CE..Ch Before a (PIE) front vowel (i, e) as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).
C(u)..Ch Before or after a (PIE) u as well as before an aspirated consonant in the next syllable (Grassmann's law, also known as dissimilation of aspirates).
Comparison of conjugations
The following table presents a comparison of conjugations of the thematic present indicative of the verbal root *bʰer- of the English verb to bear and its reflexes in various early attested IE languages and their modern descendants or relatives, showing that all languages had in the early stage an inflectional verb system.
Proto-Indo-European (*bʰer- 'to carry, to bear')
I (1st sg.)
*bʰéroh₂
You (2nd sg.)
*bʰéresi
He/She/It (3rd sg.)
*bʰéreti
We two (1st dual)
*bʰérowos
You two (2nd dual)
*bʰéreth₁es
They two (3rd dual)
*bʰéretes
We (1st pl.)
*bʰéromos
You (2nd pl.)
*bʰérete
They (3rd pl.)
*bʰéronti
Major subgroup
Hellenic
Indo-Iranian
Italic
Celtic
Armenian
Germanic
Balto-Slavic
Albanian
Indo-Aryan
Iranian
Baltic
Slavic
Ancient representative
Ancient Greek
Vedic Sanskrit
Avestan
Latin
Old Irish
Classical Armenian
Gothic
Old Prussian
Old Church Sl.
Old Albanian
I (1st sg.)
phérō
bʰárāmi
barā
ferō
biru; berim
berem
baíra /bɛra/
*bera
berǫ
*berja
You (2nd sg.)
phéreis
bʰárasi
barahi
fers
biri; berir
beres
baíris
*bera
bereši
*berje
He/She/It (3rd sg.)
phérei
bʰárati
baraiti
fert
berid
berē
baíriþ
*bera
beretъ
*berjet
We two (1st dual)
—
bʰárāvas
barāvahi
—
—
—
baíros
—
berevě
—
You two (2nd dual)
phéreton
bʰárathas
—
—
—
—
baírats
—
bereta
—
They two (3rd dual)
phéreton
bʰáratas
baratō
—
—
—
—
—
berete
—
We (1st pl.)
phéromen
bʰárāmas
barāmahi
ferimus
bermai
beremkʿ
baíram
*beramai
beremъ
*berjame
You (2nd pl.)
phérete
bʰáratha
baraθa
fertis
beirthe
berēkʿ
baíriþ
*beratei
berete
*berjeju
They (3rd pl.)
phérousi
bʰáranti
barəṇti
ferunt
berait
beren
baírand
*bera
berǫtъ
*berjanti
Modern representative
Modern Greek
Hindustani
Persian
Portuguese
Irish
Armenian (Eastern; Western)
German
Lithuanian
Slovene
Albanian
I (1st sg.)
férno
(ma͠i) bʰarūm̥
(man) {mi}baram
{con}firo
beirim
berum em; g'perem
(ich) {ge}bäre
beriu
bérem
(unë) bie
You (2nd sg.)
férnis
(tū) bʰarē
(tu) {mi}bari
{con}feres
beirir
berum es; g'peres
(du) {ge}bierst
beri
béreš
(ti) bie
He/She/It (3rd sg.)
férni
(ye/vo) bʰarē
(ān) {mi}barad
{con}fere
beiridh
berum ē; g'perē
(er/sie/es) {ge}biert
beria
bére
(ai/ajo) bie
We two (1st dual)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
beriava
béreva
—
You two (2nd dual)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
beriata
béreta
—
They two (3rd dual)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
beria
béreta
—
We (1st pl.)
férnume
(ham) bʰarēm̥
(mā) {mi}barim
{con}ferimos
beirimid; beiream
berum enkʿ; g'perenkʿ
(wir) {ge}bären
beriame
béremo
(ne) biem
You (2nd pl.)
férnete
(tum) bʰaro
(šomā) {mi}barid
{con}feris
beirthidh
berum ekʿ; g'perekʿ
(ihr) {ge}bärt
beriate
bérete
(ju) bini
They (3rd pl.)
férnun
(ye/vo) bʰarēm̥
(ānān) {mi}barand
{con}ferem
beirid
berum en; g'peren
(sie) {ge}bären
beria
bérejo; berọ́
(ata/ato) bien
While similarities are still visible between the modern descendants and relatives of these ancient languages, the differences have increased over time.
Some IE languages have moved from synthetic verb systems to largely periphrastic systems.
In addition, the pronouns of periphrastic forms are in parentheses when they appear.
Some of these verbs have undergone a change in meaning as well.
In Modern Irish beir usually only carries the meaning to bear in the sense of bearing a child; its common meanings are to catch, grab.
Apart from the first person, the forms given in the table above are dialectical or obsolete.
The second and third person forms are typically instead conjugated periphrastically by adding a pronoun after the verb: beireann tú, beireann sé/sí, beireann sibh, beireann siad.
The Hindustani (Hindi and Urdu) verb bʰarnā, the continuation of the Sanskrit verb, can have a variety of meanings, but the most common is "to fill". The forms given in the table, although etymologically derived from the present indicative, now have the meaning of future subjunctive.
The loss of the present indicative in Hindustani is roughly compensated by the periphrastic habitual indicative construction, using the habitual participle (etymologically from the Sanskrit present participle bʰarant-) and an auxiliary: ma͠i bʰartā hū̃, tū bʰartā hai, vah bʰartā hai, ham bʰarte ha͠i, tum bʰarte ho, ve bʰarte ha͠i (masculine forms).
German is not directly descended from Gothic, but the Gothic forms are a close approximation of what the early West Germanic forms of c. 400 AD would have looked like.
The descendant of Proto-Germanic *beraną (English bear) survives in German only in the compound gebären, meaning "bear (a child)".
The Latin verb ferre is irregular, and not a good representative of a normal thematic verb.
In most Romance languages such as Portuguese, other verbs now mean "to carry" (e.g.
Pt. portar < Lat. portare) and ferre was borrowed and nativized only in compounds such as sofrer "to suffer" (from Latin sub- and ferre) and conferir "to confer" (from Latin "con-" and "ferre").
In Modern Greek, phero φέρω (modern transliteration fero) "to bear" is still used but only in specific contexts and is most common in such compounds as αναφέρω, διαφέρω, εισφέρω, εκφέρω, καταφέρω, προφέρω, προαναφέρω, προσφέρω etc.
The form that is (very) common today is pherno φέρνω (modern transliteration ferno) meaning "to bring". Additionally, the perfective form of pherno (used for the subjunctive voice and also for the future tense) is also phero.
The dual forms are archaic in standard Lithuanian, and are only presently used in some dialects (e.g.
Samogitian).
Among modern Slavic languages, only Slovene continues to have a dual number in the standard variety.
Comparison of cognates
Main article: Indo-European vocabulary
See also: Proto-Indo-European numerals and List of numbers in various languages
Present distribution
Countries where Indo-European language family is majority native   Countries where Indo-European language family is official but not majority native   Countries where Indo-European language family is not official
The approximate present-day distribution of Indo-European languages within the Americas by country: Romance:   Spanish   Portuguese   French Germanic:   English   Dutch
Today, Indo-European languages are spoken by billions of native speakers across all inhabited continents, the largest number by far for any recognised language family.
Of the 20 languages with the largest numbers of speakers according to Ethnologue, 10 are Indo-European: English, Hindustani, Spanish, Bengali, French, Russian, Portuguese, German, Persian and Punjabi, each with 100 million speakers or more.
Additionally, hundreds of millions of persons worldwide study Indo-European languages as secondary or tertiary languages, including in cultures which have completely different language families and historical backgrounds—there are between 600 million and one billion L2 learners of English alone.
The success of the language family, including the large number of speakers and the vast portions of the Earth that they inhabit, is due to several factors.
The ancient Indo-European migrations and widespread dissemination of Indo-European culture throughout Eurasia, including that of the Proto-Indo-Europeans themselves, and that of their daughter cultures including the Indo-Aryans, Iranian peoples, Celts, Greeks, Romans, Germanic peoples, and Slavs, led to these peoples' branches of the language family already taking a dominant foothold in virtually all of Eurasia except for swathes of the Near East, North and East Asia, replacing many (but not all) of the previously-spoken pre-Indo-European languages of this extensive area.
However Semitic languages remain dominant in much of the Middle East and North Africa, and Caucasian languages in much of the Caucasus region.
Similarly in Europe and the Urals the Uralic languages (such as Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian etc.) remain, as does Basque, a pre-Indo-European isolate.
Despite being unaware of their common linguistic origin, diverse groups of Indo-European speakers continued to culturally dominate and often replace the indigenous languages of the western two-thirds of Eurasia.
By the beginning of the Common Era, Indo-European peoples controlled almost the entirety of this area: the Celts western and central Europe, the Romans southern Europe, the Germanic peoples northern Europe, the Slavs eastern Europe, the Iranian peoples most of western and central Asia and parts of eastern Europe, and the Indo-Aryan peoples in the Indian subcontinent, with the Tocharians inhabiting the Indo-European frontier in western China.
By the medieval period, only the Semitic, Dravidian, Caucasian, and Uralic languages, and the language isolate Basque remained of the (relatively) indigenous languages of Europe and the western half of Asia.
Despite medieval invasions by Eurasian nomads, a group to which the Proto-Indo-Europeans had once belonged, Indo-European expansion reached another peak in the early modern period with the dramatic increase in the population of the Indian subcontinent and European expansionism throughout the globe during the Age of Discovery, as well as the continued replacement and assimilation of surrounding non-Indo-European languages and peoples due to increased state centralization and nationalism.
These trends compounded throughout the modern period due to the general global population growth and the results of European colonization of the Western Hemisphere and Oceania, leading to an explosion in the number of Indo-European speakers as well as the territories inhabited by them.
Due to colonization and the modern dominance of Indo-European languages in the fields of politics, global science, technology, education, finance, and sports, even many modern countries whose populations largely speak non-Indo-European languages have Indo-European languages as official languages, and the majority of the global population speaks at least one Indo-European language.
The overwhelming majority of languages used on the Internet are Indo-European, with English continuing to lead the group; English in general has in many respects become the lingua franca of global communication.
See also
Grammatical conjugation
The Horse, the Wheel, and Language (book)
Indo-European copula
Indo-European sound laws
Indo-European studies
Indo-Semitic languages
Indo-Uralic languages
Eurasiatic languages
Language family
Languages of Asia
Languages of Europe
Languages of India
List of Indo-European languages
Proto-Indo-European root
Proto-Indo-European religion
Notes
The sentence goes on to say, equally correctly as it turned out: "...here is a similar reason, though not quite so forcible, for supposing that both the Gothic and the Celtic, though blended with a very different idiom, had the same origin with the Sanscrit; and the old Persian might be added to the same family."
References
Citations
"Ethnologue report for Indo-European". Ethnologue.com.
Bryce, Trevor (2005). Kingdom of the Hittites: New Edition.
Oxford University Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-19-928132-9.
Mallory, J. P. (2006). The Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 442. ISBN 978-0-19-928791-8.
a b c Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences.
Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 1156. ISBN 978-3-11-016735-1.
Beekes, Robert S.P. (2011). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics: An introduction.
Second edition.
John Benjamins Publishing. p. 12. ISBN 978-90-272-8500-3.
M.V. Lomonosov (drafts for Russian Grammar, published 1755). In: Complete Edition, Moscow, 1952, vol. 7, pp. 652–59:
Представимъ долготу времени, которою сіи языки раздѣлились. ... Польской и россійской языкъ коль давно раздѣлились! Подумай же, когда курляндской! Подумай же, когда латинской, греч., нѣм., росс. О глубокая древность! [Imagine the depth of time when these languages separated! ... Polish and Russian separated so long ago! Now think how long ago [this happened to] Kurlandic! Think when [this happened to] Latin, Greek, German, and Russian! Oh, great antiquity!]
"Indo-European Practice and Historical Methodology (cited on pp. 14–15)" (PDF). Retrieved 7 August 2010.
Roger Blench. "Archaeology and Language: methods and issues" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2006. Retrieved 29 May 2010. In: A Companion To Archaeology. J. Bintliff ed. 52–74. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2004. (He erroneously included Egyptian, Japanese, and Chinese in the Indo-European languages, while omitting Hindi.)
Jones, William (2 February 1786). "The Third Anniversary Discourse". Electronic Library of Historiography.
Universita degli Studi Firenze, taken from: Shore (Lord Teignmouth), John (1807). The Works of Sir William Jones.
With a Life of the Author.
Vol. III. John Stockdale and John Walker. pp. 24–46. OCLC 899731310.
Robinson, Andrew (2007). The Last Man Who Knew Everything: Thomas Young, the Anonymous Genius who Proved Newton Wrong and Deciphered the Rosetta Stone, among Other Surprising Feats.
Penguin.
ISBN 978-0-13-134304-7.
In London Quarterly Review X/2 1813.; cf.
Szemerényi 1999:12, footnote 6
Franz Bopp (2010) . Über das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache : in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache.
Documenta Semiotica : Serie 1, Linguistik (2 ed.). Hildesheim: Olms.
Kurylowicz, Jerzy (1927). "ə indo-européen et ḫ hittite".  In Taszycki, W.; Doroszewski, W. (eds.). Symbolae grammaticae in honorem Ioannis Rozwadowski.
Vol. 1. pp. 95–104.
Elsie, Robert (2005). "Theodor of Shkodra (1210) and Other Early Texts". Albanian Literature: A Short History.
New York/Westport/London: I.B.Tauris. p. 5.
In his latest book, Eric Hamp supports the thesis that the Illyrian language belongs to the Northwestern group, that the Albanian language is descended from Illyrian, and that Albanian is related to Messapic which is an earlier Illyrian dialect (Comparative Studies on Albanian, 2007).
De Vaan, Michiel (11 June 2018). "The phonology of Albanian".  In Klein, Jared; Joseph, Brian; Fritz, Matthias (eds.). Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics.
Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. pp. 1732–1749. ISBN 978-3-11-054243-1.
Curtis, Matthew Cowan (30 November 2011). Slavic–Albanian Language Contact, Convergence, and Coexistence.
ProQuest LLC. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-267-58033-7. Retrieved 31 March 2017. So while linguists may debate about the ties between Albanian and older languages of the Balkans, and while most Albanians may take the genealogical connection to Illyrian as incontrovertible, the fact remains that there is simply insufficient evidence to connect Illyrian, Thracian, or Dacian with any language, including Albanian
"The peaks and troughs of Hittite". 
Güterbock, Hans G. "The Hittite Computer Analysis Project" (PDF).
such as Schleicher 1861, Szemerényi 1957, Collinge 1985, and Beekes 1995
"Tablet Discovery Pushes Earliest European Writing Back 150 Years". Science 2.0. 30 March 2011.
Indian History.
Allied Publishers. 1988. p. 114. ISBN 978-81-8424-568-4.
Mark, Joshua J. (28 April 2011). "Mitanni". World History Encyclopedia.
David W. Anthony, "Two IE phylogenies, three PIE migrations, and four kinds of steppe pastoralism", Journal of Language Relationship, vol. 9 (2013), pp. 1–22
F. Ribezzo, Revue Internationale d'Onomastique, II, 1948 p. 43 sq. et III 1949, p. 45 sq., M.Almagro dans RSLig, XVI, 1950, p. 42 sq, P.Laviosa Zambotti, l.c.  
Bernard, Sergent (1995). Les Indo-Européens: Histoire, langues, mythes.
Paris: Bibliothèques scientifiques Payot. pp. 84–85.
Tribulato, Olga (December 2012). Language and Linguistic Contact in Ancient Sicily.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 95–114. ISBN 9781139248938.
Price, Glanville (April 2000). Encyclopedia of the languages of Europe.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 136. ISBN 0631220399.
Kruta, Venceslas (1991). The Celts.
Thames and Hudson. p. 54.
Fine, John (1985). The ancient Greeks: a critical history.
Harvard University Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-674-03314-6. "Most scholars now believe that the Sicans and Sicels, as well as the inhabitants of southern Italy, were basically of Illyrian stock superimposed on an aboriginal 'Mediterranean' population."
Lejeune, Michel (1974). Manuel de la langue vénète.
Heidelberg: C. Winter. p. 341.
Pokorny, Julius (1959). Indogermanisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch.
Bern. pp. 708–709, 882–884.
a b Chang, Will; Chundra, Cathcart (January 2015). "Ancestry-constrained phylogenetic analysis supports the Indo-European steppe hypothesis" (PDF). Language. 91 (1): 194–244. doi:10.1353/lan.2015.0005. S2CID 143978664. Retrieved 30 September 2020.
Bouckaert, Remco; Lemey, Philippe (24 August 2012). "Mapping the Origins and Expansion of the Indo-European Language Family". Science. 337 (6097): 957–960. Bibcode:2012Sci...337..957B. doi:10.1126/science.1219669. hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-000F-EADF-A. PMC 4112997. PMID 22923579.
Drinka, Bridget (1 January 2013). "Phylogenetic and areal models of Indo-European relatedness: The role of contact in reconstruction". Journal of Language Contact. 6 (2): 379–410. doi:10.1163/19552629-00602009. Retrieved 30 September 2020.
François, Alexandre (2014), "Trees, Waves and Linkages: Models of Language Diversification" (PDF),  in Bowern, Claire; Evans, Bethwyn (eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics, London: Routledge, pp. 161–89, ISBN 978-0-415-52789-7
Blažek, Václav (2007). "From August Schleicher to Sergei Starostin: on the development of the tree-diagram models of the Indo-European languages". Journal of Indo-European Studies. 35 (1–2): 82–109.
Meillet, Antoine (1908). Les dialectes indo-européens.
Paris: Honoré Champion.
Bonfante, Giuliano (1931). I dialetti indoeuropei.
Brescia: Paideia.
Porzig 1954.
Nakhleh, Luay; Ringe, Don & Warnow, Tandy (2005). "Perfect Phylogenetic Networks: A New Methodology for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Languages" (PDF). Language. 81 (2): 382–420. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.65.1791. doi:10.1353/lan.2005.0078. S2CID 162958.
Mallory, J.P.; Adams, D.Q. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture.
London: Fitzroy Dearborn.
Porzig 1954, p. 39.
Fortson 2004, p. 247.
Watkins, Calvert (1966). "Italo-Celtic revisited".  In Birnbaum, Henrik; Puhvel, Jaan (eds.). Ancient Indo-European dialects.
Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 29–50.
Weiss, Michael (2012).  Jamison, Stephanie W.; Melchert, H. Craig; Vine, Brent (eds.). Italo-Celtica: linguistic and cultural points of contact between Italic and Celtic.
Proceedings of the 23rd annual UCLA Indo-European Conference.
Bremen: Hempen. pp. 151–73. ISBN 978-3-934106-99-4. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
Greppin, James (1996). "Review of The linguistic relationship between Armenian and Greek by James Clackson". Language. 72 (4): 804–07. doi:10.2307/416105. JSTOR 416105.
Euler, Wolfram (1979). Indoiranisch-griechische Gemeinsamkeiten der Nominalbildung und deren indogermanische Grundlagen.
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck.
Lubotsky, A. (1988). "The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription" (PDF). Kadmos. 27: 9–26. doi:10.1515/kadmos-1988-0103. hdl:1887/2660. S2CID 162944161.
Kortlandt – The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift, Linguistique Balkanique 31, 71–74, 1988
Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language.
The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins.
London: Jonathan Cape.
ISBN 978-0-224-02495-2.
Encyclopædia Britannica, vol.22, Helen Hemingway Benton Publisher, Chicago, (15th ed.) 1981, p. 593
George S. Lane, Douglas Q. Adams,
Britannica 15th edition 22:667, "The Tocharian problem"
The supposed autochthony of Hittites, the Indo-Hittite hypothesis and migration of agricultural "Indo-European" societies became intrinsically linked together by C. Renfrew. (Renfrew, C 2001a The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites.
In R. Drews ed., Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language family: 36–63. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man).
Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 586 "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory" – W.C.; pp. 589, 593 "Anatolian languages" – Philo H.J. Houwink ten Cate, H. Craig Melchert and Theo P.J. van den Hout
Britannica 15th edition, 22 p. 594, "Indo-Hittite hypothesis"
Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages".  In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars;  et al. (eds.). Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications.
Proc. of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization.
Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1. The result is a partly new chain of separation for the main Indo-European branches, which fits well to the grammatical facts, as well as to the geographical distribution of these branches.
In particular it clearly demonstrates that the Anatolian languages did not part as first ones and thereby refutes the Indo-Hittite hypothesis.
Britannica 15th edition, vol.22, 1981, pp. 588, 594
Kortlandt, Frederik (1989). "The spread of the Indo-Europeans" (PDF). Retrieved 7 August 2010.
a b c Kallio, Petri; Koivulehto, Jorma (2018). "More remote relationships of Proto-Indo-European".  In Jared Klein; Brian Joseph; Matthias Fritz (eds.). Handbook of Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics. pp. 2280–2291.
a b Anthony 2007, pp. 56–58.
Ringe 2006, p. 67. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRinge2006 (help)
Anthony 2007, p. 100.
"Indo-European Languages: Balto-Slavic Family". Utexas.edu. 10 November 2008. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 7 August 2010.
Robert S.P. Beekes (2011). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics: An introduction.
Second edition.
John Benjamins Publishing. p. 30; Skt: 13, Hitt: 20, Gk: 24. ISBN 978-90-272-8500-3.
Robert S.P. Beekes (2011). Comparative Indo-European Linguistics: An introduction.
Second edition.
John Benjamins Publishing. p. 30; Toch: 19, Arm: 20, Alb: 25, 124, OIr: 27. ISBN 978-90-272-8500-3.
VAN OLPHEN, HERMAN (1975). "Aspect, Tense, and Mood in the Hindi Verb". Indo-Iranian Journal. 16 (4): 284–301. doi:10.1163/000000075791615397. ISSN 0019-7246. JSTOR 24651488. S2CID 161530848.
"Ethnologue list of language families" (22nd ed.). Ethnologue.com. 25 May 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2019.
"Ethnologue list of languages by number of speakers". Ethnologue.com. 3 October 2018. Retrieved 29 July 2021.
"English". Ethnologue.
Retrieved 17 January 2017.
"Ten Things You Might Not Have Known About the English Language". Oxford Dictionaries. 12 August 2015. Archived from the original on 13 August 2015.
Sources
Anthony, David W. (2007). The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-05887-0.
Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
ISBN 978-3-11-016735-1.
Fortson, Benjamin W. (2004). Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction.
Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell.
ISBN 978-1-4051-0315-2.
Brugmann, Karl (1886). Grundriss der Vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Vol. Erster Band.
Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner.
Houwink ten Cate, H.J.; Melchert, H. Craig & van den Hout, Theo P.J. (1981). "Indo-European languages, The parent language, Laryngeal theory". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton.
Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages".  In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars;  et al. (eds.). Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications.
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the German Classification Society (GfKl), University of Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Heidelberg-Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
ISBN 978-3-540-78239-1.
Kortlandt, Frederik (1990). "The Spread of the Indo-Europeans" (PDF). Journal of Indo-European Studies. 18 (1–2): 131–40.
Lubotsky, A. (1988). "The Old Phrygian Areyastis-inscription" (PDF). Kadmos. 27: 9–26. doi:10.1515/kadmos-1988-0103. hdl:1887/2660. S2CID 162944161.
Kortlandt, Frederik (1988). "The Thraco-Armenian consonant shift". Linguistique Balkanique. 31: 71–74.
Lane, George S.; Adams, Douglas Q. (1981). "The Tocharian problem". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 22 (15th ed.). Chicago: Helen Hemingway Benton.
Porzig, Walter (1954). Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebiets.
Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag.
Renfrew, C. (2001). "The Anatolian origins of Proto-Indo-European and the autochthony of the Hittites".  In Drews, R. (ed.). Greater Anatolia and the Indo-Hittite language family.
Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man.
ISBN 978-0-941694-77-3.
Schleicher, August (1861). Compendium der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (in German). Weimar: Böhlau (reprinted by Minerva GmbH, Wissenschaftlicher Verlag). ISBN 978-3-8102-1071-5.
Szemerényi, Oswald; Jones, David; Jones, Irene (1999). Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-823870-6.
von Bradke, Peter (1890). Über Methode und Ergebnisse der arischen (indogermanischen) Alterthumswissenshaft (in German). Giessen: J. Ricker'che Buchhandlung.
Further reading
Beekes, Robert S. P. (2011). Comparative Indo-European linguistics : An Introduction.
Revised and corrected by Michiel de Vaan (2nd ed.). Amsterdam ; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
ISBN 9789027211859.
Bjørn, Rasmus G. (2022). "Indo-European Loanwords and Exchange in Bronze Age Central and East Asia". Evolutionary Human Sciences: 1–41. doi:10.1017/ehs.2022.16.
Chakrabarti, Byomkes (1994). A Comparative Study of Santali and Bengali.
Calcutta: K. P. Bagchi & Co.
ISBN 978-81-7074-128-2.
Chantraine, Pierre (1968). Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque.
Paris: Klincksieck – via Internet Archive.
Collinge, N. E. (1985). The Laws of Indo-European.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
ISBN 9789027235305.
Gimbutas, Marija (1997).  Robbins Dexter, Miriam; Jones-Bley, Karlene (eds.). The Kurgan Culture and The Indo-Europeanization of Europe.
JIES Monograph.
Vol. 18. ISBN 0-941694-56-9.
Kroonen, Guus; Mallory, James P.; Comrie, Bernard, eds. (2018). Talking Neolithic: Proceedings of the Workshop on Indo-European Origins held at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, December 2-3, 2013. JIES Monograph.
Vol. 65. ISBN 978-0-9983669-2-0.
Mallory, J.P. (1989). In Search of the Indo-Europeans.
London: Thames and Hudson.
ISBN 978-0-500-27616-7 – via Internet Archive.
Markey, T. L.; Repanšek, Luka, eds. (2020). Revisiting Dispersions Celtic and Germanic ca. 400 BC – ca. 400 AD Proceedings of the International Interdisciplinary Conference held at Dolenjski muzej, Novo mesto, Slovenia; October 12th – 14th, 2018. JIES Monograph.
Vol. 67. ISBN 978-0-9845353-7-8.
Meillet, Antoine (1936). Esquisse d'une grammaire comparée de l'arménien classique (2nd ed.). Vienna: Mekhitarist Monastery – via Internet Archive.
Olander, Thomas, ed. (September 2022). The Indo-European Language Family : A Phylogenetic Perspective.
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108758666. ISBN 9781108758666. 
Ramat, Paolo; Giacalone Ramat, Anna, eds. (1998). The Indo-European Languages.
London: Routledge.
ISBN 041506449X.
Remys, Edmund (17 December 2007). "General distinguishing features of various Indo-European languages and their relationship to Lithuanian". Indogermanische Forschungen. 112: 244–276. doi:10.1515/9783110192858.1.244. ISBN 9783110192858. ISSN 0019-7262.
Renfrew, Colin (1987). Archaeology & Language.
The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins.
London: Jonathan Cape.
ISBN 978-0-224-02495-2.
Schleicher, August (1874–1877). A Compendium of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European, Sanskrit, Greek and Latin languages.
Translated by Bendall, Herbert. (via Internet Archive:(registration required) Part I,  Part II)
Strazny, Philip; Trask, R. L., eds. (2000). Dictionary of Historical and Comparative Linguistics (1 ed.). Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-57958-218-0.
Szemerényi, Oswald (1957). "The Problem of Balto-Slav Unity: A Critical Survey". Kratylos. O. Harrassowitz. 2: 97–123.
Reprinted in Szemerényi, Oswald (1991).  Considine, P.; Hooker, James T. (eds.). Scripta Minora: Selected Essays in Indo-European, Greek, and Latin; Vol.
IV: Indo-European Languages other than Latin and Greek.
Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft.
Vol. 63. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck. pp. 2145–2171. ISBN 9783851246117. ISSN 1816-3920.
Watkins, Calvert (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots.
Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN 978-0-618-08250-6.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indo-European languages.
Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Indo-European Languages".
Library resources about  Indo-European languages 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture (1997)
Databases
Dyen, Isidore; Kruskal, Joseph; Black, Paul (1997). "Comparative Indo-European". wordgumbo.
Retrieved 13 December 2009.
"Indo-European". LLOW Languages of the World.
Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2009.
"Indo-European Documentation Center". Linguistics Research Center, University of Texas at Austin. 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2009. Retrieved 14 December 2009.
Lewis, M. Paul, ed. (2009). "Language Family Trees: Indo-European". Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Online version (Sixteenth ed.). Dallas, Tex.: SIL International..
"Thesaurus Indogermanischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien: TITUS" (in German). TITUS, University of Frankfurt. 2003. Retrieved 13 December 2009.
"Indo-European Lexical Cognacy Database (IELex)". Uppsala University, Uppsala. 2021.
glottothèque - Ancient Indo-European Grammars online, an online collection of introductory videos to Ancient Indo-European languages produced by the University of Göttingen
Lexica
"Indo-European Etymological Dictionary (IEED)". Leiden, Netherlands: Department of Comparative Indo-European Linguistics, Leiden University.
Archived from the original on 7 February 2006. Retrieved 14 December 2009.
"Indo-European Roots Index". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.). Internet Archive: Wayback Machine. 22 August 2008 . Archived from the original on 17 February 2009. Retrieved 9 December 2009.
Köbler, Gerhard (2014). Indogermanisches Wörterbuch (in German) (5th ed.). Gerhard Köbler.
Retrieved 29 March 2015.
Schalin, Johan (2009). "Lexicon of Early Indo-European Loanwords Preserved in Finnish". Johan Schalin.
Retrieved 9 December 2009.
Indo-European languages (List)Albanian
Albanian
Balto-SlavicBaltic
Eastern Baltic
Western Baltic
Dnieper Baltic
Slavic
East Slavic
West Slavic
South Slavic
Italo-CelticCeltic
Insular Celtic
Continental Celtic
Italic
Latino-Faliscan
Osco-Umbrian
Daco-Thracian
Daco-Moesian
Dacian
Getaean
Moesian
Thracian
Germanic
North Germanic
West Germanic
East Germanic
Graeco-Phrygian-Armenian
Hellenic
Attic
Koine
Greek
Cypriot
Cretan
Jewish Koine
Romaniyot
Ancient Macedonian
Mycenaean
Doric
Tsakonian
Italiot
Griko
Calabrian
Arcadocypriot
Armeno-Phrygian
Phrygic
Mysian
Paeonian
Phrygian
Classical Armenian
Armenian
Eastern Armenian
Karabakhi
Yerevani
Western Armenian
Homshetsi
Karin
Mush
Indo-Iranian
Indo-Aryan
Iranian
Nuristani
Tocharian
Tocharian
Tocharian A
Kuchean
Anatolian
Hittite
Palaic
Luwic languages
Luwian
Lycian
Milyan
Carian
Sidetic
Pisidian
Lydian
Proto-languages
Proto-Indo-European
Proto-Albanian
Proto-Armenian
Proto-Balto-Slavic
Proto-Slavic
Proto-Baltic
Proto-Celtic
Proto-Germanic
Proto-Norse
Proto-Hellenic
Proto-Indo-Iranian
Proto-Indo-Aryan
Proto-Iranian
Proto-Italic
Proto-Romance
Proto-Tocharian
Proto-Anatolian
Italics indicate extinct languages
Primary language familiesAfrica
Afroasiatic
Austronesian
Khoe–Kwadi
Kx'a
Niger–Congo
Nilo-Saharan?
Tuu
Mande?
Songhay?
Ijaw?
Ubangian?
Kadu?
Isolates
Bangime
Hadza
Jalaa
Sandawe
Laal?
Shabo?
Eurasia(Europeand Asia)
Afroasiatic
Ainu
Altaic?
Austroasiatic
Austronesian
Chukotko-Kamchatkan
Dravidian
Eskimo–Aleut
Great Andamanese
Hmong–Mien
Hurro-Urartian
Indo-European
Japonic
Kartvelian
Koreanic
Kra–Dai
Mongolic
Nivkh
North Caucasian?
Northeast Caucasian
Northwest Caucasian
Ongan
Sino-Tibetan
Tungusic
Turkic
Tyrsenian
Uralic
Yeniseian
Yukaghir
Digaro?
Hrusish?
Kho-Bwa?
Miju?
Siangic?
Isolates
Basque
Burushaski
Elamite
Enggano?
Hattic
Kenaboi?
Kusunda
Minoan?
Nihali
Shompen?
Sumerian
Tambora?
New Guineaand the Pacific
Arai–Samaia
Austronesian
Binanderean–Goilalan
Border
Bulaka River
Central Solomons
Chimbu–Wahgi
Demta–Sentani
Doso–Turumsa
East Geelvink Bay
East New Britain
East Strickland
Eleman
Engan
Fas
Foja Range
Kaure–Kosare
Kiwaian
Kutubuan
Lakes Plain
Lower Mamberamo
Lower Sepik
Madang
Mairasi
North Bougainville
Pauwasi
Ramu
Senagi
Senu River
Sepik
Skou
South Bougainville
Teberan
Torricelli
Trans-Fly
Trans–New Guinea
Turama–Kikorian
Upper Yuat
West Papuan
Yam
Yawa
Yuat
Northwest Papuan?
Papuan Gulf?
Isolates
Abinomn
Abun
Anêm?
Ata?
Kol
Kuot
Maybrat
Mpur
Pawaia
Porome
Sulka?
Taiap?
Tambora
Wiru
Australia
Arnhem/Macro-Gunwinyguan?
Bunuban
Darwin Region?
Eastern Daly
Eastern Tasmanian
Garawan
Iwaidjan
Jarrakan
Marrku–Wurrugu?
Mirndi
Northern Tasmanian
Northeastern Tasmanian
Nyulnyulan
Pama–Nyungan
Southern Daly?
Tangkic
Wagaydyic
Western Daly
Western Tasmanian
Worrorran
Yangmanic (incl.
Wagiman)?
Isolates
Giimbiyu
Malak-Malak (Northern Daly?)
Tiwi
NorthAmerica
Algic
Alsea
Caddoan
Chimakuan
Chinookan
Chumashan
Comecrudan
Coosan
Eskimo–Aleut
Iroquoian
Kalapuyan
Keres
Maiduan
Muskogean
Na-Dene
Palaihnihan
Plateau Penutian
Pomoan
Salishan
Shastan
Siouan
Tanoan
Tsimshianic
Utian
Uto-Aztecan
Wakashan
Wintuan
Yukian
Yuman–Cochimí
Isolates
Chimariko
Esselen
Haida
Karuk
Kutenai
Seri
Siuslaw
Takelma
Timucua
Tonkawa
Waikuri
Washo
Yana
Yokuts
Yuchi
Zuni
Mesoamerica
Chibchan
Jicaquean
Lencan
Mayan
Misumalpan
Mixe–Zoque
Oto-Manguean
Tequistlatecan
Totonacan
Uto-Aztecan
Xincan
Isolates
Cuitlatec
Huave
Tarascan/Purépecha
SouthAmerica
Andoque–Urequena
Arauan
Araucanian
Arawakan
Arutani–Sape
Aymaran
Barbacoan
Boran
Cahuapanan
Cariban
Catacaoan
Chapacuran
Charruan
Chibchan
Choco
Chonan
Guaicuruan
Guajiboan
Harákmbut–Katukinan
Jirajaran
Jivaroan
Katembri–Taruma
Mascoian
Matacoan
Nadahup
Nambikwaran
Otomákoan
Pano-Tacanan
Peba–Yaguan
Quechuan
Piaroa–Saliban
Ticuna–Yuri
Timotean
Tiniguan
Tucanoan
Tupian
Uru–Chipaya
Witotoan
Yanomaman
Zamucoan
Zaparoan
Bora–Witoto languages?
Chimuan?
Esmeralda–Yaruro?
Hibito–Cholón?
Lule–Vilela?
Macro-Jê?
Tequiraca–Canichana?
Isolates (extant in 2000)
Aikanã?
Alacalufan
Camsá
Candoshi
Chimane
Chiquitano
Cofán?
Fulniô
Guató
Hodï/Joti
Irantxe?
Itonama
Kunza
Leco
Maku (Maku-Auari/Jukude)
Movima
Mura-Pirahã
Nukak?
Páez
Puinave
Huaorani/Waorani
Trumai
Urarina
Warao
Yamana
Yuracaré
Signlanguages
Arab
BANZSL
Chinese
Francosign
Germanosign
Indo-Pakistani
Japanese
Original Thai
Swedish
Tanzanian?
Isolates
See list of sign languages
See also
Constructed languages
Creoles
Language isolates
Mixed languages
Pidgins
Unclassified languages
Families with question marks (?) are disputed or controversial.Families in italics have no living members.Families with more than 30 languages are in bold.
Language families of EurasiaEurope
Indo-European
Uralic
Basque
Iberian
Tartessian
Paleo-Corsican
Paleo-Sardinian
Camunic
Ligurian
North Picene
Sicani
Tyrsenian
Eteocretan
Eteocypriot
Minoan
West Asia
Indo-European
Afroasiatic
Hattic
Kaskian
Hurro-Urartian
Kassite
Gutian
Philistine
Sumerian
Proto-Euphratean ?
Elamite
Caucasus
Kartvelian
Northeast Caucasian
Northwest Caucasian
South Asia
Indo-European
Dravidian
Sino-Tibetan
Austroasiatic
Nihali
Burushaski
Kusunda
Harappan ?
East Asia
Sino-Tibetan
Austroasiatic
Hmong–Mien
Kra–Dai
Austronesian
Turkic
Mongolic
Tungusic
Koreanic
Japonic
Indian Ocean rim
Great Andamanese
Ongan
Sentinelese
Kenaboi
North Asia"Paleosiberian"
Ainu
Nivkh
Chukotko-Kamchatkan
Yukaghir
Yeniseian
Other North Asia
Uralic
Ruanruan ?
Eskimo–Aleut
Proposed groupings
Alarodian
Altaic
Borean
Nostratic
Dené–Caucasian
Eurasiatic
Dené–Yeniseian
Dravido-Korean
Elamo-Dravidian
Ibero-Caucasian
Indo-Hittite
Indo-Pacific
Indo-Semitic
Indo-Uralic
Karasuk
Serbi–Mongolic
Pontic
Turanian
Ural-Altaic
Uralo-Siberian
Uralic–Yukaghir
Eskimo–Uralic
Chukotko-Kamchatkan–Amuric
Arunachal
Greater Siangic
Siangic
Digaro
Miju
Hrusish
Kho-Bwa
East and Southeast Asia
Andamanese
Austric
Austro-Tai
Austronesian–Ongan
East Asian
Sino-Austronesian
Substrata
Atlantic
Pre-Celtic
Pre-Germanic
Pre-Goidelic
Pre-Greek
Vasconic
Pre-Vedic
Pre-Finno-Ugric
Paleo-Laplandic
Families in italics have no living members.Families with more than 30 languages are in bold.
Authority control National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Ukraine
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Poland
Other
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikiversity
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 September 2022, at 23:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
