John Locke - Wikipedia
John Locke
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Leading English Enlightenment philosopher and physician (1632–1704)
For other people named John Locke, see John Locke (disambiguation).
John LockeFRSPortrait of Locke in 1697 by Godfrey KnellerBornJohn Locke(1632-08-29)29 August 1632Wrington, Somerset, EnglandDied28 October 1704(1704-10-28) (aged 72)High Laver, Essex, EnglandNationalityEnglishAlma materUniversity of Oxford (BA, MA, MB)Era17th-century philosophyRegionWestern philosophySchool
Empiricism
Foundationalism
Conceptualism
Indirect realism
Correspondence theory of truth
Ideational theory of meaning
Corpuscularianism
Social contract
Natural law
Classical liberalism
InstitutionsUniversity of OxfordRoyal SocietyMain interestsMetaphysics, epistemology, political philosophy, philosophy of mind, philosophy of education, economicsNotable ideas
List
Consciousness
Consent of the governed
Inverted spectrum
Labor theory of property
Law of opinion
Lockean proviso
Molyneux's problem
Argument from ignorance
Natural rights (rights of life, liberty and property)
Primary/secondary quality distinction
Semeiotike (the doctrine of signs)
Social contract
Sortal
State of nature
Tabula rasa
Influences
Bacon
Grotius
Descartes
Filmer
Spinoza
Hobbes
Pufendorf
Masham
Newton
Influenced
Berkeley
Godwin
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
Newton
Rousseau
Shaftesbury
Voltaire
Signature
Part of a series onJohn Locke
Social contract
Limited government
Tabula rasa
State of nature
Right to property
Labor theory of property
Lockean proviso
Argument from consciousness
Works(listed chronologically)
Fundamental Constitutionsof Carolina
A Letter Concerning Toleration
Two Treatises of Government
An Essay ConcerningHuman Understanding
Some ThoughtsConcerning Education
Of the Conduct ofthe Understanding
People
Robert Filmer
Thomas Hobbes
David Hume
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Adam Smith
Immanuel Kant
Thomas Jefferson
Related topics
Empiricism
Classical liberalism
Polish Brethren
John Locke's portrait by Godfrey Kneller, National Portrait Gallery, London
John Locke FRS (/lɒk/; 29 August 1632 – 28 October 1704) was an English philosopher and physician, widely regarded as one of the most influential of Enlightenment thinkers and commonly known as the "Father of Liberalism". Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, following the tradition of Sir Francis Bacon, Locke is equally important to social contract theory.
His work greatly affected the development of epistemology and political philosophy.
His writings influenced Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and many Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, as well as the American Revolutionaries.
His contributions to classical republicanism and liberal theory are reflected in the United States Declaration of Independence.
Internationally, Locke’s political-legal principles continue to have a profound influence on the theory and practice of limited representative government and the protection of basic rights and freedoms under the rule of law.
Locke's theory of mind is often cited as the origin of modern conceptions of identity and the self, figuring prominently in the work of later philosophers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant.
Locke was the first to define the self through a continuity of consciousness.
He postulated that, at birth, the mind was a blank slate, or tabula rasa.
Contrary to Cartesian philosophy based on pre-existing concepts, he maintained that we are born without innate ideas, and that knowledge is instead determined only by experience derived from sense perception, a concept now known as empiricism.
Demonstrating the ideology of science in his observations, whereby something must be capable of being tested repeatedly and that nothing is exempt from being disproved, Locke stated that "whatever I write, as soon as I discover it not to be true, my hand shall be the forwardest to throw it into the fire". Such is one example of Locke's belief in empiricism.
Contents
Early life
Locke was born on 29 August 1632, in a small thatched cottage by the church in Wrington, Somerset, about 12 miles from Bristol.
He was baptised the same day, as both of his parents were Puritans.
Locke's father, also called John, was an attorney who served as clerk to the Justices of the Peace in Chew Magna and as a captain of cavalry for the Parliamentarian forces during the early part of the English Civil War.
His mother was Agnes Keene.
Soon after Locke's birth, the family moved to the market town of Pensford, about seven miles south of Bristol, where Locke grew up in a rural Tudor house in Belluton.
In 1647, Locke was sent to the prestigious Westminster School in London under the sponsorship of Alexander Popham, a member of Parliament and John Sr.'s former commander.
After completing studies there, he was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in the autumn of 1652 at the age of 20. The dean of the college at the time was John Owen, vice-chancellor of the university.
Although a capable student, Locke was irritated by the undergraduate curriculum of the time.
He found the works of modern philosophers, such as René Descartes, more interesting than the classical material taught at the university.
Through his friend Richard Lower, whom he knew from the Westminster School, Locke was introduced to medicine and the experimental philosophy being pursued at other universities and in the Royal Society, of which he eventually became a member.[citation needed]
Locke was awarded a bachelor's degree in February 1656 and a master's degree in June 1658. He obtained a bachelor of medicine in February 1675, having studied the subject extensively during his time at Oxford and, in addition to Lower, worked with such noted scientists and thinkers as Robert Boyle, Thomas Willis and Robert Hooke.
In 1666, he met Anthony Ashley Cooper, Lord Ashley, who had come to Oxford seeking treatment for a liver infection.
Ashley was impressed with Locke and persuaded him to become part of his retinue.
Career
Work
Locke had been looking for a career and in 1667 moved into Ashley's home at Exeter House in London, to serve as his personal physician.
In London, Locke resumed his medical studies under the tutelage of Thomas Sydenham.
Sydenham had a major effect on Locke's natural philosophical thinking – an effect that would become evident in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Locke's medical knowledge was put to the test when Ashley's liver infection became life-threatening.
Locke coordinated the advice of several physicians and was probably instrumental in persuading Ashley to undergo surgery (then life-threatening in itself) to remove the cyst.
Ashley survived and prospered, crediting Locke with saving his life.
During this time, Locke served as Secretary of the Board of Trade and Plantations and Secretary to the Lords Proprietors of Carolina, which helped to shape his ideas on international trade and economics.[citation needed]
Ashley, as a founder of the Whig movement, exerted great influence on Locke's political ideas.
Locke became involved in politics when Ashley became Lord Chancellor in 1672 (Ashley being created 1st Earl of Shaftesbury in 1673). Following Shaftesbury's fall from favour in 1675, Locke spent some time travelling across France as a tutor and medical attendant to Caleb Banks.
He returned to England in 1679 when Shaftesbury's political fortunes took a brief positive turn.
Around this time, most likely at Shaftesbury's prompting, Locke composed the bulk of the Two Treatises of Government.
While it was once thought that Locke wrote the Treatises to defend the Glorious Revolution of 1688, recent scholarship has shown that the work was composed well before this date.
The work is now viewed as a more general argument against absolute monarchy (particularly as espoused by Robert Filmer and Thomas Hobbes) and for individual consent as the basis of political legitimacy.
Although Locke was associated with the influential Whigs, his ideas about natural rights and government are today considered quite revolutionary for that period in English history.
The Netherlands
Locke fled to the Netherlands in 1683, under strong suspicion of involvement in the Rye House Plot, although there is little evidence to suggest that he was directly involved in the scheme.
The philosopher and novelist Rebecca Newberger Goldstein argues that during his five years in Holland, Locke chose his friends "from among the same freethinking members of dissenting Protestant groups as Spinoza's small group of loyal confidants. [Baruch Spinoza had died in 1677.] Locke almost certainly met men in Amsterdam who spoke of the ideas of that renegade Jew who... insisted on identifying himself through his religion of reason alone." While she says that "Locke's strong empiricist tendencies" would have "disinclined him to read a grandly metaphysical work such as Spinoza's Ethics, in other ways he was deeply receptive to Spinoza's ideas, most particularly to the rationalist's well thought out argument for political and religious tolerance and the necessity of the separation of church and state." In the Netherlands, Locke had time to return to his writing, spending a great deal of time working on the Essay Concerning Human Understanding and composing the Letter on Toleration.
Return to England
Locke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution.
Locke accompanied Mary II back to England in 1688. The bulk of Locke's publishing took place upon his return from exile – his aforementioned Essay Concerning Human Understanding, the Two Treatises of Government and A Letter Concerning Toleration all appearing in quick succession.
Locke's close friend Lady Masham invited him to join her at Otes, the Mashams' country house in Essex.
Although his time there was marked by variable health from asthma attacks, he nevertheless became an intellectual hero of the Whigs.
During this period he discussed matters with such figures as John Dryden and Isaac Newton.
Death
He died on 28 October 1704, and is buried in the churchyard of the village of High Laver, east of Harlow in Essex, where he had lived in the household of Sir Francis Masham since 1691. Locke never married nor had children.
Events that happened during Locke's lifetime include the English Restoration, the Great Plague of London, the Great Fire of London, and the Glorious Revolution.
He did not quite see the Act of Union of 1707, though the thrones of England and Scotland were held in personal union throughout his lifetime.
Constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy were in their infancy during Locke's time.
Philosophy
Portrait of John Locke by John Greenhill (died 1676)
In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Locke's Two Treatises were rarely cited.
Historian Julian Hoppit said of the book, "except among some Whigs, even as a contribution to the intense debate of the 1690s it made little impression and was generally ignored until 1703 (though in Oxford in 1695 it was reported to have made 'a great noise')." John Kenyon, in his study of British political debate from 1689 to 1720, has remarked that Locke's theories were "mentioned so rarely in the early stages of the [Glorious] Revolution, up to 1692, and even less thereafter, unless it was to heap abuse on them" and that "no one, including most Whigs, [was] ready for the idea of a notional or abstract contract of the kind adumbrated by Locke".: 200  In contrast, Kenyon adds that Algernon Sidney's Discourses Concerning Government were "certainly much more influential than Locke's Two Treatises."[i]: 51 
In the 50 years after Queen Anne's death in 1714, the Two Treatises were reprinted only once (except in the collected works of Locke). However, with the rise of American resistance to British taxation, the Second Treatise of Government gained a new readership; it was frequently cited in the debates in both America and Britain.
The first American printing occurred in 1773 in Boston.
Locke exercised a profound influence on political philosophy, in particular on modern liberalism.
Michael Zuckert has argued that Locke launched liberalism by tempering Hobbesian absolutism and clearly separating the realms of Church and State.
He had a strong influence on Voltaire, who called him "le sage Locke". His arguments concerning liberty and the social contract later influenced the written works of Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and other Founding Fathers of the United States.
In fact, one passage from the Second Treatise is reproduced verbatim in the Declaration of Independence, the reference to a "long train of abuses". Such was Locke's influence that Thomas Jefferson wrote:Bacon, Locke and Newton… I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences.However, Locke's influence may have been even more profound in the realm of epistemology.
Locke redefined subjectivity, or self, leading intellectual historians such as Charles Taylor and Jerrold Seigel to argue that Locke's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689/90) marks the beginning of the modern Western conception of the self.
Locke's theory of association heavily influenced the subject matter of modern psychology.
At the time, Locke's recognition of two types of ideas, simple and complex—and, more importantly, their interaction through association—inspired other philosophers, such as David Hume and George Berkeley, to revise and expand this theory and apply it to explain how humans gain knowledge in the physical world.
Religious tolerance
See also: Toleration § Locke
John Locke by Richard Westmacott, University College London
Writing his Letters Concerning Toleration (1689–1692) in the aftermath of the European wars of religion, Locke formulated a classic reasoning for religious tolerance, in which three arguments are central:
earthly judges, the state in particular, and human beings generally, cannot dependably evaluate the truth-claims of competing religious standpoints;
even if they could, enforcing a single 'true religion' would not have the desired effect, because belief cannot be compelled by violence;
coercing religious uniformity would lead to more social disorder than allowing diversity.
With regard to his position on religious tolerance, Locke was influenced by Baptist theologians like John Smyth and Thomas Helwys, who had published tracts demanding freedom of conscience in the early 17th century.
Baptist theologian Roger Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island in 1636, where he combined a democratic constitution with unlimited religious freedom.
His tract, The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience (1644), which was widely read in the mother country, was a passionate plea for absolute religious freedom and the total separation of church and state.
Freedom of conscience had had high priority on the theological, philosophical, and political agenda, as Martin Luther refused to recant his beliefs before the Diet of the Holy Roman Empire at Worms in 1521, unless he would be proved false by the Bible.
Slavery and child labour
Locke's views on slavery were multifaceted and complex.
Although he wrote against slavery in general, Locke was an investor and beneficiary of the slave trading Royal Africa Company.
In addition, while secretary to the Earl of Shaftesbury, Locke participated in drafting the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, which established a quasi-feudal aristocracy and gave Carolinian planters absolute power over their enslaved chattel property; the constitutions pledged that "every freeman of Carolina shall have absolute power and authority over his negro slaves". Philosopher Martin Cohen notes that Locke, as secretary to the Council of Trade and Plantations and a member of the Board of Trade, was "one of just half a dozen men who created and supervised both the colonies and their iniquitous systems of servitude". 
According to American historian James Farr, Locke never expressed any thoughts concerning his contradictory opinions regarding slavery, which Farr ascribes to his personal involvement in the slave trade.
Locke's positions on slavery have been described as hypocritical, and laying the foundation for the Founding Fathers to hold similarly contradictory thoughts regarding freedom and slavery.
Locke also drafted implementing instructions for the Carolina colonists designed to ensure that settlement and development was consistent with the Fundamental Constitutions.
Collectively, these documents are known as the Grand Model for the Province of Carolina.[citation needed]
Historian Holly Brewer has argued, however, that Locke's role in the Constitution of Carolina has been exaggerated and that he was merely paid to revise and make copies of a document that had already been partially written before he became involved; she compares Locke's role to a lawyer writing a will.
She further notes that Locke was paid in Royal African Company stock in lieu of money for his work as a secretary for a governmental sub-committee and that he sold the stock after only a few years.
Brewer likewise argues that Locke actively worked to undermine slavery in Virginia while heading a Board of Trade created by William of Orange following the Glorious Revolution.
He specifically attacked colonial policy granting land to slave owners and encouraged the baptism and Christian education of the children of enslaved Africans to undercut a major justification of slavery—that they were heathens that possessed no rights.
Locke also supported child labour.
In his "Essay on the Poor Law", he turns to the education of the poor; he laments that "the children of labouring people are an ordinary burden to the parish, and are usually maintained in idleness, so that their labour also is generally lost to the public till they are 12 or 14 years old".: 190  He suggests, therefore, that "working schools" be set up in each parish in England for poor children so that they will be "from infancy [three years old] inured to work".: 190  He goes on to outline the economics of these schools, arguing not only that they will be profitable for the parish, but also that they will instill a good work ethic in the children.: 191 
Government
See also: Two Treatises of Government
Part of the Politics seriesRepublicanism
Central concepts
Anti-monarchism
Democracy
Democratization
Liberty as non-domination
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract
Schools
Classical
Federal
Kemalism
Nasserism
Neo-republicanism
Venizelism
Types of republics
Autonomous
Capitalist
Christian
Democratic
Federal
Federal parliamentary
Islamic
Parliamentary
People's
Revolutionary
Secular
Sister
Soviet
Important thinkers
Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
Niccolò Machiavelli
James Madison
Montesquieu
Polybius
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Algernon Sidney
Mary Wollstonecraft
History
Roman Republic
Gaṇasaṅgha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
Chinese Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–1919
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
Spanish Civil War
Egyptian revolution of 1952
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
Cambodian coup of 1970
Metapolitefsi
Iranian Revolution
Nepalese Civil War
By country
Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
Scotland
Wales
United States
Related topics
Communitarianism
Criticism of monarchy
Egalitarianism
The Emperor's New Clothes
Liberalism
Monarchism
Primus inter pares
Politics portal
Part of a series onLiberalism
History
Age of Enlightenment
List of liberal theorists (contributions to liberal theory)
Ideas
Consent of the governed
Due process
Democracy
Economic liberalism
Economic globalization
Equality
Gender
Legal
Federalism
Freedom
Economic
Market
Trade
Press
Religion
Speech
Harm principle
Internationalism
Invisible hand
Labor theory of property
Lockean proviso
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Negative
Positive
Limited government
Market economy
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Popular sovereignty
Property
Private
Public
Rights
Civil and political
Natural and legal
To own property
To bear arms
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Separation of powers
Social contract
Social justice
Basic income
Social services
Welfare state
State of nature
Schools of thought
Classical
Conservative
Cultural
Democratic
Feminist
Equity
Green
Internationalist
Muscular
National
Neo
Ordo
Radical
Radical centrism
Religious
Christian
Catholic
Islamic
Jewish
Secular
Social
Techno
Third Way
Thinkers
Acton
Alberdi
Arnold
Aron
Badawi
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Burke
Čapek
Cassirer
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Emerson
Friedman
Guizot
Hayek
Hobhouse
Hu
Humboldt
Jouvenel
Kant
Keynes
Korais
Kymlicka
Leoni
List
Locke
Martineau
Mill
Milton
Mises
Montesquieu
Nozick
Ortega
Paine
Popper
Priestley
Rawls
Ricardo
Rousseau
Say
Sen
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Staël
Tocqueville
Turgot
Voltaire
Weber
Wollstonecraft
Politicians
Artigas
Bright
Broglie
Cavour
Cobden
Deák
Deakin
Einaudi
Gladstone
Gokhale
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jenkins
Juárez
Kemal
Kennedy
King
Kołłątaj
Kossuth
Lamartine
Levski
Lincoln
Lloyd George
Macaulay
Madison
Madero
Mazzini
Milyukov
Mommsen
Naoroji
Ohlin
Pearson
Pino Suárez
Rathenau
Roosevelt
Sarmiento
Ståhlberg
Venizelos
Organizations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberalsand Democrats for Europe Party
Amnesty International
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
Humanists International
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network
Regional variants
Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Venizelism
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Liberism
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Poland
Cracovian
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Cobdenism
Gladstonian
Manchester
Whiggism
United States
Arizona School
Classical
Jeffersonian
Modern
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe
Related topics
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-communism
Bias in American academia
Bias in the media
Capitalism
Democratic
Centrism
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Empiricism
Humanism
Individualism
Anarchist
Land value tax
Libertarianism
Left
Right
Pirate Party
Progressivism
Sexually liberal feminism
Utilitarianism
Liberalism portal
Politics portal
Locke's political theory was founded upon that of social contract.
Unlike Thomas Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature is characterised by reason and tolerance.
Like Hobbes, however, Locke believed that human nature allows people to be selfish.
This is apparent with the introduction of currency.
In a natural state, all people were equal and independent, and everyone had a natural right to defend his "life, health, liberty, or possessions".: 198  Most scholars trace the phrase "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness" in the American Declaration of Independence to Locke's theory of rights, although other origins have been suggested.
Like Hobbes, Locke assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough, so people established a civil society to resolve conflicts in a civil way with help from government in a state of society.
However, Locke never refers to Hobbes by name and may instead have been responding to other writers of the day.
Locke also advocated governmental separation of powers and believed that revolution is not only a right but an obligation in some circumstances.
These ideas would come to have profound influence on the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.
Accumulation of wealth
See also: Lockean proviso
According to Locke, unused property is wasteful and an offence against nature, but, with the introduction of "durable" goods, men could exchange their excessive perishable goods for those which would last longer and thus not offend the natural law.
In his view, the introduction of money marked the culmination of this process, making possible the unlimited accumulation of property without causing waste through spoilage.
He also includes gold or silver as money because they may be "hoarded up without injury to anyone", as they do not spoil or decay in the hands of the possessor.
In his view, the introduction of money eliminates limits to accumulation.
Locke stresses that inequality has come about by tacit agreement on the use of money, not by the social contract establishing civil society or the law of land regulating property.
Locke is aware of a problem posed by unlimited accumulation, but does not consider it his task.
He just implies that government would function to moderate the conflict between the unlimited accumulation of property and a more nearly equal distribution of wealth; he does not identify which principles that government should apply to solve this problem.
However, not all elements of his thought form a consistent whole.
For example, the labour theory of value in the Two Treatises of Government stands side by side with the demand-and-supply theory of value developed in a letter he wrote titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money.
Moreover, Locke anchors property in labour but, in the end, upholds unlimited accumulation of wealth.
Ideas
Economics
On price theory
Locke's general theory of value and price is a supply-and-demand theory, set out in a letter to a member of parliament in 1691, titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money.
In it, he refers to supply as quantity and demand as rent: "The price of any commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of buyers and sellers" and "that which regulates the price…[of goods] is nothing else but their quantity in proportion to their rent."
The quantity theory of money forms a special case of this general theory.
His idea is based on "money answers all things" (Ecclesiastes) or "rent of money is always sufficient, or more than enough" and "varies very little". Locke concludes that, as far as money is concerned, the demand for it is exclusively regulated by its quantity, regardless of whether the demand is unlimited or constant.
He also investigates the determinants of demand and supply.
For supply, he explains the value of goods as based on their scarcity and ability to be exchanged and consumed.
He explains demand for goods as based on their ability to yield a flow of income.
Locke develops an early theory of capitalisation, such as of land, which has value because "by its constant production of saleable commodities it brings in a certain yearly income". He considers the demand for money as almost the same as demand for goods or land: it depends on whether money is wanted as medium of exchange.
As a medium of exchange, he states, "money is capable by exchange to procure us the necessaries or conveniences of life" and, for loanable funds, "it comes to be of the same nature with land by yielding a certain yearly income…or interest".
Monetary thoughts
Locke distinguishes two functions of money: as a counter to measure value, and as a pledge to lay claim to goods.
He believes that silver and gold, as opposed to paper money, are the appropriate currency for international transactions.
Silver and gold, he says, are treated to have equal value by all of humanity and can thus be treated as a pledge by anyone, while the value of paper money is only valid under the government which issues it.
Locke argues that a country should seek a favourable balance of trade, lest it fall behind other countries and suffer a loss in its trade.
Since the world money stock grows constantly, a country must constantly seek to enlarge its own stock.
Locke develops his theory of foreign exchanges, in addition to commodity movements, there are also movements in country stock of money, and movements of capital determine exchange rates.
He considers the latter less significant and less volatile than commodity movements.
As for a country's money stock, if it is large relative to that of other countries, he says it will cause the country's exchange to rise above par, as an export balance would do.
He also prepares estimates of the cash requirements for different economic groups (landholders, labourers, and brokers). In each group he posits that the cash requirements are closely related to the length of the pay period.
He argues the brokers—the middlemen—whose activities enlarge the monetary circuit and whose profits eat into the earnings of labourers and landholders, have a negative influence on both personal and the public economy to which they supposedly contribute.[citation needed]
Theory of value and property
Locke uses the concept of property in both broad and narrow terms: broadly, it covers a wide range of human interests and aspirations; more particularly, it refers to material goods.
He argues that property is a natural right that is derived from labour.
In Chapter V of his Second Treatise, Locke argues that the individual ownership of goods and property is justified by the labour exerted to produce such goods—"at least where there is enough [land], and as good, left in common for others" (para. 27)—or to use property to produce goods beneficial to human society.
Locke states in his Second Treatise that nature on its own provides little of value to society, implying that the labour expended in the creation of goods gives them their value.
From this premise, understood as a labour theory of value, Locke developed a labour theory of property, whereby ownership of property is created by the application of labour.
In addition, he believed that property precedes government and government cannot "dispose of the estates of the subjects arbitrarily". Karl Marx later critiqued Locke's theory of property in his own social theory.[citation needed]
The human mind
The self
Locke defines the self as "that conscious thinking thing, (whatever substance, made up of whether spiritual, or material, simple, or compounded, it matters not) which is sensible, or conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of happiness or misery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness extends". He does not, however, wholly ignore "substance", writing that "the body too goes to the making the man".
In his Essay, Locke explains the gradual unfolding of this conscious mind.
Arguing against both the Augustinian view of man as originally sinful and the Cartesian position, which holds that man innately knows basic logical propositions, Locke posits an 'empty mind', a tabula rasa, which is shaped by experience; sensations and reflections being the two sources of all of our ideas.
He states in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding:
This source of ideas every man has wholly within himself; and though it be not sense, as having nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be called 'internal sense.'
Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning Education is an outline on how to educate this mind.
Drawing on thoughts expressed in letters written to Mary Clarke and her husband about their son, he expresses the belief that education makes the man—or, more fundamentally, that the mind is an "empty cabinet":I think I may say that of all the men we meet with, nine parts of ten are what they are, good or evil, useful or not, by their education.Locke also wrote that "the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancies have very important and lasting consequences". He argues that the "associations of ideas" that one makes when young are more important than those made later because they are the foundation of the self; they are, put differently, what first mark the tabula rasa.
In his Essay, in which both these concepts are introduced, Locke warns, for example, against letting "a foolish maid" convince a child that "goblins and sprites" are associated with the night, for "darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the other".
This theory came to be called associationism, going on to strongly influence 18th-century thought, particularly educational theory, as nearly every educational writer warned parents not to allow their children to develop negative associations.
It also led to the development of psychology and other new disciplines with David Hartley's attempt to discover a biological mechanism for associationism in his Observations on Man (1749).
Dream argument
Locke was critical of Descartes's version of the dream argument, with Locke making the counter-argument that people cannot have physical pain in dreams as they do in waking life.
Religion
Religious beliefs
Some scholars have seen Locke's political convictions as being based from his religious beliefs.
Locke's religious trajectory began in Calvinist trinitarianism, but by the time of the Reflections (1695) Locke was advocating not just Socinian views on tolerance but also Socinian Christology.
However Wainwright (1987) notes that in the posthumously published Paraphrase (1707) Locke's interpretation of one verse, Ephesians 1:10, is markedly different from that of Socinians like Biddle, and may indicate that near the end of his life Locke returned nearer to an Arian position, thereby accepting Christ's pre-existence.
Locke was at times not sure about the subject of original sin, so he was accused of Socinianism, Arianism, or Deism.
Locke argued that the idea that "all Adam's Posterity [are] doomed to Eternal Infinite Punishment, for the Transgression of Adam" was "little consistent with the Justice or Goodness of the Great and Infinite God", leading Eric Nelson to associate him with Pelagian ideas.
However, he did not deny the reality of evil.
Man was capable of waging unjust wars and committing crimes.
Criminals had to be punished, even with the death penalty.
With regard to the Bible, Locke was very conservative.
He retained the doctrine of the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures.
The miracles were proof of the divine nature of the biblical message.
Locke was convinced that the entire content of the Bible was in agreement with human reason (The Reasonableness of Christianity, 1695). Although Locke was an advocate of tolerance, he urged the authorities not to tolerate atheism, because he thought the denial of God's existence would undermine the social order and lead to chaos.
That excluded all atheistic varieties of philosophy and all attempts to deduce ethics and natural law from purely secular premises.
In Locke's opinion the cosmological argument was valid and proved God's existence.
His political thought was based on Protestant Christian views.
Additionally, Locke advocated a sense of piety out of gratitude to God for giving reason to men.
Philosophy from religion
Locke's concept of man started with the belief in creation.
Like philosophers Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf, Locke equated natural law with the biblical revelation.
Locke derived the fundamental concepts of his political theory from biblical texts, in particular from Genesis 1 and 2 (creation), the Decalogue, the Golden Rule, the teachings of Jesus, and the letters of Paul the Apostle.
The Decalogue puts a person's life, reputation and property under God's protection.
Locke's philosophy on freedom is also derived from the Bible.
Locke derived from the Bible basic human equality (including equality of the sexes), the starting point of the theological doctrine of Imago Dei.
To Locke, one of the consequences of the principle of equality was that all humans were created equally free and therefore governments needed the consent of the governed.
Locke compared the English monarchy's rule over the British people to Adam's rule over Eve in Genesis, which was appointed by God.
Following Locke's philosophy, the American Declaration of Independence founded human rights partially on the biblical belief in creation.
Locke's doctrine that governments need the consent of the governed is also central to the Declaration of Independence.
Library
Manuscripts, books and treatises
Locke's signature in Bodleian Locke 13.12. Photo taken at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
Locke was an assiduous book collector and notetaker throughout his life.
By his death in 1704, Locke had amassed a library of more than 3,000 books, a significant number in the seventeenth century.
Unlike some of his contemporaries, Locke took care to catalogue and preserve his library, and his will made specific provisions for how his library was to be distributed after his death.
Locke's will offered Lady Masham the choice of "any four folios, eight quartos and twenty books of less volume, which she shall choose out of the books in my Library." Locke also gave six titles to his “good friend” Anthony Collins, but Locke bequeathed the majority of his collection to his cousin Peter King (later Lord King) and to Lady Masham's son, Francis Cudworth Masham.
Francis Masham was promised one “moiety” (half) of Locke's library when he reached “the age of one and twenty years.” The other “moiety” of Locke's books, along with his manuscripts, passed to his cousin King.
Over the next two centuries, the Masham portion of Locke's library was dispersed.
The manuscripts and books left to King, however, remained with King's descendants (later the Earls of Lovelace), until most of the collection was bought by the Bodleian Library, Oxford in 1947. Another portion of the books Locke left to King was discovered by the collector and philanthropist Paul Mellon in 1951. Mellon supplemented this discovery with books from Locke's library which he bought privately, and in 1978, he transferred his collection to the Bodleian.
The holdings in the Locke Room at the Bodleian have been a valuable resource for scholars interested in Locke, his philosophy, practices for information management, and the history of the book.
Many of the books still contain Locke's signature, which he often made on the pastedowns of his books.
Many also include Locke's marginalia.
One of Locke's famous books on politics, Two Treatises of Government, written and published in his lifetime.
The printed books in Locke's library reflected his various intellectual interests as well as his movements at different stages of his life.
Locke travelled extensively in France and the Netherlands during the 1670s and 1680s, and during this time he acquired many books from the continent.
Only half of the books in Locke's library were printed in England, while close to 40% came from France and the Netherlands.
These books cover a wide range of subjects.
According to John Harrison and Peter Laslett, the largest genres in Locke's library were theology (23.8% of books), medicine (11.1%), politics and law (10.7%), and classical literature (10.1%). The Bodleian library currently holds more than 800 of the books from Locke's library.
These include Locke's copies of works by several of the most influential figures of the seventeenth century, including
The Quaker William Penn: An address to Protestants of all perswasions (Bodleian Locke 7.69a)
The explorer Francis Drake: The world encompassed by Sir Francis Drake (Bodleian Locke 8.37c)
The scientist Robert Boyle: A discourse of things above reason (Bodleian Locke 7.272)
The bishop and historian Thomas Sprat: The history of the Royal-Society of London (Bodleian Locke 9.10a)
In addition to books owned by Locke, the Bodleian also possesses more than 100 manuscripts related to Locke or written in his hand.
Like the books in Locke's library, these manuscripts display a range of interests and provide different windows into Locke's activity and relationships.
Several of the manuscripts include letters to and from acquaintances like Peter King (MS Locke b. 6) and Nicolas Toinard (MS Locke c. 45). MS Locke f. 1–10 contain Locke's journals for most years between 1675 and 1704. Some of the most significant manuscripts include early drafts of Locke's writings, such as his Essay concerning human understanding (MS Locke f. 26). The Bodleian also holds a copy of Robert Boyle's General History of the Air with corrections and notes Locke made while preparing Boyle's work for posthumous publication (MS Locke c. 37 ). Other manuscripts contain unpublished works.
Among others, MS. Locke e. 18 includes some of Locke's thoughts on the Glorious Revolution, which Locke sent to his friend Edward Clarke but never published.
One of the largest categories of manuscript at the Bodleian comprises Locke's notebooks and commonplace books.
The scholar Richard Yeo calls Locke a "Master Note-taker" and explains that "Locke's methodical note-taking pervaded most areas of his life." In an unpublished essay “Of Study,” Locke argued that a notebook should work like a “chest-of-drawers” for organizing information, which would be a "great help to the memory and means to avoid confusion in our thoughts." Locke kept several notebooks and commonplace books, which he organized according to topic.
MS Locke c. 43 includes Locke's notes on theology, while MS Locke f. 18–24 contain medical notes.
Other notebooks, such as MS c. 43, incorporate several topics in the same notebook, but separated into sections.
Page 1 of Locke's unfinished index in Bodleian Locke 13.12. Photo taken at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
These commonplace books were highly personal and were designed to be used by Locke himself rather than accessible to a wide audience.
Locke's notes are often abbreviated and are full of codes which he used to reference material across notebooks.
Another way Locke personalized his notebooks was by devising his own method of creating indexes using a grid system and Latin keywords.
Instead of recording entire words, his indexes shortened words to their first letter and vowel.
Thus, the word "Epistle" would be classified as "Ei". Locke published his method in French in 1686, and it was republished posthumously in English in 1706.
Some of the books in Locke's library at the Bodleian are a combination of manuscript and print.
Locke had some of his books interleaved, meaning that they were bound with blank sheets in-between the printed pages to enable annotations.
Locke interleaved and annotated his five volumes of the New Testament in French, Greek, and Latin (Bodleian Locke 9.103-107). Locke did the same with his copy of Thomas Hyde's Bodleian Library catalogue (Bodleian Locke 16.17), which Locke used to create a catalogue of his own library.
Writing
List of major works
Major posthumous manuscripts
c.1662. Second Tract of Government (or the Latin Tract)
Paul to the Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Ephesians
See also
Liberalism portal
List of liberal theorists
References
Notes
Kenyon (1977) adds: "Any unbiassed study of the position shows in fact that it was Filmer, not Hobbes, Locke or Sidney, who was the most influential thinker of the age" (p. 63).
Citations
Fumerton, Richard (2000). "Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Retrieved 19 August 2018.
David Bostock (2009). Philosophy of Mathematics: An Introduction.
Wiley-Blackwell. p. 43. All of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume supposed that mathematics is a theory of our ideas, but none of them offered any argument for this conceptualist claim, and apparently took it to be uncontroversial.
John W. Yolton (2000). Realism and Appearances: An Essay in Ontology.
Cambridge University Press. p. 136.
"The Correspondence Theory of Truth". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 2020.
Grigoris Antoniou; John Slaney, eds. (1998). Advanced Topics in Artificial Intelligence.
Springer. p. 9.
Vere Claiborne Chappell, ed. (1994). The Cambridge Companion to Locke.
Cambridge University Press. p. 56.
a b Uzgalis, William (1 May 2018) [September 2, 2001]. "John Locke".  In E. N. Zalta (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Fallacies : classical and contemporary readings.
Hansen, Hans V., Pinto, Robert C. University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press. 1995. ISBN 978-0-271-01416-6. OCLC 30624864.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
Locke, John (1690). "Book IV, Chapter XVII: Of Reason". An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Retrieved 12 March 2015.
Locke, John (1690). Two Treatises of Government (10th edition): Chapter II, Section 6. Project Gutenberg.
Retrieved 5 May 2018.
Broad, Jacqueline (2006). "A Woman's Influence? John Locke and Damaris Masham on Moral Accountability". Journal of the History of Ideas. 67 (3): 489–510. doi:10.1353/jhi.2006.0022. JSTOR 30141038. S2CID 170381422.
a b Ducheyne, Steffen (2009). "The Flow of Influence: From Newton to Locke ... And Back". Rivista di Storia della Filosofia (1984-). 64 (2): 245–268. doi:10.3280/SF2009-002001. ISSN 0393-2516. JSTOR 44024132.
a b Rogers, G. A. J. (1978). "Locke's Essay and Newton's Principia". Journal of the History of Ideas. 39 (2): 217–232. doi:10.2307/2708776. ISSN 0022-5037. JSTOR 2708776.
Hirschmann, Nancy J. (2009). Gender, Class, and Freedom in Modern Political Theory.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 79.
Sharma, Urmila; S. K. Sharma (2006). Western Political Thought.
Washington: Atlantic Publishers. p. 440.
Korab-Karpowicz, W. Julian (2010). A History of Political Philosophy: From Thucydides to Locke.
New York: Global Scholarly Publications. p. 291.
Becker, Carl Lotus (1922). The Declaration of Independence: a Study in the History of Political Ideas.
New York: Harcourt, Brace. p. 27.
Foreword and study guide to John Locke's Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English, ISR Publications, 2013, page ii.
ISBN 9780906321690
Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008). From Plato to Derrida.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp. 527–29. ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1.
Broad, C. D. (2000). Ethics And the History of Philosophy.
UK: Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-22530-4.
Roger Woolhouse (2007). Locke: A Biography.
Cambridge University Press. p. 116.
Henning, Basil Duke (1983), The House of Commons, 1660–1690, vol. 1, ISBN 978-0-436-19274-6, retrieved 28 August 2012
Laslett 1988, III. Two Treatises of Government and the Revolution of 1688.
Rebecca Newberger Goldstein (2006). Betraying Spinoza: The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity.
New York: Schocken Books. pp. 260–61.
Rogers, Graham A. J. "John Locke". Britannica Online.
Retrieved 3 September 2019.
Hoppit, Julian (2000). A Land of Liberty? England. 1689–1727. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 195.
a b Kenyon, John (1977). Revolution Principles: The Politics of Party. 1689–1720. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Milton, John R. (2008) . "Locke, John (1632–1704)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/16885. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
"The Three Greatest Men". American Treasures of the Library of Congress.
Library of Congress.
August 2007. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Jefferson identified Bacon, Locke, and Newton as "the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception". Their works in the physical and moral sciences were instrumental in Jefferson's education and world view.
Jefferson, Thomas. "The Letters: 1743–1826 Bacon, Locke, and Newton". Archived from the original on 31 December 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2009. Bacon, Locke and Newton, whose pictures I will trouble you to have copied for me: and as I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical & Moral sciences.
"Jefferson called Bacon, Newton, and Locke, who had so indelibly shaped his ideas, "my trinity of the three greatest men the world had ever produced"". Explorer.
Monticello.
Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Seigel, Jerrold (2005). The Idea of the Self: Thought and Experience in Western Europe since the Seventeenth Century.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, Charles (1989). Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Schultz, Duane P. (2008). A History of Modern Psychology (ninth ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomas Higher Education. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-0-495-09799-0.
McGrath, Alister (1998). Historical Theology, An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. pp. 214–15.
a b c Heussi 1956.
Olmstead 1960, p. 18.
Stahl, H. (1957). "Baptisten". Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German). 3 (1), col. 863{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: postscript (link)
Halbrooks, G. Thomas; Erich Geldbach; Bill J. Leonard; Brian Stanley (2011). "Baptists". Religion Past and Present. doi:10.1163/1877-5888_rpp_COM_01472. ISBN 978-90-04-14666-2. Retrieved 2 June 2020..
Olmstead 1960, pp. 102–05.
Olmstead 1960, p. 5.
Cohen, Martin (2008), Philosophical Tales, Blackwell, p. 101.
Tully, James (2007), An Approach to Political Philosophy: Locke in Contexts, New York: Cambridge University Press, p. 128, ISBN 978-0-521-43638-0
Farr, J. (1986). "I. 'So Vile and Miserable an Estate': The Problem of Slavery in Locke's Political Thought". Political Theory. 14 (2): 263–89. doi:10.1177/0090591786014002005. JSTOR 191463. S2CID 145020766..
Farr, J. (2008). "Locke, Natural Law, and New World Slavery". Political Theory. 36 (4): 495–522. doi:10.1177/0090591708317899. S2CID 159542780..
Brewer 2017, p. 1052.
Brewer 2017, pp. 1053–1054.
Brewer 2017, pp. 1066 & 1072.
a b c Locke, John (1997a). "An Essay on the Poor Law".  In Mark Goldie (ed.). Locke: Political Essays.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Locke, John.  2017. Second Treatise of Government (10th ed.), digitized by D. Gowan.
Project Gutenberg.
Retrieved 2 June 2020.
Zuckert, Michael (1996), The Natural Rights Republic, Notre Dame University Press, pp. 73–85
Wills, Garry (2002), Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co
Skinner, Quentin, Visions of Politics, Cambridge.
Locke, John (2009), Two Treatises on Government: A Translation into Modern English, Industrial Systems Research, p. 81, ISBN 978-0-906321-47-8
"John Locke: Inequality is inevitable and necessary". Department of Philosophy The University of Hong Kong.
Archived from the original (MS PowerPoint) on 9 May 2009. Retrieved 1 September 2011.
Locke, John. "Second Treatise". The Founders Constitution. §§ 25–51, 123–26. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 1 September 2011.
Cliff, Cobb; Foldvary, Fred. "John Locke on Property". The School of Cooperative Individualism.
Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 14 October 2012.
Locke, John (1691), Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money, Marxists.
a b Vaughn, Karen (1978). "John Locke and the Labor Theory of Value" (PDF). Journal of Libertarian Studies. 2 (4): 311–26. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2011.
Locke 1997b, p. 307.
Locke 1997b, p. 306.
The American International Encyclopedia, vol. 9, New York: JJ Little Co, 1954.
Angus, Joseph (1880). The Handbook of Specimens of English Literature.
London: William Clowes and Sons. p. 324.
"Clarke [née Jepp], Mary". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/66720. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
a b Locke 1996, p. 10.
Locke 1997b, p. 357.
"Dreaming, Philosophy of – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". utm.edu.
Forster, Greg (2005), John Locke's politics of moral consensus.
Parker, Kim Ian (2004), The Biblical Politics of John Locke, Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion.
Locke, John (2002),  Nuovo, Victor (ed.), Writings on religion, Oxford.
a b Marshall, John (1994), John Locke: resistance, religion and responsibility, Cambridge, p. 426.
Wainwright, Arthur, W., ed. (1987). The Clarendon Edition of the Works of John Locke: A Paraphrase and Notes on the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Ephesians.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 806. ISBN 978-0-19-824806-4.
Waldron 2002, pp. 27, 223.
Nelson 2019, pp. 7–8.
Waldron 2002, p. 145.
Henrich, D (1960), "Locke, John", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German), 3. Auflage, Band IV, Spalte 426
Waldron 2002, pp. 217 ff.
a b Waldron 2002, p. 13.
Dunn, John (1969), The Political Thought of John Locke: A Historical Account of the Argument of the 'Two Treatises of Government', Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p. 99, [The Two Treatises of Government are] saturated with Christian assumptions..
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. 1994. "John Locke's Epistemological Piety: Reason Is The Candle Of The Lord." Faith and Philosophy 11(4):572–91.
Waldron 2002, p. 142.
Elze, M (1958), "Grotius, Hugo", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German) 2(3):1885–86.
Hohlwein, H (1961), "Pufendorf, Samuel Freiherr von", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German), 5(3):721.
Waldron 2002, p. 12.
Waldron 2002, pp. 22–43, 45–46, 101, 153–58, 195, 197.
Waldron 2002, pp. 21–43.
Waldron 2002, p. 136.
Locke, John (1947). Two Treatises of Government.
New York: Hafner Publishing Company. pp. 17–18, 35, 38.
Becker, Carl.
The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas. 1922. Google Book Search.
Revised edition New York: Vintage Books, 1970. ISBN 978-0-394-70060-1.
Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971). The Library of John Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 1.
a b c d Quoted in Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971). The Library of John Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 8.
Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971). The Library of John Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 57–61.
a b c d Bodleian Library. "Rare Books Named Collections".{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971). The Library of John Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 20.
Harrison, John; Laslett, Peter (1971). The Library of John Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 18.
a b c d e Clapinson, M, and TD Rogers. 1991. Summary Catalogue of Post-Medieval Western Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
Vol. 2. Oxford University Press.
The works of Robert Boyle, vol. 12. Edited by Michael Hunter and Edward B. Davis.
London: Pickering & Chatto, 2000, pp. xviii–xxi.
James Farr and Clayton Robers. “John Locke on the Glorious Revolution: a Rediscovered Document” Historical Journal 28 (1985): 395–98.
Richard Yeo, Notebooks, English Virtuosi (University of Chicago Press, 2014), 183.
John Locke, The Educational Writings of John Locke, ed.
James Axtell (Cambridge University Press, 1968), 421.
Richard Yeo, Notebooks, English Virtuosi (University of Chicago Press, 2014), 218.
G. G. Meynell, “John Locke’s Method of Common-Placing, as seen in His Drafts and His Medical Notebooks, Bodleian MSS Locke d. 9, f. 21 and f. 23,” The Seventeenth Century 8, no. 2 (1993): 248.
Michael Stolberg, “John Locke’s ‘New Method of Making Common-Place-Books’: Tradition, Innovation and Epistemic Effects,” Early Science and Medicine 19, no. 5 (2014): 448–70.
John Locke, A New Method of Making Common-Place-Books (London: Printed for J. Greenood, 1706), 4.
G. G. Meynell, “A Database for John Locke’s Medical Notebooks and Medical Reading,” Medical History 42 (1997): 478
"The manuscripts, Letter from Andrew Millar to Thomas Cadell, 16 July, 1765. University of Edinburgh". 
Locke, John.  1990. Questions Concerning the Law of Nature (definitive Latin text), translated by R. Horwitz, et al.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Sources
Ashcraft, Richard, 1986.  Revolutionary Politics & Locke's Two Treatises of Government.  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Discusses the relationship between Locke's philosophy and his political activities.
Ayers, Michael, 1991. Locke.
Epistemology & Ontology Routledge (the standard work on Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding.)
Bailyn, Bernard, 1992 (1967). The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution.
Harvard Uni.
Press.
Discusses the influence of Locke and other thinkers upon the American Revolution and on subsequent American political thought.
Brewer, Holly (October 2017). "Slavery, Sovereignty, and "Inheritable Blood": Reconsidering John Locke and the Origins of American Slavery". American Historical Review. 122 (4): 1038–1078. doi:10.1093/ahr/122.4.1038.
Cohen, Gerald, 1995. 'Marx and Locke on Land and Labour', in his Self-Ownership, Freedom and Equality, Oxford University Press.
Cox, Richard, Locke on War and Peace, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1960. A discussion of Locke's theory of international relations.
Chappell, Vere, ed., 1994. The Cambridge Companion to Locke.
Cambridge U.P. excerpt and text search
Dunn, John, 1984. Locke.
Oxford Uni.
Press.
A succinct introduction.
———, 1969. The Political Thought of John Locke: An Historical Account of the Argument of the "Two Treatises of Government". Cambridge Uni.
Press.
Introduced the interpretation which emphasises the theological element in Locke's political thought.
Heussi, Karl (1956), Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte (in German), Tübingen, DE
Hudson, Nicholas, "John Locke and the Tradition of Nominalism," in: Nominalism and Literary Discourse, ed.
Hugo Keiper, Christoph Bode, and Richard Utz (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1997), pp. 283–99.
Laslett, Peter (1988), Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press to Locke, John, Two Treatises of Government
Locke, John (1996),  Grant, Ruth W; Tarcov, Nathan (eds.), Some Thoughts Concerning Education and of the Conduct of the Understanding, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co, p. 10
Locke, John (1997b),  Woolhouse, Roger (ed.), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, New York: Penguin Books
Locke Studies, appearing annually from 2001, formerly The Locke Newsletter (1970–2000), publishes scholarly work on John Locke.
Mack, Eric (2008). "Locke, John (1632–1704)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 305–07. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n184. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Macpherson, C.B. The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962). Establishes the deep affinity from Hobbes to Harrington, the Levellers, and Locke through to nineteenth-century utilitarianism.
Moseley, Alexander (2007), John Locke: Continuum Library of Educational Thought, Continuum, ISBN 978-0-8264-8405-5
Nelson, Eric (2019). The Theology of Liberalism: Political Philosophy and the Justice of God.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-24094-0.
Olmstead, Clifton E (1960), History of Religion in the United States, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Robinson, Dave; Groves, Judy (2003), Introducing Political Philosophy, Icon Books, ISBN 978-1-84046-450-4
Rousseau, George S. (2004), Nervous Acts: Essays on Literature, Culture and Sensibility, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-4039-3453-6
Tully, James, 1980.  A Discourse on Property : John Locke and his Adversaries.
Cambridge Uni.
Press
Waldron, Jeremy (2002), God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-89057-1
Yolton, John W., ed., 1969. John Locke: Problems and Perspectives.
Cambridge Uni.
Press.
Yolton, John W., ed., 1993. A Locke Dictionary.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Zuckert, Michael, Launching Liberalism: On Lockean Political Philosophy.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
External links
John Locke  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Works
Works by John Locke in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
The Clarendon Edition of the Works of John Locke
Of the Conduct of the Understanding
Works by John Locke at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about John Locke at Internet Archive
Works by John Locke at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Work by John Locke at Online Books
The Works of John Locke
John Locke Manuscripts
Updated versions of Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Second Treatise of Government, Letter on Toleration and Conduct of the Understanding, edited (i.e. modernized and abridged) by Jonathan Bennett
Resources
"John Locke". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"John Locke: Epistemology". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
"John Locke: Political Philosophy". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Rickless, Samuel. "Locke on Freedom".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
John Locke Bibliography
Locke Studies An Annual Journal of Locke Research
Hewett, Caspar, John Locke's Theory of Knowledge, UK: The great debate.
The Digital Locke Project, NL, archived from the original on 1 January 2014, retrieved 27 February 2007.
Portraits of Locke, UK: NPG.
Huyler, Jerome, Was Locke a Liberal? (PDF), Independent, archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009, retrieved 2 August 2008, a complex and positive answer.
Kraynak, Robert P. (March 1980). "John Locke: from absolutism to toleration". American Political Science Review. 74 (1): 53–69. doi:10.2307/1955646. JSTOR 1955646. S2CID 146901427.
Anstey, Peter, John Locke and Natural Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2011.
Articles and topics related to John Locke
Age of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Lumières
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Universality
Weimar Classicism
ThinkersEngland
Joseph Addison
Anthony Ashley-Cooper
Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Anthony Collins
Edward Gibbon
William Godwin
James Harrington
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
John Milton
Isaac Newton
Alexander Pope
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Joshua Reynolds
Algernon Sidney
Matthew Tindal
John Trenchard
Mary Wollstonecraft
France
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
René Louis d'Argenson
Pierre Bayle
Pierre Beaumarchais
Nicolas Chamfort
Émilie du Châtelet
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
René Descartes
Denis Diderot
Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle
Olympe de Gouges
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Baron d'Holbach
Louis de Jaucourt
Julien Offray de La Mettrie
Antoine Lavoisier
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Maréchal
Jean Meslier
Montesquieu
Étienne-Gabriel Morelly
Blaise Pascal
François Quesnay
Guillaume Thomas François Raynal
Marquis de Sade
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Firmin Abauzit
Charles Bonnet
Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui
Jean-Louis de Lolme
Pierre Prévost
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Antoine-Jacques Roustan
Horace Bénédict de Saussure
Jacob Vernes
Jacob Vernet
Germany
Justus Henning Böhmer
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Immanuel Kant
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg
Moses Mendelssohn
Samuel von Pufendorf
Friedrich Schiller
Christian Thomasius
Gabriel Wagner
Christian Felix Weiße
Adam Weishaupt
Christoph Martin Wieland
Thomas Wizenmann
Christian Wolff
Greece
Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais
Ireland
George Berkeley
Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke
Jonathan Swift
John Toland
Italy
Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Ferdinando Galiani
Luigi Galvani
Antonio Genovesi
Francesco Mario Pagano
Giovanni Salvemini
Pietro Verri
Giambattista Vico
Netherlands
Balthasar Bekker
Pieter de la Court
Petrus Cunaeus
Hugo Grotius
François Hemsterhuis
Christiaan Huygens
Adriaan Koerbagh
Frederik van Leenhof
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Bernard Nieuwentyt
Baruch Spinoza
Jan Swammerdam
Hendrik Wyermars
Poland
Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Stanisław Staszic
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski
Portugal
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Ion Budai-Deleanu
Dinicu Golescu
Petru Maior
Samuil Micu-Klein
Gheorghe Șincai
Russia
Catherine II
Denis Fonvizin
Antiochus Kantemir
Mikhail Kheraskov
Mikhail Lomonosov
Nikolay Novikov
Alexander Radishchev
Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Dositej Obradović
Avram Mrazović
Spain
José Cadalso
Charles III
Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro
Leandro Fernández de Moratín
Valentin de Foronda
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos
Martín Sarmiento
Diego de Torres Villarroel
Scotland
James Beattie
Joseph Black
Hugh Blair
James Boswell
James Burnett
Robert Burns
William Cullen
Adam Ferguson
Thomas Gordon
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
James Hutton
James Mill
John Millar
Isaac Newton
William Ogilvie
John Playfair
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Dugald Stewart
United States
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine
Romanticism 
Category
LiberalismIdeas
Civil and political rights
Democracy
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural rights and legal rights
Natural law
Negative/Positive liberty
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state
SchoolsClassical
Economic
Fiscal
Neo
Equity feminism
Georgist
Radical
Anti-clerical
Civic nationalism
Republican
Utilitarian
Conservative
Democratic
Liberal conservatism
National
Ordo
Social
Green
Liberal feminism
Ecofeminism
Liberal socialism
Social democracy
Progressivism
Third Way
Other
Constitutional
Constitutional patriotism
Cultural
Corporate
International
Libertarianism
Left-libertarianism
Geolibertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Right-libertarianism
Radical centrism
Religious
Christian
Islamic
Secular
Techno
By regionAfrica
Egypt
Nigeria
Senegal
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe
Asia
China
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Israel
Japan
South Korea
Progressive
Philippines
Turkey
Kemalism
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Orléanist
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Berlusconism
Liberism
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Gladstonian
Libertarian
Manchester
Muscular
Radical
Whiggist
Latin America andthe Caribbean
Bolivia
Brazil
Lulism
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
North America
Canada
United States
Arizona School
Jacksonian
Jeffersonian
Libertarian
Modern
Progressive
Oceania
Australia
Small-l
New Zealand
Key FiguresSee also:History ofLiberalism
Acton
Alberdi
Allais
Arnold
Aron
Artigas
Badawi
Bălcescu
Barante
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Betances
Beveridge
Blum
Bobbio
Brentano
Bright
Broglie
Burke
Čapek
Cassirer
Cavour
Chicherin
Chu
Chydenius
Cobden
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Croly
Cuoco
Deák
Deakin
Dewey
Dickens
Diderot
Dongsun
Dworkin
Einaudi
Emerson
Eötvös
Fukuyama
Friedman
Galbraith
Garrett
Garrison
Gladstone
Gobetti
Gokhale
Gray
Green
Grundtvig
Gu
Guizot
Harrison
Havlíček
Hayek
Herbert
Herder
Hobbes
Hobhouse
Hobson
Hu
Humboldt
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jovanović
Juárez
Jubani
Kairis
Kant
Kelsen
Kemal
Keynes
King
Kołłątaj
Korais
Kossuth
Kymlicka
Lamartine
La Mennais
Larra
Lastarria
Lelewel
Levski
Li
Lincoln
List
Lloyd George
Locke
Lufti
Macaulay
Madariaga
Madero
Madison
Martí
Martineau
Masterman
Mažuranić
Mazzini
Menzies
Michelet
Mill (James)
Mill (John Stuart)
Milton
Milyukov
Molteno
Mommsen
Montalembert
Montesquieu
Mora
Nakae
Naoroji
Naumann
Nitti
Ohlin
Ortega
Ozaki
Paine
Paton
Pino Suárez
Pearson
Popper
Price
Priestley
Prieto
Qin
Quinet
Radishchev
Ramírez
Rathenau
Rawls
Raz
Renan
Renouvier
Ricardo
Rogers
Röpke
Rorty
Roosevelt
Rosetti
Rosmini
Rosselli
Rousseau
Ruggiero
Sarmiento
Say
Sen
Shaftesbury
Shklar
Sidney
Sieyès
Şinasi
Sismondi
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Staël
Ståhlberg
Stein
Tahtawi
Tao
Tavčar
Thierry
Thorbecke
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tracy
Treub
Troeltsch
Turgot
Venizelos
Voltaire
Ward
Weber
Wollstonecraft
Zambrano
Organisations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network
Liberalism Portal
MetaphysicsMetaphysicians
Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Christian Wolff
Bernard Bolzano
Hermann Lotze
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
G. E. Moore
Gilles Deleuze
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
W. V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
D. M. Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Héctor-Neri Castañeda
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
Alexius Meinong
Ernst Mally
Edward N. Zalta
more ...
Theories
Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Platonic realism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Truthmaker theory
Type theory
Concepts
Abstract object
Anima mundi
Category of being
Causality
Causal closure
Choice
Cogito, ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Nature
Necessity
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical object
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Relation
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...
Related topics
Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Feminist metaphysics
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Mereology
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Category
Philosophy portal
EpistemologyEpistemologists
Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
Gilles Deleuze
Keith DeRose
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
Anil Gupta
Susan Haack
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Peter Klein
Saul Kripke
Hilary Kornblith
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
John McDowell
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Duncan Pritchard
James Pryor
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Reid
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
Wilfrid Sellars
Susanna Siegel
Ernest Sosa
P. F. Strawson
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle
more...
Theories
Coherentism
Constructivism
Contextualism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representational realism
Skepticism
Transcendental idealism
Concepts
A priori knowledge
A posteriori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Epistemic injustice
Gettier problem
Induction
Internalism and externalism
Justification
Knowledge
Objectivity
Privileged access
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Procedural knowledge
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...
Related articles
Outline of epistemology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Metaepistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
PropertyBy owner
Collective
Common
Communal
Community
Crown
Customary
Cooperative
Private
Public
Self
Social
State
Unowned
By nature
Estate
Croft
Intangible
Intellectual
indigenous
Personal
Tangible
real
Commons
Common land
Common-pool resource
Digital
Global
Information
Knowledge
Theory
Bundle of rights
Commodity
fictitious commodities
Common good (economics)
Excludability
First possession
appropriation
homestead principle
Free-rider problem
Game theory
Georgism
Gift economy
Labor theory of property
Law of rent
rent-seeking
Legal plunder
Natural rights
Ownership
Property rights
primogeniture
usufruct
women's
Right to property
Rivalry
Tragedy of the commons
anticommons
Applications
Acequia (watercourse)
Ejido (agrarian land)
Forest types
Huerta
Inheritance
Land tenure
Property law
alienation
easement
restraint on alienation
real estate
title
Rights
Air
Fishing
Forest-dwelling (India)
Freedom to roam
Grazing
pannage
Hunting
Land
aboriginal
indigenous
squatting
Littoral
Mineral
Bergregal
Right of way
Water
prior-appropriation
riparian
Disposession/redistribution
Bioprospecting
Collectivization
Eminent domain
Enclosure
Eviction
Expropriation
Farhud
Forced migration
population transfer
Illegal fishing
Illegal logging
Land reform
Legal plunder
Piracy
Poaching
Primitive accumulation
Privatization
Regulatory taking
Slavery
bride buying
human trafficking
spousal
husband-selling
wife selling
wage
Tax
inheritance
poll
progressive
property
Theft
Scholars(key work)
Frédéric Bastiat
The Law
Ronald Coase
Friedrich Engels
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State
Henry George
Progress and Poverty
Garrett Hardin
David Harvey
John Locke
Two Treatises of Government
Karl Marx
Das Kapital
Marcel Mauss
The Gift
John Stuart Mill
Elinor Ostrom
Karl Polanyi
The Great Transformation
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
What Is Property?
David Ricardo
Murray N. Rothbard
The Ethics of Liberty
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
The Social Contract
Adam Smith
The Wealth of Nations
Property law
by country
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Philosophy of educationPhilosophers
John Dewey
John Locke
Jean Piaget
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
more...
Concepts
Active learning
Student-centred learning
What to teach
Classicism
Contemplative education
Critical pedagogy
Critical theory
Critical thinking
Democratic education
Educational essentialism
Educational existentialism
Educational perennialism
Idealism
Popular education
Pragmatism
Progressive education
Realism
Social Reconstructionism
Theism
How and whom to teach
Behaviorism (philosophy of education)
Cognitivism (philosophy of education)
Compulsory education
Constructivism (philosophy of education)
Criticism of schooling
Humanism (philosophy of education)
Montessori education
Unschooling
Waldorf education
Related
Cognitive science
Psychology
Category
Discussion
American Revolutionary WarOrigins of the American RevolutionPhilosophy
American Enlightenment
John Locke
Colonial history
Liberalism
Republicanism
Freedom of religion
Rights of Englishmen
Common Sense
Spirit of '76
"All men are created equal"
"Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness"
"Consent of the governed"
Royalists
Pitt–Newcastle ministry
Bute ministry
Grenville ministry
First Rockingham ministry
Chatham ministry
Grafton ministry
North ministry
Second Rockingham ministry
Shelburne ministry
Fox–North coalition
Loyalists
Black Loyalist
Related BritishActs of Parliament
Navigation
Iron
Molasses
Royal Proclamation of 1763
Sugar
Currency
Quartering
Stamp
Declaratory
Townshend
Tea
Quebec
Intolerable
Conciliatory Resolution
Restraining
Proclamation of Rebellion
Prohibitory
Colonials
Stamp Act Congress
Declaration of Rights and Grievances
Virginia Association
Sons of Liberty
Patriots
Black Patriots
Committees of correspondence
Committees of safety
Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania
Massachusetts Circular Letter
Suffolk Resolves
First Continental Congress
Continental Association
Minutemen
Provincial Congress
Second Continental Congress
United Colonies
Olive Branch Petition
Committee of Secret Correspondence
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union
Confederation Congress
Events
French and Indian War
Treaty of Paris (1763)
Boston Massacre
Crisis of 1772
Gaspee Affair
Hutchinson Letters Affair
Boston Tea Party
Powder Alarm
Combatants
Campaigns
Theaters
Battles
Events
Colonies
CombatantsThirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Army
Navy
Marines
Kingdom of Great Britain
Parliament
British Army
Royal Navy
German auxiliaries
Colonial allies
France
army
navy
Hortalez et Cie
Campaigns andtheaters
Boston
Quebec
Nova Scotia
New York and New Jersey
Saratoga
Philadelphia
Northern
Northern after Saratoga
Southern
Western
Yorktown
Naval battles
Major battles
Lexington and Concord
Boston
Capture of Fort Ticonderoga
Bunker Hill
Quebec
Valcour Island
Long Island
Harlem Heights
Fort Washington
Trenton
Assunpink Creek
Princeton
Siege of Fort Ticonderoga
Bennington
Saratoga
Brandywine
Germantown
Monmouth
St.
Lucia
Grenada
Stony Point
Sullivan Expedition
Savannah
Gibraltar
Cape St.
Vincent
Charleston
Connecticut Farms
Springfield
Camden
Kings Mountain
Cowpens
Guilford Court House
Lochry's Defeat
Yorktown
Saintes
Other events
Staten Island Peace Conference
"First Salute"
Washington's crossing of the Delaware River
Conway Cabal
Valley Forge
Entry of France into war
Carlisle Peace Commission
Gordon Riots
Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1781
Sint Eustatius
Newburgh Conspiracy
Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783
Related conflicts
Cherokee–American wars
Fourth Anglo-Dutch War
Second Anglo-Mysore War
Involvement (by colony or location)Rebel colonies
Connecticut
Delaware
Georgia
Maryland
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
North Carolina
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Virginia
Loyal colonies
East Florida
Nova Scotia
Quebec
West Florida
LeadersBritishMilitary
Arbuthnot
Brant
Burgoyne
Campbell
Carleton
Clinton
Cornwallis
Fraser
Gage
Graves
Richard Howe
William Howe
Knyphausen
Rodney
Civilian
King George III
Amherst
Barrington
Germain
North
Rockingham
Sandwich
Shelburne
ColonialMilitary
Washington
Alexander
Allen
Arnold
Barry
Claghorn
Clark
Duportail
Gates
Greene
Hamilton
Hopkins
Jones
de Kalb
Knox
Lafayette
Charles Lee
Lincoln
Mercer
Montgomery
Nicholson
Putnam
Rodney
St.
Clair
Schuyler
von Steuben
Sullivan
Ward
Wayne
Civilian
John Adams
Samuel Adams
Carroll
Dickinson
Franklin
Hancock
Hanson
Henry
Huntington
Jay
Jefferson
Laurens
Richard Henry Lee
McKean
Morris
Revere
Rush
Witherspoon
Colonial alliesFrench
Louis XVI
Beaumarchais
d'Estaing
de Grasse
de Guichen
Luzerne
de Rochambeau
Suffren
Vergennes
Aftermath
Society of the Cincinnati
Treaty of Paris (1783)
Ratification Day (1784)
Constitutional Convention
The Federalist Papers
Constitution
Bill of Rights
Shays' Rebellion
Jay Treaty
Related topics
Military
Prisoners
The Turtle
Political
Founding Fathers
Diplomacy
Liberty Tree
Yankee Doodle
Other topics
Timeline of the American Revolution
African Americans in the Revolutionary War
Dogs in the American Revolutionary War
Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War
Women in the American Revolution
Financial costs of the war
Libertas Americana
Commemoration
film
television
theater
minor holidays
Portal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
zbMATH
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
RERO (Switzerland)
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 29 September 2022, at 18:37 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
