Lagos - Wikipedia
Lagos
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Metropolis in Nigeria
This article is about the city, officially known as Lagos Metropolis Area.
For other uses, see Lagos (disambiguation).
Metropolis in NigeriaLagos
ÈkóMetropolisFrom top, left to right: Tinubu Square, array of skyscrapers, Lekki-Epe Expressway, National Arts Theatre.
Third Mainland Bridge
FlagNickname(s): Eko akete, LasgidiMotto: Èkó ò ní bàjé o!Lagos shown within the State of LagosLagosLocation of Lagos in NigeriaShow map of LagosLagosLagos (Nigeria)Show map of NigeriaLagosLagos (Africa)Show map of AfricaLagosLagos (North Atlantic)Show map of North AtlanticLagosLagos (Earth)Show map of EarthCoordinates: 6°27′18″N 3°23′03″E﻿ / ﻿6.455027°N 3.384082°E﻿ / 6.455027; 3.384082Coordinates: 6°27′18″N 3°23′03″E﻿ / ﻿6.455027°N 3.384082°E﻿ / 6.455027; 3.384082Country NigeriaStateLagosLGA(s)[note 1]
List of LGAs
Island Apapa Eti-Osa[a] Lagos Island
MainlandAjeromi-IfelodunLagos MainlandSurulere
Suburban Agege  Alimosho Ifako-Ijaiye  Ikeja Kosofe Mushin Ojo Oshodi-Isolo Shomolu Amuwo-Odofin 
Settled15th centuryFounded byAwori subgroup of the YorubaGovernment • Governor of LagosBabajide Sanwo-Olu • Deputy GovernorFemi Hamzat • Supreme JudgeKazeem AlogbaArea • Metropolis1,171.28 km2 (452.23 sq mi) • Land999.6 km2 (385.9 sq mi) • Water171.68 km2 (66.29 sq mi) • Urban907 km2 (350 sq mi) • Metro2,706.7 km2 (1,045.1 sq mi)Elevation41 m (135 ft)Population (2006 census)[note 1] • Metropolis8,048,430 • Estimate (2018 by LASG)23,437,435 • Rank1st • Density6,871/km2 (17,800/sq mi) • Urban15,388,000 • Urban density14,469/km2 (37,470/sq mi) • Metro21,320,000 (estimated) • Metro density7,759/km2 (20,100/sq mi)DemonymLagosianTime zoneUTC+1Area code010ClimateAw
Only Ikoyi-Obalande and Iru-Victoria Island LCDAs
Lagos (Nigerian English: /ˈleɪɡɒs/; Yoruba: Èkó) is the largest city in Nigeria and the second most populous city in Africa, with a population of 15.4 million as of 2015 within the city proper. 
Lagos was the national capital of Nigeria until December 1991 following the government's decision to move their capital to Abuja in the centre of the country.
The Lagos metropolitan area has a total population of roughly 23.5 million as of 2018, making it the largest metropolitan area in Africa.
Lagos is a major African financial centre and is the economic hub of Lagos State and Nigeria at large.
The city has been described as the cultural, financial, and entertainment capital of Africa, and is a significant influence on commerce, entertainment, technology, education, politics, tourism, art,  and fashion.
Lagos is also among the top ten of the world's fastest-growing cities and urban areas.
The megacity has the fourth-highest GDP in Africa and houses one of the largest and busiest seaports on the continent.
The Lagos metropolitan area is a major educational and cultural centre in Sub Saharan Africa.
Lagos initially emerged as a home to the Awori subgroup of the Yoruba of West Africa and later emerged as a port city of the Benin Empire that originated on a collection of islands, which are contained in the present day Local Government Areas (LGAs) of Lagos Island, Eti-Osa, Amuwo-Odofin and Apapa.
The islands are separated by creeks, fringing the southwest mouth of Lagos Lagoon, while being protected from the Atlantic Ocean by barrier islands and long sand spits such as Bar Beach, which stretch up to 100 km (62 mi) east and west of the mouth.
Due to rapid urbanization, the city expanded to the west of the lagoon to include areas in the present day Lagos Mainland, Ajeromi-Ifelodun and Surulere.
This led to the classification of Lagos into two main areas: the Island, which was the original city of Lagos, and the Mainland, which it has since expanded into.
This city area was governed directly by the Federal Government through the Lagos City Council, until the creation of Lagos State in 1967, which led to the splitting of Lagos city into the present day seven Local Government Areas (LGAs), and an addition of other towns (which now make up 13 LGAs) from the then Western Region to form the state.
However, the state capital was later moved to Ikeja in 1976, and the federal capital moved to Abuja in 1991. Even though Lagos is still widely referred to as a city, the present-day Lagos, also known as "Metropolitan Lagos", and officially as "Lagos Metropolitan Area" is an urban agglomeration or conurbation, consisting of 16 LGAs including Ikeja, the state capital of Lagos State.
This conurbation makes up 37% of Lagos State total land area, but houses about 85% of the state's total population.
The exact population of Metropolitan Lagos is disputed.
In the 2006 federal census data, the conurbation had a population of about 8 million people.
However, the figure was disputed by the Lagos State Government, which later released its own population data, putting the population of Lagos Metropolitan Area at approximately 16 million.[note 1] Daily, the Lagos area is growing by some 3,000 people, or around 1.1 million annually, so the true population figure of the greater Lagos area in 2022 is roughly 28 million (up from some 23.5 million in 2018). Lagos may therefore have overtaken Kinshasa as Africa's most populous city.
As of 2015, unofficial figures put the population of "Greater Metropolitan Lagos", which includes Lagos and its surrounding metro area, extending as far as into Ogun State, at approximately 21 million.
Contents
History
Main article: History of Lagos
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Lagos.
Aerial view of Lagos in 1929
Lagos was originally inhabited by the Awori subgroup of the Yoruba people in the 15th century.
The Awori moved to an island now called Iddo and then to the larger Lagos Island.
The Aworis who were predominantly fishermen and hunters, called it Oko.
Because the area was dominated by the then expansive Oyo Empire, they called it Eko, from the late 16th century to the mid-19th century.
The name Eko was given to it by its first Awori traditional settlers, Oba Ado.
Eko is still the native name for Lagos to date.
Lagos (Portuguese for "lakes") was a name given to the settlement by the Portuguese.
Throughout history, it was home to a number of warring ethnic Yoruba groups who had settled in the area.
Following its early settlement by the Awori nobility, the state first came to the attention of the Portuguese in the 15th century.
Portuguese explorer Rui de Sequeira visited the area in 1472, naming the area around the city Lago de Curamo, which means Lake of Curamo.
In Britain's early 19th century fight against the transatlantic slave trade, its West Africa Squadron or Preventative Squadron as it was also known, continued to pursue Portuguese, American, French and Cuban slave ships and to impose anti-slavery treaties with West African coastal chiefs with so much doggedness that they created a strong presence along the West African coast from Sierra Leone all the way to the Niger Delta (today's Nigeria) and as far south as Congo.
In 1849, Britain appointed John Beecroft Consul of the Bights of Benin and Biafra, a position he held (along with his governorship of Fernando Po) until his death in 1854. John Duncan was appointed Vice Consul and was located at Wydah.
At the time of Beecroft's appointment, the Kingdom of Lagos (under Oba Kosoko) was in the western part of the Consulate of the Bights of Benin and Biafra and was a key slave trading port.
In 1851 and with pressure from liberated slaves who now wielded political and business influence, Britain intervened in Lagos in what is now known as the Bombardment of Lagos or Capture of Lagos resulting in the installation of Oba Akitoye and the ouster of Oba Kosoko.
Oba Akitoye then signed the Treaty between Great Britain and Lagos abolishing slavery.
The signing of the 1852 treaty ushered in the Consular Period in Lagos' history wherein Britain provided military protection for Lagos.
Following threats from Kosoko and the French who were positioned at Wydah, a decision was made by Lord Palmerston (British Prime Minister) who noted in 1861, "the expediency of losing no time in assuming the formal Protectorate of Lagos". William McCoskry, the Acting Consul in Lagos with Commander Bedingfield convened a meeting with Oba Dosunmu on 30 July 1861 aboard HMS Prometheus where Britain's intent was explained and a response to the terms were required by August 1861. Dosunmu resisted the terms of the treaty but under the threat to unleash a bombardment on Lagos by Commander Bedingfield, Dosunmu relented and signed the Lagos Treaty of Cession on 6 August 1861.
Map of Lagos' initial city boundaries, showing its contemporary districts.
This definition is rarely used in the present day; the expanded metropolitan area is now a more accepted definition of Lagos.
Lagos was declared a colony on 5 March 1862. The remainder of modern-day Nigeria was seized in 1887, and when the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria was established in 1914, Lagos became its capital, continuing as such after the country's independence from Britain in 1960. Along with migrants from all over Nigeria and other West African nations were the returnee ex-slaves known as Creoles, who came from Freetown, Sierra Leone, Brazil and the West Indies to Lagos.
The Creoles contributed to Lagos' modernisation and their knowledge of Portuguese architecture can still be seen from the architecture on Lagos Island.
Since the 19th century, Lagos gradually transformed to a melting pot of Africans and Europeans.
Railway links and telephone cables connecting Lagos to London had been established by 1886. Electric street lighting was introduced in the city in 1898. Lagos experienced rapid growth throughout the 1960s and 1970s as a result of Nigeria's economic boom.
Before the creation of Lagos State on 27 May 1967, Lagos, which was the country's capital had been administered directly by the Federal Government as a Federal Territory through the Federal Ministry of Lagos Affairs, while the Lagos City Council (LCC) governed the city.
Lagos, along with the towns from the then Western region (Ikeja, Agege, Mushin, Ikorodu, Epe and Badagry), were eventually captured to create Lagos State.
Lagos city was split into the present day seven Local Government Areas (LGAs), while the other towns now make up 13 LGAs in the state.
Lagos played the dual role of being the State and Federal Capital until 1976 when the state capital was moved to Ikeja.
Lagos was adversely affected during Nigeria's military rule.
Also, on 12 December 1991, the seat of the Federal Government was also formally relocated to Abuja.
However, Lagos remains the financial centre of the country, and also grew to become the most populous conurbation in the country.
Geography
Lagos is loosely classified into two main geographical areas—the "Island" and the "Mainland".
Cityscape
Main article: Architecture of Lagos
Lekki Conservation Centre canopy walk
Lagos has the tallest skyline in Nigeria.
The architectural styles in Lagos are diverse and range from tropical and vernacular to colonial European and ultramodern buildings or a mixture.
Brazilian style architecture brought by the creoles is evident in buildings such as Water House and  Shitta Bey Mosque.
Skyscrapers and most high rise buildings are centered on the islands, while the mainland has some high rise buildings.
In recent years, the Lagos State government has renovated existing parks and green areas, with a long-term goal of expansion.
Many good quality buildings are interspersed across the city.
Island
The Island is a loose geographical term that is used to define the area of Lagos that is separated from the "Mainland" by the main channel draining the lagoon into the Atlantic Ocean, which forms Lagos Harbour.
The Island is mainly a collection of Islands that are separated from each other by creeks of varying sizes and are connected by bridges.
The smaller sections of some creeks have been dredged and built over.
This part of Lagos is the area where most business activities and entertainment events in Lagos take place.
It also houses most of the upscale residential areas in Lagos.
The Local Government Areas (LGAs) that are considered to be in the Island include Lagos Island and Eti-Osa.
The major upscale Island neighbourhoods within these LGAs include Ikoyi and Victoria Island.
Three major bridges join the Island to the Mainland.
They are the Carter Bridge, which starts from Iddo; the Eko Bridge (formerly called the Second Mainland Bridge); and the Third Mainland Bridge, which passes through densely populated mainland suburbs to the Lagos Lagoon.
The Ikoyi link bridge links Ikoyi and Lekki Phase 1, both of which are part of the Island.
Construction on the Fourth Mainland Bridge will commence in 2022, according to Lagos State Governor, Babajide Sanwo-Olu.
Lagos Island
Main article: Lagos Island
Lagos Marina
Lagos Island contains a central business district.
This district is characterized by high-rise buildings.
The Island also contains many of the city's largest wholesale marketplaces (such as the popular Idumota and Balogun Markets). It also has the National Museum of Nigeria, the Central Mosque, the Glover Memorial Hall, Christ's Church Cathedral (CMS) and the Oba's Palace (Iga Idunganran). Another major part of Lagos Island is Marina.
It borders around the idumota and Balogun markets and houses major Banking institutions.
Though formerly in a derelict condition, Lagos Island's Tinubu Square is a site of historical importance; it was here that the Amalgamation Ceremony that unified the North and South protectorate to form Nigeria took place in 1914.
Ikoyi
Main article: Ikoyi
Aerial view of Ikoyi
Ikoyi is situated on the eastern half of Lagos Island and joined to it by a landfill.
Ikoyi is also connected to Victoria Island by Falomo bridge, which carries the main road over Five Cowrie creek.
Falomo garden, a green public space which was developed by the state government in conjunction with Fidelity Bank in 2017, is located under the bridge.
Ikoyi housed the headquarters of the federal government of Nigeria and other buildings owned by the government, including the old federal secretariat complex.
The complex today is on reestablishment.
In Ikoyi there are military and police barracks, a top-security prison and a federal high court of Nigeria.
Ikoyi also has a number of hotels, night clubs, a recreational park and one of Africa's largest golf courses.
Originally a middle class neighbourhood, in recent years, it has become a fashionable residential enclave for the upper middle class to the upper class.
There are also commercial activities in Ikoyi, which is spotted in an increasing number of offices, banks, and shopping complexes.
The commercial section is concentrated in the South-West.
Victoria Island
Main article: Victoria Island (Nigeria)
Victoria Island
Civic Towers, Victoria Island, Lagos
Victoria Island with its annexe is situated to the south of Lagos Island  and known with a zip code of 101241 as assigned by NIPOST. It has expensive real estate properties and for that reason, many new luxury condos and apartments are blooming up everywhere.
Along with Ikoyi, Victoria Island occupies a major area in Lagos that boasts of several sizeable shopping districts.
On its sea shore along the Atlantic front, there is environmentally reconstructed Bar Beach.
Ajah/Lekki
The Lekki Peninsula shares some prestige with its Ikoyi and Victoria Island neighbours.
Development has stretched the piece of land further such that the Ibeju axis, though closer to Epe (which is literally on the outskirts of Lagos) is almost always described as part of Lekki.  The expanse of land starts from the Lekki toll gate, which was the focal stage of the famous #EndSars protest in October 2019, and ends in Ibeju-Lekki and boasts of communities slowly inching their way to suburb status such as Ajah, Awoyaya, Sangotedo, Abijo and Eputu.
There's quite a bit of places to see – the Lekki Conservation Centre; The Novare Mall; The Lekki Free Trade Zone – Dangote, Africa's richest man is building his refinery in this FTZ; Lagos Business School; Eleko Beach; Elegushi Beach; La Camaigne Tropicana – a beach/tourist getaway, Pan-Atlantic University.
The area even boasts of a Catholic monastery.
Iddo
Across the main channel of the lagoon from Lagos Island, there is a smaller settlement called Iddo.
Iddo is also a railroad terminus and it is now situated in the Lagos Mainland Local Government Area after it was connected to the Mainland like a peninsula.
Mainland
A huge population of Lagosians also live on the Lagos Mainland, and most industries are located there.
The Mainland is known for its music and nightlife, which used to be located in areas around Yaba and Surulere.
However, in recent years more night clubs have sprung up on the Island, making the Island (particularly Victoria Island, Ikate and Lekki Phase 1) the main nightlife attractions.
Mainland LGAs include Surulere, Apapa, and Lagos Mainland.
Metropolitan Lagos suburban LGAs include: Agege, Amuwo Odofin, Mushin, Oshodi-Isolo and Ikeja (site of Murtala Muhammed International Airport and the capital of Lagos State).
Major areas on the Mainland include Ebute Metta, Yaba and Ejigbo.
Some rivers, like Badagry Creek, flow parallel to the coast for some distance before exiting through the sand bars to the sea.
Climate
Lagos experiences a tropical savanna climate (Aw) according to the Köppen climate classification, as there are four months under 60 mm or 2.4 in of rain, and annual rainfall is not nearly high enough for tropical monsoon classification.
The wet season starts in March and ends in October, while the dry season starts in November and ends in February.
The wettest month is June with precipitation total 315.5 mm or 12.42 in, while the driest month is January with precipitation total 13.2 mm or 0.52 in.
Located near the equator, Lagos has only a slight seasonal temperature variation, with mean high temperatures ranging from 28.3 to 32.9 °C (82.9 to 91.2 °F). Lagos shares the seasons of the Southern Hemisphere, with highest temperatures in March with a daily range from 32.9 to 24.1 °C (91.2 to 75.4 °F), and least hot temperatures in August ranging from 28.3 to 21.8 °C (82.9 to 71.2 °F).
Climate data for Lagos (Murtala Muhammed International Airport) 1961–1990, extremes: 1886–present
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °C (°F)
Average high °C (°F)
Daily mean °C (°F)
Average low °C (°F)
Record low °C (°F)
Average precipitation mm (inches)
1,506.6(59.31)
Average precipitation days (≥ 1.0 mm)
1.5
2.8
6.6
9.0
4.9
2.1
Average relative humidity (%)
Average dew point °C (°F)
Mean monthly sunshine hours
1,843.9
Mean daily sunshine hours
5.3
6.1
5.6
6.0
5.7
3.8
3.2
3.5
3.8
5.4
6.2
6.2
5.1
Source 1: Deutscher Wetterdienst (humidity, 1952–1967), NOAA (monthly sun hours)
Source 2: Meteo Climat (record highs and lows)
Time and Date (dewpoints, 2005-2015)
Weather Atlas (daily sun hours)
Demographics
In terms of administration, Lagos is not a single municipality and therefore has no overall city administration.
The geographical city limits of Metropolitan Lagos comprise 16 of the 20 Local Government Areas of Lagos State.
The latter entity provides overall government for the metropolitan region.
The former Municipality of Lagos, which covered Lagos Island, Ikoyi, and Victoria Island as well as some mainland territory, was managed by the Lagos City Council (LCC), but it was disbanded in 1976 and divided into several Local Government Areas (most notably Lagos Island LGA, Lagos Mainland LGA and Eti-Osa LGA).
The mainland beyond the Municipality of Lagos, on the other hand, included several separate towns and settlements such as Mushin, Ikeja and Agege.
In the wake of the 1970s Nigerian oil boom, Lagos experienced a population explosion, untamed economic growth, and unmitigated rural migration.
This caused the outlying towns and settlements to develop rapidly, thus forming the present day "Lagos Metropolitan Area", also known as "Metropolitan Lagos". The history of Lagos is still evidenced in the layout of the LGAs that display the unique identities of the cultures that created them.
By 2006, the metro area around Lagos had extended beyond Lagos State's boundaries and attained a megacity status.
This much larger area is referred to as "Greater Metropolitan Lagos" or "Lagos Megacity Region", which is a continuous built up land area of an additional 1,535.4 square kilometres (592.8 square miles), in LGAs situated next to Lagos' eastern and western city limits in Lagos State, and also beyond its northern limits, spilling into some LGAs in adjoining Ogun State.
Ogun State LGAs that have become part of Greater Metropolitan Lagos include Obafemi Owode, Sagamu, Ifo, Ado-Odo/Ota and part of Ewekoro.
The 16 LGAs of Metropolitan Lagos
Local Government Area
Land area(in km2)
Population(2006 Census)
Density(inh. per km2)
Agege
Ajeromi-Ifelodun
Alimosho
1,277,714
6,899
Amuwo-Odofin
2,364
Apapa
8,153
Eti-Osa
1,496
Ifako-Ijaiye
Ikeja
6,785
Kosofe
8,174
Lagos Island
Lagos Mainland
Mushin
Ojo
3,781
Oshodi-Isolo
Somolu
Surulere
Metropolitan Lagos
1,171.28
7,937,932
7,941
A map showing the 16 LGAs making up Lagos Metropolitan Area
Today, the word Lagos most often refers to the urban area, called "Metropolitan Lagos" in Nigeria, which includes both the islands of the former municipality of Lagos and the mainland suburbs.
Lagos State government is responsible for some of the utilities including roads and transportation, power, water, health and education.
Metropolitan Lagos extends over 16 of the 20 LGAs of Lagos State, and contains about 85% of the population of Lagos State, including some semi-rural areas.
Lagos has a considerable number of high-rise buildings that dominate its skyline.
Most of the tall buildings are located in the downtown Central Business District.
Lagos was formerly the capital city of Nigeria, but it has since been replaced by Abuja.
Abuja officially became the capital of Nigeria on 12 December 1991, although the decision to move the federal capital had been made in now Act no. 6 of 1976. Lagos is also home to the High Court of the Lagos State Judiciary, housed in an old colonial building on Lagos Island.
Census data for Lagos
Although the 2006 National Population Census of Nigeria credited the metropolitan area with a population figure of 7,937,932, the figure is at variance with some projections by the UN and other population agencies and groups worldwide.
The population figure of Lagos State given by the Lagos State Government is 17,553,924. That figure was based on claimed conducted enumeration for social planning by the Lagos State Government "parallel census" and it believes that since the inhabitants of the metropolitan area of Lagos constitute 88% of the Lagos State population, the population of metropolitan Lagos is about 15.5 million.
A rejoinder to Lagos State Government views concluded that Lagos State concealed the fact that the population projection, for Lagos Urban Agglomeration by the UN agencies had been revised downwards substantially as early as 2003. It failed to interpret the two most important and fairly representative and reliable secondary data sets already in public domain, the National Identity Card Scheme and the 2003 Voters Registration figures from INEC. The figures for 2007 Voters Registration by INEC were an act subsequent to the release of the provisional census results and comprehensively corroborate, vindicate and validate the population figures in no uncertain terms.
According to the official results of the 2006 census, there were 8,048,430 inhabitants in Metropolitan Lagos.
This figure was lower than anticipated, and has created controversy in Nigeria.
Lagos Island, the central Local Government Area and historic centre of Metropolitan Lagos, had a population of 212,700 at the 2006 Census.
Lagos market scene
Authorities of Lagos State have attacked the results of the 2006 census, accusing the Nigerian National Population Commission of having undercounted the population of the state.
This accusation is denied by the National Population Commission.
A study found that research carried out by Africapolis (the African subsidiary of e-Geopolis backed by the Agence française de développement), in addition to the cross-referencing of official figures with more scientific independent research concluded that the 2006 census figures for Lagos State of about 9 million were valid and that the state's own assessments are inflated.
Lagos is, by most estimates, one of the fastest-growing cities in the world.
Lagos is currently experiencing a population increase of about 275,000 persons per annum.
In 1999 the United Nations predicted that the city's metropolitan area, which had only about 290,000 inhabitants in 1950, would exceed 20 million by 2010 and thus become one of the ten most populated cities in the world.
There is a huge spectrum of wealth distribution among the people that reside in Lagos.
It ranges from the very wealthy to the very poor.
Lagos has attracted many young people and families seeking a better life from all other parts of Nigeria and beyond and this has also contributed to its cosmopolitan status.
Historical populationYearPop.±%1950325,218—    1960762,418+134.4%19701,413,528+85.4%19802,572,218+82.0%19904,764,093+85.2%20007,280,706+52.8%201010,441,182+43.4%201913,903,620+33.2%source: for Lagos Agglomeration
Economy
Apapa port
The city of Lagos is a major economic focal point in Nigeria, generating around 10% of the country's GDP. Most commercial and financial business is carried out in the central business district situated on the island.
This is also where most of the country's commercial banks, financial institutions and major corporations are headquartered.
Lagos is also the major Information Communications and Telecommunications (ICT) hub of West Africa and potentially, the biggest ICT market in the continent.
Lagos is developing a 24-hour economy.
Ports
Lagos, its ports, airports, free trade zone and light rail system
The Port of Lagos is Nigeria's leading port and one of the largest and busiest in Africa.
Due to the large urban population, Lagos is categorized as a medium-port megacity using the Southampton System for port-city classification.
It is administered by the Nigerian Ports Authority.
The following types of vessels regularly call at the port of Lagos: Fishing vessels (18%), container ships (14%), oil/chemical tankers (13%), bulk carriers (12%), offshore supply vessels (5%). The maximum length of vessels that have called at this port is 279 meters.
The maximum draught is 13.5 m.
The maximum carrying capacity is 113,306 t.
The port features a railhead.
It is split into three main sections.
The largest terminal is located in the Apapa district (Apapa Quays). This is where mainly general cargo is handled.
Among other things, Apapa is home to a container port owned by the Danish company A. P. Møller-Mærsk, worth over one billion U.S. dollars.
The next largest terminal is located on Tin Can Island.
Containers and bulk cargo are handled here.
The storage capacity of the silos is 28,000 tons of grain transported by Fleetwood Transportation.
The terminal handles wheat, corn and malt, and can receive about 4000 tons of grain daily.
The port facilities can handle vessels with a capacity of about 30,000 tons.
There is also a grain bagging facility on the site.
Third is the Lagos oil port north of Apapa Quays.
Entertainment industry and media
Main article: Cinema of Nigeria
Filming
Lagos is the center of the West African film, music, and TV industries.
The film industry in the Surulere locality ranks second or third in the world, ahead of or behind Hollywood, depending on the survey.
PricewaterhouseCoopers Int. forecasts that the Nigerian entertainment industry will grow 85% to $15 billion.
Since the success of the Nigerian thriller "The Figurine", Nigerian film has increasingly turned to high quality productions that are also commercially successful.
This, in turn, has led to consistently new box office revenue records in Nigeria (2009's "The Figurine," 2013's "Half of a Yellow Sun," 2016's "The Wedding Party").
Lekki Free Trade Zone
Entrance of the Lekki Free Trade Zone
Lekki Free Trade Zone (Lekki FTZ) is a free zone situated at the eastern part of Lekki, which covers a total area of about 155 square kilometres.
The first phase of the zone has an area of 30 square kilometres, with about 27 square kilometres for urban construction purposes, which would accommodate a total resident population of 120,000. According to the Master Plan, the free zone will be developed into a new modern city within a city with integration of industries, commerce and business, real estate development, warehousing and logistics, tourism, and entertainment.
Lekki FTZ is divided into three functional districts; the residential district in the north, industrial district in the middle and commercial trading/warehousing & logistics district in the southeast.
The "sub-centre" located in the south of the Zone is to be developed first.
The region is close to the customs supervisory area, and it is mainly for commercial trading, logistics and warehousing operations.
The second phase is located in the north of the Zone adjacent to E9 Road (Highway) which will serve as central business district of the free zone.
The area along E2 Road will be developed for financial and commercial businesses, estate properties & supporting facilities, high-end production service industries and so on, which will link it to the sub-centre the Zone.
The area along E4 Road will be utilized mainly for the development of logistics and industrial manufacturing/processing.
A number of connection axes are also planned in-between the principal axis and the sub-axis, with multi-functional service nodes to serve the whole of Lekki FTZ. Dangote Refinery is currently being built in the Lekki Free Zone.
In the start-up area of the Lekki Free Trade Zone, there will be a Commercial & Logistics Park which will cover a total area of 1.5 square kilometres.
The Park is planned to be multi-functional with the integration of commerce, trading, warehousing, and exhibition.
According to the Site Plan of the park, large construction works will be built in the park, including the "international commodities & trade centre", the "international exhibition & conversation centre", industrial factory workshops, logistics warehouses, office buildings, hotels and residential apartment buildings, amongst others.
Oil refinery
Main article: Dangote Refinery
Distilling column of the Dangote refinery in compare to a Saturn rocket
Until now, paradoxically, oil exporter Nigeria had to import its oil derivatives (mainly gasoline) and oil processing by-products such as polypropylene.
For this reason, the Dangote Group built an oil refinery in the Lekki district, which is expected to be operational in 2022 (as of December 2021). Job advertisements for this were placed in November 2021. The refinery is expected to process 650,000 barrels of oil per day when fully operational, and 327, 000 barrels of gasoline, 244,000 barrels of diesel, 56,000 barrels of aviation fuel, 800 megatons of propane, 2,500 megatons of polypropylene, and 100 megatons of sulfur. 9,000 direct jobs and 25,000 indirect jobs will be created by the refinery.
The oil industry has been a major polluter of Lagos' water sources for decades.
Software companies
Software companies in Lagos work mainly in the telecommunications, banking and education/employment services sectors.
They are concentrated in the Lekki and Ikeja districts.
MTN maintains the first and still predominant 4G network in Nigeria.
Airtel is another 4G provider. 9Mobile and Dataflex are Internet providers.
Flutterwave is in the virtual bank card business.
Opay is a platform for online bookings.
Paystack is used by Nigerians who regularly receive payments from abroad.
Andela trains software engineers and places them in the Nigerian job market.
ULesson maintains a platform on which secondary school learning content is presented.
Hotels.ng allows hotel bookings to be made throughout Africa.
Yaba has increasingly been a focal point with several software companies and engineering services companies set up around University of Lagos and Yabatech communities including Flutterwave and Andela.
Several start up incubators and entrepreneurs hubs are also located in the area which is sometimes called Yabacon valley in reference to Silicon Valley.   
Automotive Industry
Main article: Automotive industry in Nigeria
Former Mercedes manager Oluwatobi Ajayi founded "Nord Automobiles Ltd" in the Sangotedo district in 2018. He benefited from the decline of the naira, which made importing vehicles unaffordable for many Nigerians.
Nord has two assembly plants in Lagos: a 2,100 m2 plant in Sangotedo, where all eight models are currently assembled; the second 5,400 m2 plant in Epe is still under construction.
Once completed, assembly of the models will be moved to the new plant, while component manufacturing will take place in Sangotedo.
The company currently manufactures its own plastic parts and plans to add steel stamping in the future. "In the new plant, we could produce about 1,000 vehicles per month.
But the market is not yet big enough to justify assembly on that scale.
We've only been selling officially since September, and our orders are increasing by 20% to 30% per month," Ajayi adds.
The company offers eight different models, with the 3-ton pickup, the Nord Tank, being the most popular.
The others are the Nord Max (2.6-ton pickup), Nord A3 (sedan), Nord A5 (luxury SUV), Nord Flit minibus, Nord Yarn and Nord Tripper.
Fertiliser
A fertiliser production plant was commissioned in the Lekki Free Trade Zone on May 3, 2022. It will produce 3 million tonnes of fertiliser a year.
Since Russian fertiliser is refrained from coming onto the world market due to the Ukraine war 2022, Nigeria fills a gap in the market.
Pharmaceutical industry
Pharmacy in Epe
Nigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa (status 2022). The larger pharmaceutical companies in Nigeria are located in the North of Lagos.
Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd appears to be the pharmaceutical producer with the most employees.
Next in line are Fidson Healthcare Plc, May & Baker Nig.
Plc and Swiss Pharma Nigeria.
Social situation
Oil export revenues have led to a general increase in prices and cost of living, making Lagos the most expensive city in Nigeria.
Despite its oil wealth, long queues are commonplace at the country's gas stations due to gasoline shortages.
Yet the city remains more or less functional, and rapid growth is producing intact infrastructures even without government intervention-despite what the West sees as a chaotic picture[citation needed]. Change and permeability characterize urban coexistence.
One room is occupied by an average of four people, and life takes place primarily on the streets.
During rush hour between the center and the residential areas, the main traffic routes are transformed into marketplaces.
After improvements in living conditions, the 1990s with their economic and political crises led to mass impoverishment in Lagos as well.
In a 2018 ranking of cities by quality of life, Lagos ranked 212th among 231 cities surveyed worldwide.
Lagos has been ranked as one of the most expensive cities in the world.
In some parts of Lagos, residents have one of the highest standards of living in Nigeria and in Africa.
At the same time, a sizable proportion of the residents live in slums without access to piped water and sanitation.
Culture
Music and film industry
Lagos is famous throughout Africa for its music scene.
Lagos has a vibrant nightlife and has given birth to a variety of styles such as Sakara music, Nigerian hip hop, highlife, juju, fuji and Afrobeats.
Lagos is the centre of the Nigerian movie industry, often referred to as 'Nollywood'. Idumota market on Lagos Island is the primary distribution centre.
Many films are shot in the Festac area of Lagos, where the World Festival of Black Arts was held.
Iganmu is home to the primary centre for the performing arts and artistes in Nigeria: the National Arts Theatre.
James Brown performed in Lagos in 1970. With his band Wings, Paul McCartney recorded his fifth post-Beatles album, Band on the Run, in an EMI studio in Lagos in August and September 1973. Other foreign musicians who have also performed in the city include Sean Paul, Snoop Dogg, 50 Cent, Akon, Jarule, Ashanti, Usher, Shaggy, R Kelly, Cardi B, Migos especially during the Star Mega Jam; Shakira, John Legend, Ludacris, Busta Rhymes, Boyz II Men, T-Pain, Brian McKnight, JayZ, Mary J. Blige, Beyoncé, Brandy, Ciara, Keri Hilson and Lauryn Hill, among others.
Parks and squares
Tree growing in Freedom Park
Freedom Park is a memorial and leisure park area in the middle of downtown Lagos in Lagos Island, Nigeria which was formerly Her Majesty's Broad Street Prison.
It was designed by the Architect Theo Lawson.
The Park was constructed to preserve the history and cultural heritage of Nigerians.
Monuments in the park reveal the Lagos colonial heritage and history of Her Majesty's Broad Street prisons.
It was built to commemorate the 50th anniversary independence celebration in October, 2010. The Park serves as a National Memorial, a Historical landmark, a Cultural site, Arts and Recreation centre.
The park, which is now a serene abode for individuals, visitors' collective contemplation and interaction is open to the public every day.
Today, freedom park has become a venue for diverse social events and recreational entertainment.
Tinubu Square
Tinubu Square (formerly Independence Square), is an open space landmark located in Broad Street, Lagos Island, Lagos State, Nigeria named after the Yoruba slave trader, merchant, and aristocrat Madam Efunroye Tinubu.
It used to be called Ita Tinubu before it was named Independence Square by leaders of the First Nigerian Republic after Nigerian independence and subsequently Tinubu Square.
The Tafawa Balewa Square, (TBS) is a 14.5-hectare (35.8-acre) ceremonial ground (originally called "Race Course") in Lagos Island, Lagos.
The entrance to the square has gigantic sculptures of four white horses hovering above the gate and seven red eagles, which are symbols from the national emblem signifying Strength and Dignity respectively.
Other monuments in the square include the Remembrance Arcade 1(with memorials to World War I, World War II and Nigerian civil war victims) and the 26-storey Independence House, built in 1963 which was for a long time, the tallest building in Nigeria.
Sports
National Stadium.
Association football is Lagos' most popular sport.
Prominent Lagos football clubs include Bridge Boys F.C., MFM F.C. and First Bank: both play in Nigeria National League, the second tier of Nigerian football.
The Lagos Black Heritage Festival Parade, 2012
The Nigeria national football team, also known as the Super Eagles, used to play almost all of their home games in Lagos at the National Stadium in Surulere; much later, games were played at the then New Abuja National Stadium in Abuja for sometime; however, games are now mostly played at the newer Godswill Akpabio International Stadium in Uyo, which is the default home of the Super Eagles.
Lagos also hosted the 2nd All-African games in 1973.
Tourism
Lekki Beach in Lagos
The Cathedral Church of Christ Marina on Lagos Island
Lagos, subsequent to the re-modernization project achieved by the previous administration of Governor Raji Babatunde Fashola, is gradually becoming a major tourist destination, being one of the largest cities in Africa and in the world.
Lagos is currently taking steps to become a global city and is rated as Beta − by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
The 2009 Eyo carnival (a yearly festival originated from Iperu Remo, Ogun State), which took place on 25 April, was a step toward world city status.
Currently, Lagos is primarily known as a business-oriented and a fast-paced community.
Lagos has become an important location for African and Black cultural identity.
Many festivals are held in Lagos; festivals vary in offerings each year and may be held in different months.
Some of the festivals are Festac Food Fair held in Festac Town Annually, Eyo Festival, Lagos Black Heritage Carnival, Lagos Carnival, Eko International Film Festival, Lagos Seafood Festac Festival, LAGOS PHOTO Festival and the Lagos Jazz Series, which is a unique franchise for high-quality live music in all genres with a focus on jazz.
Established in 2010, the popular event takes place over a 3–5 day period at selected high quality outdoor venues.
The music is as varied as the audience itself and features a diverse mix of musical genres from rhythm and blues to soul, Afrobeat, hip hop, bebop, and traditional jazz.
The festivals provide entertainment of dance and song to add excitement to travelers during a stay in Lagos.
Lagos has a number of sandy beaches by the Atlantic Ocean, including Elegushi Beach and Alpha Beach.
Lagos also has a number of private beach resorts including Inagbe Grand Beach Resort and several others in the outskirts.
Lagos has a variety of hotels ranging from three star to five star hotels, with a mixture of local hotels such as Eko Hotels and Suites, Federal Palace Hotel and franchises of multinational chains such as Intercontinental Hotel, Sheraton and Four Points by Sheraton.
Other places of interest include the Tafawa Balewa Square, Festac town, The Nike Art Gallery, Freedom Park, Lagos and the Cathedral Church of Christ, Lagos.
Cuisine
Main articles: Nigerian cuisine and African cuisine
Arewa Traditional Kitchen
Some of the famous dishes in Lagos include indigenous delicacies such as eba and egusi; amala and ewedu; jollof (the go-to party dish); ofada rice; plantains (locally called dodo); beans; suya (spicy shish kebab or spiced roasted beef), which is consumed in local clubs and bars with a bottle of cold beer; and eba, made from cassava and eaten with soups prepared with vegetables and mixture of spices and herbs.
Other dishes range from local ones like Iyan (pounded yam) made from yam flour, amala; asaro, which is usually eaten with various kind of vegetables; and Egusi (melon soup) to European, Middle-Eastern, and Asian cuisine.
Education
See also: List of schools in Lagos
Lagos Business School
Lagos Business School's Cafeteria
Dowen College in Lagos
The Lagos State Government operates state schools.
The education system is the 6-3-3-4 system, which is practised throughout the country (as well as by many other members of the Economic Community of West African States). The levels are Primary, Junior Secondary School (JSS), Senior Secondary School (SSS) and university.
All children are offered basic education, with special focus now on the first nine years.
Many of the schools in Nigeria are federally funded and usually are boarding schools.
A few examples are Federal government college Odogbolu (FGCOdogbolu), Federal government girls college Sagamu (FGGCSagamu) and Federal government college Kano (FGCKano). The state of Lagos has its own federally funded high schools namely Federal government college Ijanikin also known as FGC Lagos, King's College Lagos and Queen's College Lagos.
Lagos is home to various postsecondary schools, universities and other vocational institutions that are either operated by the government or private entities.
Vocational schools
Institute for Industrial Technology (IIT) : founded in 2000, IIT is a technical vocational school for male youth from families with limited resources.
Its educational model is based on the Dual Training System.
Polytechnics
Yaba College of Technology (YABATECH) : founded in 1934, the college is Nigeria's first higher educational institution and third in Africa.
The college is a center of culture and heritage.
Currently it has student enrolment of over 16,000.
Lagos State Polytechnic is a polytechnic comprising more than six schools including private polytechnics and was founded 25 years ago.
Its main campus resides at Ikorodu, along Shagamu road.
Lagos City Polytechnic, located at 6/8, Bashiru Oweh Street, Off Simbiat Abiola Road (formerly Medical Road), Ikeja – This is the first private Polytechnic in Nigeria.
It was established in 1990 by Engr.
Babatunde Odufuwa.
Engr.
Odufuwa hails from Oke-Aye in Ijebu North East Local Government Area (I.N.E.L.G) of Ogun State.
Grace Polytechnic
Wolex Polytechnic
Federal College of Fisheries and Marine Technology is a monotechnic that offers courses in fisheries technology, general science, marine engineering and nautical science.
Federal College of Education (tech) Akoka
Ronik Polytechnic
Universities
University of Lagos
The University of Lagos (UNILAG) Akoka, is a large institution dating from 1962, with over 55,000 students.
It comprises 13 faculties, run by over 4,000 staff.
Lagos State University (LASU) is a multi-campus university established in the year 1983 and owned by the Lagos State government.
The main campus is located at Ojo, along the Lagos-Badagry Expressway.
Pan-Atlantic University formerly known as Pan-African University has a business school (LBS), a school of Media and communication (SMC) and an entrepreneurial development center (EDC), specialized in providing short courses for SMEs.
Lagos Business School (LBS) is the most famous of them all, awarding world-class MBA and EMBA. The School of Media and Communication is also known for its pragmatic communication courses in the field of journalism, media and marketing.
SMC awards BSc., MSc., and PhD in social science courses.
Founded in 1996 and awarded University status in 2002.  The university also places some emphasis on the study of art, running the Virtual Museum of Modern Nigerian Art.
National Open University of Nigeria is the first Open university in Nigeria; it is located on Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Caleb University is a private university located at Imota, Lagos.
Lagos State College of Health Technology (LASCOHET) is an institution that runs health courses such as Health Information Management, Pharmacist Tech, Medical Laboratory Tech, Community Health Extension and Environmental Health Technology; it is located in Yaba.
Lagos State University College of Medicine (LASUCOM), Ikeja
College of Medicine, University of Lagos (CMUL)
Healthcare
Further information: List of hospitals in Lagos
Lagos has many hospitals and medical facilities, some of which have accomplished feats in Nigeria's medical history.
For example, the oldest Nigerian hospital is located in the city as well as West Africa's first air-operated emergency medical service, which commenced in the city.
The Lagos healthcare system is generally divided into public and private sectors that provide medical services at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels.
Transportation
Further information: Transportation in Lagos
Lagos has one of the largest and most extensive road networks in West Africa.
It also has suburban trains and some ferry services.
Highways are usually congested in peak hours, due in part to the geography of the city, as well as to its explosive population growth.
Lagos is also linked by many highways and bridges.
Highways
Toll gates and roads at the Lekki-Ẹpẹ Expressway
The Lagos–Ibadan Expressway and the Lagos–Abeokuta Expressway are the major controlled-access highways in the north of the city and serve as inter-state highways to Oyo State and Ogun State respectively.
To the west the congested Lagos–Badagry Expressway serves outlying towns such as Festival Town, which was the location for the 1977 Festival of Black Arts and Culture 77.
Lagos' importance as a commercial centre and port and its strategic location have led to it being the end-point of three Trans-African Highway routes using Nigeria's national roads.
The Trans–West African Coastal Highway leaves the city as the Badagry Expressway to Benin and beyond as far as Dakar and Nouakchott; the Trans-Sahara Highway to Algiers, which is close to completion, leaves the city as the Lagos-Ibadan Expressway.
Local public transport
The Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (LAMATA) is responsible for public transport.
Since 2021 using a bus or the light rail system is paid for with a public transport card without cash.
This card can be used equally on BRT and LBSL buses.
One can purchase a public transportation card at any of the ticketing booths at the bus terminals scattered across Lagos State.
City buses
There are two city bus companies in Lagos: BRT (Lagos Bus Rapid Transit System) and LBSL (Lagos Bus Services). The city buses are air-conditioned.
BRT was inaugurated in 2008. BRT offers e-payment with bank cards.
On two arterial roads (Ikorodu Road and Funsho Williams Avenue), a dedicated bus lane has been established for BRT buses.
BRT uses diverse brands of bus, like Ashok Leyland and Yutong.
Primero Transport Services (PTS) Ltd. is the sole operator of the BRT buses.
LBSL was inaugurated in 2019. LBSL uses Brazilian-built Marcopolo buses.
The central hub for city buses and long-distance buses is the Oshodi Bus Terminal, which is visible from afar.
It is the largest bus station in West Africa and commenced operation in 2019.
Suburban rail
Currently, a rapid transit system, the Lagos Light Rail, is under construction with the first section scheduled to open in 2022. The "Blue Line" will operate between Okokomaiko and Marina (East–west axis). The "Red Line" will run between Agbado and Marina (North–south axis).
Both lines will share three stations: Iddo, Ebute Ero and Marina.
There are plans for more light rail lines:
the green line (Marina to Lekki),
the yellow line (Otta/airport to Iddo),
the purple line (Redeem to Ojo),
the brown line (Mile 12 to Marina) and
the orange line (Redeem to Marina).
Rail transport
As of 10 June 2021, Lagos has a double-track standard gauge line to Ibadan and a modern main station, Mobolaji Johnson.
Departure times are 8:00 and 16:00 (on time). Ticket sales are over the counter and cash only (as of 2021). The operator is the Nigerian Railway Corporation.
Shared cabs
A popular means of transportation are yellow minibuses called danfo.
The yellow buses, mostly of the VW T3 or LT type, characterize the appearance of the city.
They run on fixed routes, but without a timetable, according to the principle of shared cabs.
Ferries
Lagos State Ferry Services Corporation runs a few regular routes, for example between Lagos Island and the mainland, served by modern ferries and wharves.
Private boats run irregular passenger services on the lagoon and on some creeks.
Air traffic
Lagos is served by Murtala Muhammed International Airport, one of the largest and busiest airports in Africa.
The MMIA is Nigeria's premier international air gateway.
The airport's history dates back to colonial times, around the time of the Second World War.
The current international airport terminal was built and commissioned over 40 years ago, in 1978. The terminal opened officially 15 March 1979. The airport had been known simply as the Lagos International Airport.
It was, however, renamed for the late Nigerian Head of State, General Murtala Muhammed, who died in 1976.
The airport terminal has been renovated several times since the 1970s but its most radical makeover began in 2013, following the launch of the Federal government's multi-billion naira Remodelling/ Rehabilitation Programme for its airports nationwide.
Under the re-modeling work there, by late in 2014, the MMlA lounge area had been expanded to four times its previous size and new passenger handling conveyor systems installed which can handle over 1,000 passengers per hour.
A second airport, Lekki-Epe International Airport is proposed.
Logistics hub
Logistics hub, close to Epe
In Ketu-Ereyun, between Epe and Ikorodu, Lagos State builds a "Food Logistics Park" - the biggest logistics hub for food in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The site is 1.2 million square metres big and the construction is expected to be finished in 2024.
Timber trade
In the middle of the city, in the Oko Baba district, there is (as of September 2022) a large transhipment centre for timber, mainly redwood and mahogany.
This timber trade, including sawmill, will move to a new location, "Timberville", in December 2022.
Notable people
Main category: People from Lagos
Business
Abike Dabiri, Chairman/Chief Executive Officer of the Nigerian Diaspora Commission
Victoria Chibuogu Nneji, computer scientist, design and innovation strategist, and a lecturing fellow, known for her research on robotics and autonomous transportation
Habeeb Okunola, businessman and philanthropist
Toyin Saraki, global health advocate and healthcare philanthropist
Politicians and rulers
Akinwunmi Ambode, former Governor of Lagos state
Rilwan Akiolu, Oba (traditional ruler) of Lagos
Babatunde Fashola, Former Governor of Lagos and current Minister of Power, Works and Housing
Lekan Fatodu, Politician and journalist
Bode George, Politician
Yemi Osinbajo, politician, lawyer and current vice-president of Nigeria.
Babajide Sanwo-Olu, Governor of Lagos State
Bola Tinubu, Former Governor of Lagos State
Funsho Williams, politician and one time aspirant to the office of Lagos state governor
Sports
Kenny Adeleke (born 1983), basketball player
Israel Adesanya, UFC middleweight champion
Nelson Agholor, Professional American football player, Super Bowl LII Champion with the Philadelphia Eagles in 2018
Tunji Awojobi (born 1973), professional basketball player
Israel Idonije, Professional American football player, Chicago Bears 2003–2013, Detroit Lions 2013
Uche Okechukwu, football player
Hakeem Olajuwon, professional basketball player
Anoure Obiora, football player
Victor Osimhen, football player
Arnaut Danjuma, football player
Omos, professional wrestler
Other
Oyinkan Braithwaite, novelist and writer, who wrote My Sister, the Serial Killer
Agbani Darego, Miss Nigeria 2001, Semifinalist Miss Universe 2001 and Miss World 2001
Rosa Egipcíaca, Afro-Brazilian Catholic mystic, who wrote  Sagrada Teologia do Amor Divino das Almas Peregrinas
Buchi Emecheta, novelist
Yvonne Orji, actress, comedian
Esther Uzodinma, actress and producer
Twin towns – sister cities
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Nigeria
Lagos is twinned with:
Atlanta, United States
Gary, Indiana, United States
Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Bucharest, Romania
Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
See also
List of largest cities
List of Governors of Lagos State
Portals: Nigeria Africa Geography Cities
Notes
a b c Metropolitan Lagos consists of 16 of Lagos State's 20 LGAs, which excludes Badagry, Epe, Ibeju-Lekki and Ikorodu.
References
a b c "Metro Lagos (Nigeria): Local Government Areas". City Population. 21 March 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
a b c d "Lagos and Its Potentials for Economic Growth". 2 July 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
"18th National Sports Festival: Lagos unveils Logo, mascot and website". Premium Times.
Abuja, Nigeria. 18 June 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2012.
"Eko 2012: Building Branding through Sports, Articles". ThisDay.
Lagos, Nigeria. 22 August 2012. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2012.
a b c Hutchison, Ray (2009). Encyclopedia of Urban Studies.
SAGE. p. 427. ISBN 978-1-412-9143-21.
a b Lagos Bureau of Statistics. "2019 Abstract of Local Government Statistics" (PDF). Retrieved 1 January 2021.
Demographia (January 2015). Demographia World Urban Areas (PDF) (11th ed.). Retrieved 2 March 2015.
Williams, Lizzie (2008). Bradt Travel Guides (3rd ed.). Paperback. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-8416-2397-9. Retrieved 26 July 2014.
Jones, Daniel (2011).  Roach, Peter; Setter, Jane; Esling, John (eds.). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6.
"Nigeria: cities with the largest population 2021". Statista.
Retrieved 12 March 2022.
"Lagos | City, Population, & History | Britannica". 
African Cities Driving the NEPAD Initiative.
UN-HABITAT. 2006. p. 202. ISBN 978-9-211318159.
Hartley, John; Potts, Jason; Flew, Terry; Cunningham, Stuart; Keane, Michael; Banks, John (2012). Key Concepts in Creative Industries.
SAGE. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-446-2028-90.
Helmut K Anheier; Yudhishthir Raj Isar (2012). Cultures and Globalization: Cities, Cultural Policy and Governance.
SAGE. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-446-2585-07.
Cunningham, Stuart (2013). Hidden Innovation: Policy, Industry and the Creative Sector (Creative Economy and Innovation Culture Se Series). Univ. of Queensland Press. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-702-2509-89.
Benton-Short, Lisa; John Rennie Short (2013). Cities and Nature.
Routledge Critical Introductions to Urbanism and the City. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-134252749.
a b Pinther, Kerstin; Förster, Larissa; Hanussek, Christian (2012). Afropolis: City Media Art.
Jacana Media. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-431-4032-57.
Diop, Salif; Barusseau, Jean-Paul; Descamps, Cyr (2014). The Land/Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone of West and Central Africa Estuaries of the World.
Springer. p. 66. ISBN 978-3-319-0638-81.
Sources:
"The Most Populated Cities of the World.
World Megacities - Nations Online Project". nationsonline.org.
Retrieved 23 September 2021.
"These cities are the hubs of Africa's economic boom". Big Think. 4 October 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2019.
"Africa's biggest shipping ports". Businesstech. 8 March 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
Rajewski, Brian (1998). Africa, Volume 1 of Cities of the World: a compilation of current information on cultural, geographical, and political conditions in the countries and cities of six continents, based on the Department of State's "post reports". Gale Research International, Limited.
ISBN 978-0-810-3769-22.
Lees, Loretta; Hyun Bang Shin; Ernesto López Morales (2015). Global Gentrifications: Uneven Development and Displacement.
Policy Press. p. 315. ISBN 978-1-447-3134-89.
"Lagos | City, Population, & History | Britannica". britannica.com.
Retrieved 19 November 2021.
"CASE STUDY OF LAGOS" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2015.
a b c d e f "Lagos State Information". National Bureau of Statistics.
Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 25 October 2015.
"History Of Lagos". One Lagos Fiesta.
Retrieved 12 March 2022.
"A Flood-Free Lagos: The Regional Imperative". Retrieved 27 November 2015.
Olukoju, Ayodeji (1996). "The Travails of Migrant and Wage Labour in the Lagos Metropolitan Area in the Inter-War Years". Labour History Review.
Liverpool University Press. 61: 49–70. doi:10.3828/lhr.61.1.49. Retrieved 27 November 2015.
"Lagos Metropolitan Area: Scope and scale of the shelter problem". Retrieved 27 November 2015.
Caprio, Charles (6 March 2012). "Lagos is wonderful and charming conurbation of Nigeria to visit". Go Articles.
Retrieved 27 November 2015.
"Administrative Levels - Lagos State". Nigeria Congress.
Archived from the original on 25 December 2005. Retrieved 27 November 2015.
"Population - Lagos State". Lagos State Government.
Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015.
"2022 World Population by Country". worldpopulationreview.com.
Retrieved 12 March 2022.
a b c The sixteen LGAs making up Metropolitan Lagos (Agege, Ajeromi-Ifelodun, Alimosho, Amuwo-Odofin, Apapa, Eti-Osa, Ifako-Ijaiye, Ikeja, Kosofe, Lagos Island, Lagos Mainland, Mushin, Ojo, Oshodi-Isolo, Shomolu, Surulere) as per"2006 Population Census" (PDF). National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria.
May 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2010.
"Population". Lagos State Government. 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2012.
a b Pacetti, M.; Passerini, G.; Brebbia, C.A.; Latini, G. (2012). The Sustainable City VII: Urban Regeneration and Sustainability.
ISBN 9781845645786.
Peil, Margaret (1991). Lagos: the city is the people (World cities series). G.K. Hall. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-816-1729-93.
Appiah, Anthony; Gates, Henry Louis (2010). Encyclopedia of Africa, Volume 1. Oxford University Press. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-195-3377-09.
"Awori People: A brief history and belief of the original indigenes of Lagos". Pulse Nigeria. 9 February 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022.
"Lagos | City, Population, & History | Britannica". 
"Lagos Oba traces origin". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. 14 May 2017. Retrieved 12 June 2022.
"The history of Lagos and the aboriginal tribes". Vanguard News. 4 June 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2022.
"The Origin of Eko (Lagos)". Edo Nation.
Retrieved 2 June 2010.
Smith, Robert (January 1979). The Lagos Consulate 1851-1861. Macmillan. p. 2. ISBN 9780520037465.
Howard Temperley, "Beecroft, John (1790–1854)", rev.
Elizabeth Baigent, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004
Wikisource:Duncan, John (1805-1849) (DNB00)
a b A. Adu Boahen (1985). Africa Under Colonial Domination 1880-1935 (General history of Africa). Vol. 7. Unesco.
International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa. p. 134. ISBN 978-9-231-0171-31.
a b Sir William M.N. Geary (2013). Nigeria Under British Rule (1927). Routledge. pp. 24–28. ISBN 978-1-136-9629-43.
"The Reduction of Lagos:Introduction". 25 March 2014. Retrieved 1 February 2015.
Austen, R. (1 April 2009). "Slavery and the Birth of an African City: Lagos, 1760-1900, by Kristin Mann". African Affairs. 108 (431): 328–329. doi:10.1093/afraf/adp004. ISSN 0001-9909.
Smith, Robert (January 1979). The Lagos Consulate 1851-1861. Macmillan. p. 121. ISBN 9780520037465.
Elebute, Adeyemo (2013). The Life of James Pinson Labulo Davies: A Colossus of Victorian Lagos.
Kachifo Limited/Prestige. pp. 143–145. ISBN 9789785205763.
Anderson, David; Rathbone, Richard (2000). Africa's Urban Past.
James Currey Publishers, 2000. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-852-5576-17.
Agawu, Kofi (2014). "19th century Lagos". Representing African Music: Postcolonial Notes, Queries, Positions.
Routledge. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-317-7940-66.
J. F. Ade Ajayi; Unesco.
International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa (1998). Africa in the Nineteenth Century Until the 1880s.
Vol. 6. University of California Press. p. 286. ISBN 978-0-520-0670-11.
"1914 - 2014 Colonial Footprints: Lagos, Then and Now". The Centenary Project (Google Arts and Culture). March 2014. Retrieved 14 May 2016.
Williams, Lizzie (2008). Nigeria: The Bradt Travel Guide.
Bradt Travel Guides. p. 111. ISBN 978-1-841-6223-92.
Ulrich, Hans F.; Lehrmann, Ernst P. (2008). Telecommunications Research Trends.
Nova Publishers. p. 144. ISBN 978-1-604-5615-86.
Noam, Eli M. (1999). Telecommunications in Africa (Global communications series). Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-195-3562-74.
Williams, Lizzie (2008). Nigeria: The Bradt Travel Guide.
Bradt Travel Guides. p. 110. ISBN 978-1-84162-239-2.
Olukoju, Ayodeji (2003). "Chapter two.
Electricity supply in Lagos, 1898-2000". INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND URBAN FACILITIES IN LAGOS, 1861-2000. OpenEdition Books.
African Dynamics.
Institut français de recherche en Afrique (IFRA-Nigeria). pp. 22–45. ISBN 9791092312225.
a b "2008 All Africa Media Research Conference" (PPT). Pan African Media Research Organisation. p. 8. Retrieved 4 April 2012.[permanent dead link]
a b Draper, Robert; Hammond, Robin (1 January 2015). "Lagos Nigeria: Africa's First city". National Geographic.
Retrieved 18 April 2016.
Herskovits, Melville J. (5 November 2013). The Human Factor in Changing Africa.
Routledge, 2013. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-136-5296-10.
Brook, James (6 September 1987). "Brazilian Houses In Nigeria Are A Legacy Of Thousands Of Freed Slaves". Chicago Tribune.
New York.
Retrieved 30 May 2017.
"Five Architectural Wonders of Lagos". The Guardian.
Retrieved 30 May 2017.
Bakare, Tonye (15 May 2016). "Open House Lagos opens a new vista in Lagos architecture". The Guardian.
Retrieved 27 August 2017.
de Blij, Harm; Muller, Peter O. (24 March 1998). Geography, Update: Realms, Regions, and Concepts.
Wiley, 1998. p. 349. ISBN 9780471291121.
Immerwahr, Daniel.
The Politics of Architecture and Urbanism in Postcolonial Lagos, 1960-1986. Journal of African Cultural Studies (Thesis). Vol. 19. Taylor & Francis, Ltd. p. 165-186. JSTOR 25473387.[dead link]
"A cursory look at the colonial roots of Lagos, Nigeria". Google Arts and culture (The Centenary Project). 1 March 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2017.
"THE RISE OF FUTURE CITIES IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA". Cityscape.
Retrieved 30 May 2017.
Akin George - 29 November 2016. "Rising Residential Towers In Lagos: Changing The Megacity Skyline". Independent.
Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017.
"Lekki-Ikoyi Link Bridge in Lagos, Nigeria". Julius Berger International.
Retrieved 27 January 2022.
"Sanwo-Olu says Opebi-Mende link bridge, 4th mainland bridge projects to commence 2022 - Naira metrics". 3 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022.
"Lagos to begin construction of 4th Mainland Bridge 2022 - Sanwo-Olu - P.M. News". Retrieved 15 January 2022.
"The lagos pressure group on the environment". Limge Online.
Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
2008 All Africa Media Research Conference.
Nigeria Tribune. 26 April 2007. p. 34.
"Simply Lagos". The Transmitter.
Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
Oni, A. O (2008). "Journal of the Nigerian Institution of Estate Surveyors and Valuers: An empirical study of the Lagos state rent edict of 1997". Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Lagos | City, Population, & History | Britannica". 
Branch of the Nigerian Institution of estate surveyors & Valuers.
Lagos state. 30 August 2006.
"'We spent between N40m and N200m to construct a park'". Business day NG. 12 October 2014.
Awa, Omiko (3 November 2019). "Ikoyi Federal secretariat … Disused monument rotting away". The Guardian (Nigeria). Retrieved 26 December 2021.
"Victoria Island Postal Code / Zip Code – Lagos City | Lagos State | Nigerian Postal Code | NairaPostCode". 10 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022.
"Giant Cities of Tiny Islands" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Klimatafel von Lagos-Ikeja (Flugh.) / Nigeria" (PDF). Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure.
Retrieved 7 July 2016.
"Lagos Climate Normals 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Retrieved 7 July 2016.
"Station Murtala" (in French). Meteo Climat.
Retrieved 7 July 2016.
"Climate & Weather Averages in Lagos, Nigeria". Time and Date.
Retrieved 10 January 2022.
"Monthly weather forecast and climate in Lagos, Nigeria". Weather Atlas.
Retrieved 10 January 2022.
"Cities & Citizens Series:Urban Iniquities in three Cities" (PDF). Unhabit Online.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
Dr.
Dele Olowu (1992). Public Admin.
Dev.
Urban local government finance in Nigeria: The case of Lagos municipal area. p. 12: 19–38. doi:10.1002/pad.4230120103.
"Metro Lagos". Retrieved 28 November 2015.
a b "Managing Metropolitan Lagos" (PDF). R.Rasaki.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Lagos State Judiciary". Nigeria Law Online.
Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Document". Nigerian Muse Online. 7 February 2007. Archived from the original on 8 February 2010. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"NATIONAL POPULATION COMMISSION – MISUNDERSTANDING, MISPERCEPTION AND MISREPRESENTATION OF CENSUS 2006 A REJOINDER TO THE PUBLICATION – "The Falsification of Lagos Census Figure" by Lagos State Government". Economicconfidential.com.
Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2010.
"Legal Notice on Publication of the Details of the Breakdown of the National and State Official Totals 2006 Census" (PDF). Federal Republic of Nigeria Official Gazette. 96 (2). 2 February 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007.
Obasola, Kemi (5 February 2007). "Lagos rejects population commission's figures". The Punch.
Punch Nigeria Limited, via Biafra Nigeria World News.
Retrieved 11 December 2007.
Government of Nigeria, National Population Commission (8 February 2007). "Lagos State Claim on the Provisional Result of the 2006 Census is Unfounded" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 June 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007.
"FACTSHEET: Nigeria's population figures". Africa Check.
Retrieved 2 June 2016.
a b Lawal, Leonard; Egbejule, Eromo; Norbrook, Nicholas (5 April 2016). "Nigeria: Lagos, Maximum City". The Africa Report.
Retrieved 18 April 2016.
John David Yeadon Peel (2003). Religious Encounter and the Making of the Yoruba African Systems of Thought Series.
Indiana University Press.
ISBN 978-0-253-2158-88.
Lagos State (Nigeria). Ministry of Economic Planning and Budget (2004). "State of Lagos Megacity and Other Nigerian Cities: Report". Lagos State Ministry of Economic Planning & Budget.
Okuneye P. A.; Adebayo, K.; Opeolu B.T.; Baddru F.I. ANALYSIS OF THE INTERPLAY OF MIGRATION AND URBAN EXPANSION, ON HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT: THE CASE OF LAGOS, NIGERIA (PDF) (Thesis). Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography (CICRED). Retrieved 11 July 2016.
Ugbiajah, Paul.
Culture-conflict and delinquency: a case study of colonial Lagos - Monash Arts (Thesis). Retrieved 11 July 2016.
Otero, Solimar (2010). Afro-Cuban Diasporas in the Atlantic World (Rochester studies in African history and the diaspora). University Rochester Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-1-580-4632-63. ISSN 1092-5228.
"World Urbanization Prospects - Population Division - United Nations". Population.un.org.
Retrieved 31 January 2022.
Douglas Zhihua Zeng (2008). Knowledge, Technology, and Cluster-based Growth in Africa (WBI development studies). World Bank Publications. p. 66. ISBN 9780821373071.
"ICT Development: Nigeria Seeks Increased Regional Collaboration among West African States". 
"Ambode, Security And Lagos Quest For 24/7 Economy". PM News. 27 August 2015. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
a b Busari, Stephanie (1 April 2009). "24 hours in Lagos: The city that never sleeps". CNN. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
Roberts, Toby; Williams, Ian; Preston, John (2021). "The Southampton system: A new universal standard approach for port-city classification". Maritime Policy & Management. 48 (4): 530–542. doi:10.1080/03088839.2020.1802785. S2CID 225502755.
"Hafen von LAGOS () Details - Abfahrten, Erwartete Ankunftszeiten und Hafenanläufen". Marinetraffic.com.
"Lagos Port". Nigerianports.gov.ng.
npa2016. "Tincan". Nigerian Ports Authority.
Retrieved 12 March 2022.
Liston, Enjoli (10 April 2014). "Hello Nollywood: how Nigeria became Africa's biggest economy overnight". The Guardian.
Retrieved 12 April 2014.
"Nigeria: Media and Entertainment to hit $15bn by 2025". Theafricareport.com.
October 2021.
Akande, Victor (14 September 2014). "Toronto: Nigerians disagree over new Nollywood". The Nation Newspaper.
The Nation Online.
Retrieved 24 March 2015.
a b c "Plans of Lekki Free Trade Zone ( Lekki FTZ)". China-Africa Lekki Investment Ltd.
Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015.
"Nigeria's Dangote refinery to be operational by early-2022 despite shipping constraints". Spglobal.com.
November 2021.
"Dangote Refinery Recruitment 2021/2022 Application Form Portal". Topnigerianjobs.com. 19 November 2021.
"China power crisis". Spglobal.com. 20 December 2021.
"10 Most Impressive Mega Projects in Nigeria" (in German) – via YouTube.
"Nigeria's agony dwarfs the Gulf oil spill.
The US and Europe ignore it". TheGuardian.com. 29 May 2010.
"Best Tech Companies in Nigeria 2021: Top 14 Nigerian Software Companies". Bscholary.com. 25 September 2021.
"Best Computer Software Solution in Lagos, Nigeria - List of Computer Software Solution Companies Nigeria". Businesslist.com.ng.
Retrieved 31 January 2022.
"10 Most Popular Software Companies in Lagos". Infoguidenigeria.com. 19 February 2019.
"Top 10 Software Companies in Lagos". Mitrobe.com. 7 August 2021.
"Welcome to Yabacon Valley: What Nigeria's tech town is learning from Israel". calcalistech.com.
Retrieved 2 September 2022.
"Forging Nigeria's future: The young entrepreneurs of Yabacon Valley". irishtimes.com.
Retrieved 2 September 2022.
"Forging Nigeria's future: The young entrepreneurs of Yabacon Valley". techpoint.africa.
Retrieved 2 September 2022.
"Nigeria's Yabacon Valley Has Start-Ups Worth $2bn – Adesina". dailytrust.com.
Retrieved 2 September 2022.
"How this entrepreneur started a Nigerian car brand". Howwemadeitinafrica.com. 7 March 2021.
Abiodun, Eromosele (28 April 2022). "Nigeria's Path to Irreversible Industrial Revolution". THISDAYLIVE. Retrieved 22 May 2022.
a b "Dangote's timely fertiliser plant pays off as prices soar". African Business. 5 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022.
Onyesi, Chika (6 October 2021). "'Nigeria's pharmaceutical sector dwindling despite 60 percent production capacity'". Daily Post Nigeria.
Retrieved 5 June 2022.
Yahaya, Abdulwali (19 September 2019). "Top 10 Best Pharmaceutical Companies in Nigeria & Their Products". Nigerian Infopedia.
Retrieved 2 June 2022.
"About Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Limited". Emzor.
Retrieved 2 June 2022.
Fidson. "Our Company".
"May and Baker Plc. – Supporting your Health for Life". Retrieved 2 June 2022.
"Welcome to swiss pharma nigeria limited". 
"Mercer's 2018 Quality of Living Rankings". Mobilityexchange.mercer.com.
Retrieved 30 July 2018.
Cyr, Ruth (2001). Twentieth Century Africa. iUniverse. p. 391. ISBN 978-0-595-1898-23.
"BLACK ENTERPRISE". Earl G. Graves, Ltd.
January 1980. p. 122. ISSN 0006-4165.
"Tokyo is the World's Most Expensive City". Jet.
Vol. 60, no. 10. 21 May 1981. p. 14. ISSN 0021-5996.
Olumide-Faoseke, John O. (2002). Lagos: the miracle city of Nigeria : street and safety guide.
Keystone (Tourism) Promotion Services.
ISBN 9789783077263.
Hernando Gómez Buendía (13 July 2007). Urban crime: global trends and policies.
United Nations University, 1989 (University of Michigan). p. 141. ISBN 978-9-280-8067-93.
R. K. Raju (2002). Welcome to Nigeria: The Impossible Land.
Allied Publishers. p. 15. ISBN 978-8-177-6404-27.
Ogunlesi, Tolu (4 May 2014). "Commercial hub status of Lagos sparks a chain reaction". Financial Times.
Retrieved 17 March 2016.
"Luxury living in Lagos". CNBC Africa. 21 October 2013. Archived from the original on 19 March 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
Price, Roland K.; Zoran Vojinovi? (2011). Urban Hydroinformatics: Data, Models, and Decision Support for Integrated Urban Water Management.
IWA Publishing. p. 492. ISBN 978-1-843-3927-43.
"Water Supply and Sanitation in Nigeria" (PDF). WorldBank.
Retrieved 30 November 2016.
"Lagos, the mega-city of slums". The New Humanitarian. 5 September 2006. Retrieved 31 January 2022.
In 1995, the World Bank stated that "70 percent of Lagos' population lived in squatted settlements in extremely poor environmental surroundings.
Knee-deep floods sweeping raw sewage and refuse inside densely packed homes were frequent in neighborhoods where overcrowding was the norm.
While the average residential density for Lagos was about 260 people per hectare, the population density in slums was between 790 and 1240 people per hectare." Nigeria - Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project, report of World Bank, 2006 (lookup on 2016-11-23)
Duthiers, Vladimir; Kermeliotis, Teo (22 August 2012). "Lagos of the future: Megacity's ambitious plans". CNN. Retrieved 30 November 2016.
a b The University of Michigan (1992). Post Report.
United States Department of State. p. 16.
Awa, Omiko (21 June 2015). "A Peep into The Glamour, Glitz of Lagos Nightlife". The Guardian.
Retrieved 26 March 2016.
Ganiu, Ayodele (2011). "The contribution of the Creative Economy to African Cities: A Case Study of Lagos Creative Sector & Its Potential" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Yoruba Travelling Theatre & Video Film" (PDF). Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"James Brown tours Africa for U.S. State Department Company". Jet.
Vol. 38, no. 26. 1 October 1970. p. 57. ISSN 0021-5996.
Lewisohn, Mark (2001). "Band on the Run: Paul McCartney and Wings". Retrieved 8 April 2012.
Williams, Lizzie; Shenley, Mark (2012). Nigeria.
Bradt Travel Guides. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-841-6239-79.
"Nigeria: The Shaggy Thriller in Lagos". All Africa. 2 January 2002. Retrieved 25 April 2017.
"R Kelly storms Nigeria". The Vanguard. 11 November 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2017.
"Nigeria: Shakira, Legend, UB40 to Star at Thisday Festival". All Africa.
Retrieved 25 April 2017.
Ogunjimi, Opeoluwa. "Jay-Z coming to Nigeria". The Vanguard.
Retrieved 25 April 2017.
Egole, Anozie (5 October 2013). "How Mary J. Blige rocked Lagos". The Vanguard.
Retrieved 25 April 2017.
"How 7 US celebs have visited Nigeria in six months". Nigerian Entertainment Today. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017.
"Nigeria: Usher Raymond is Star of the Mega Jam". All Africa.
Retrieved 25 April 2017.
"Basic facts about the Freedom Park". The Pulse. 15 April 2015. Retrieved 6 May 2015.
"Freedom Park". Tripadvisor.
Juliet Umeh (23 March 2016). "Tourism: Maximising potential of Tinubu Square, Lagos". National Mirror Newspaper.
Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. Retrieved 11 September 2016.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
Ọladipọ Yemitan (1987). Madame Tinubu: Merchant and King-maker.
University Press.
Seun Akioye (22 November 2013). "Tinubu Square: A befitting memorial to an Amazon". The Nation Newspaper.
Retrieved 11 September 2016.
a b Kaye Whiteman (2013). Lagos: A Cultural and Literary History (Landscapes of the Imagination). Vol. 5. Andrews UK Limited.
ISBN 978-1-908-4938-97.
Peju Akande; Toni Kan (4 January 2015). "BUILDING THE LAGOS CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT". Thisdaylive.
Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015.
"Nigeria". World Stadiums.
Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2010.
Onwumechili, Chuka (3 July 2008). "Nigeria International Matches 1955–2007". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation Online.
Retrieved 2 June 2010.
"OnlineNigeria.com". Onlinenigeria.com. 29 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022.
"The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC - Research Network.
Globalization and World Cities.
Retrieved 31 August 2020.
Appiah, Anthony; Henry Louis Gates (2010). Encyclopedia of Africa, Volume 2. Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-195-3377-09.
Whiteman, Kaye (2013). Lagos: A Cultural and Literary History Volume 5 of Landscapes of the Imagination.
Andrews UK Limited.
ISBN 9781908493897.
"Education". Archived from the original on 14 July 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Issue And Problems in Higher Edfucation" (PDF). National Open University, Nigeria.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Technology for Self Reliance – Official Website". Ronik Polytechnic Ejigbo.
Retrieved 24 September 2021.
"Homepage". University of Lagos official website.
Retrieved 4 April 2012.
Dekker, Marleen; van Dijk, Rijk (2010). Markets of Well-being: Navigating Health and Healing in Africa.
Vol. 9. BRILL, African Dynamics. p. 31. ISBN 9789004201101.
"Digest of Statistics 2010" (PDF). Lagos State.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"BRT-Lite-Final Report" (PDF). Nigerianewsworld.
Retrieved 14 September 2020.[permanent dead link]
"The Socio-economic Costs of Traffic Congestion in Lagos" (PDF) (2). Economic Intelligence Unit (Working paper series. 2 July 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
"Ogun, Oyo move to deploy CCTV, drones to tackle insecurity on highways, borderlines". Businessday NG. 3 February 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022.
Strategic Plan.
University of Lagos, Lagos. 2003–2008.
African Development Bank/United Nations Economic Commission For Africa: "Review of the Implementation Status of the Trans African Highways and the Missing Links (PDF). Vol. 2 Description of Corridors.
African Development Bank. 14 August 2003. Retrieved 14 July 2007.
"Africa Renewal". 20 (3). Itai Madamombe : "NEPAD promotes better transport networks". October 2006: 14. Retrieved 4 April 2012. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
"How to Get and Use the Lagos BRT Bus Cowry Card; All You Need to Know; FAQs". Bank Naija. 2 August 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021.
Olisah, Chike (23 March 2021).  Nairametrics (ed.). "Lagos Bus Services commence deployment of contactless payment card to commuters". Nairametrics.
Retrieved 18 December 2021.
"Cowry's 'tap to ride' contactless payment is making transit easier for Lagosians to commute during the pandemic". The Guardian Nigeria. 1 October 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021.
"Home". 18 December 2021.
"Lagos Bus Services: New face of Smart City Transportation in Nigeria". Businessday NG. 28 May 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2022.
Blue BRT Bus, Lagos [@PrimeroTSL] (17 March 2021). "Dear valued customers" (Tweet). Retrieved 26 December 2021 – via Twitter.
"The Difference Between Lagos BRT And LBSL Buses". Autojosh.com.
Retrieved 31 January 2022.
Lagos light rail to commence operation 2022 – Official.
Premium Times, 12. August 2018; viewed on 28. Oktober 2019.
"Lagos & Ogun State Rail Lines (Update & Map)". Blackborderbuild.weebly.com.
Retrieved 31 January 2022.
"Mobolaji Johnson railway station – Channels Television". Retrieved 16 December 2021.
"Buhari inaugurates Lagos-Ibadan Railway project". 10 June 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021.
New Ultra Modern Train Ride, Lagos to Abeokuta, Nigeria. #LagosTube on YouTube
"Mobolaji Johnson Train Station in the city Lagos". Retrieved 16 December 2021.
"Danfo: Yellow of Lagos". 13 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2021.
"LAMATA Ferry Services". LAMATA. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
"Murtala Ramat Mohammed | head of state of Nigeria | Britannica". 
"Nigerians in Diaspora Commission – NIDCOM". Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"The 10: These Black Women in Computer Science Are Changing the Face of Tech". The Root. 17 March 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2021.
"Board of Directors – Tilt Energy Company Limited". Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"100Women | Avance Media | Toyin Saraki". Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Former Lagos State Govnor tweet 'first' post since 2019 - See wetin e tok". BBC News Pidgin.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Why Oba of Lagos 'snubbing' Ooni of Ife shocked Nigeria". BBC News. 27 April 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Babatunde Raji Fashola | Profile | Africa Confidential". africa-confidential.com.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Meet Lekan Fatodu, the young man who donated a website to governing party". Pulse Nigeria. 30 August 2018. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Bode George: Pathetic death throes of a political dinosaur". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. 1 November 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Nigeria's VP Osinbajo: Does he have friends in the political elite?". The Africa Report.com. 25 June 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Babajide Sanwo-Olu". The AFRICA CEO FORUM (in French). Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Nigeria's Bola Tinubu: the Kingmaker who would be King?". The Africa Report.com. 27 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Funsho Williams: A servant leader worthy of emulation". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. 27 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Kenny Adeleke Net Worth 2018: What is this basketball player worth?". The Squander. 29 August 2018. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
Kasabian, Paul. "Israel Adesanya Defeats Marvin Vettori, Retains Middleweight Title at UFC 263". Bleacher Report.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Nelson Agholor's Super Bowl symbolic of his turnaround". RSN. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Tunji Awojobi Net Worth 2018: What is this basketball player worth?". The Squander. 25 August 2018. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Giants add DE Israel Idonije and TE Jerome Cunningham". giants.com.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
Busybuddies (12 February 2018). "Veteran Eagles Defender Uche Okechukwu Is Now A Professional Hunter (Photos)". The Busy Buddies.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Hakeem Olajuwon | Biography, Stats, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Nigeria - A. Obiora - Profile with news, career statistics and history - Soccerway". int.soccerway.com.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
Nigeria, Media (12 June 2018). "Biography of Anoure Obiora (Footballer)". Media Nigeria.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Agbani Darego and her husband Ishaya Danjuma welcome second baby?". BBC News Pidgin.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"Enslaved: Peoples of the Historical Slave Trade". enslaved.org.
Retrieved 21 August 2021.
"Buchi Emecheta - Literature". literature.britishcouncil.org.
Retrieved 30 June 2021.
Olanrewaju, Adenike (5 June 2020). "Yvonne Orji, the 'Insecure' Star, Returns Confidently to Stand-Up". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2021.
"List of Atlanta's 17 Sister Cities". atlantaga.gov.
City of Atlanta.
Retrieved 22 October 2020.
"Cidades Irmãs de Belo Horizonte". portalbelohorizonte.com.br (in Portuguese). Belo Horizonte.
Retrieved 12 October 2020.
"Care-i cel mai… înfrățit oraș din România? Care-i cu americanii, care-i cu rușii? Și care-i înfrățit cu Timișoara…". banatulazi.ro (in Romanian). Banatul Azi. 6 August 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2020.
"Listing of Twinning Cities". cityofportofspain.gov.tt.
City of Port of Spain.
Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2020.
Further reading
Leithead, Alastair (August 2017). "The city that won't stop growing: How can Lagos cope with its spiralling population?", BBC News
External links
Lagos  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity
Official website 
State Judiciary of Lagos
Articles Related to Lagos
Yoruba topicsHistory
Ifẹ
Oyo Empire
Yoruba country
Western Nigeria
Nigeria
Benin
Togo
Subgroups
Ijesha
Egba
Egun
Egbado
Igbomina
Awori
Akoko
Okun
Ana
Ekiti
Ilaje
Olukumi
Yoruboid languages
Yoruba
Ulukwumi
Lucumí
Ede
Ifè
Mokole
Itsekiri
Igala
Politics
Rulers of Dassa
Rulers of Icha
Rulers of Ketu
Rulers of Sabe
Olota of Ota
Ijebu Kingdom
Egba Alake
Iwo Kingdom
Oyo Empire
Owu Kingdom
Ondo Kingdom
Akure Kingdom
Oke Ila
Ila Yara
Ila Kingdom
Idoani Confederacy
Western Nigeria
Nigeria
Geography(Yorubaland)Precolonial state:
Yoruba country
Departments:
Ouémé
Plateau
Collines
Borgou
Alibori
Zou
Donga
Plateau (Kétou)
States:
Lagos
Oyo
Ogun
Osun
Ondo
Ekiti
Kwara
Kogi
Edo
Major cities:
Lagos
Ibadan
Ilorin
Abẹokuta
Ọyọ
Ilé-Ifẹ
Akure
Ogbomosho
Owo
Osogbo
Ado-Ekiti
Iwo
Ondo City
Porto Novo
Demographics
Yoruba people
Saros
Sierra Leone
United Kingdom
United States
Canada
Cuba
Jamaica
Brazil
Trinidad and Tobago
Culture
Art
Music
Highlife
Religion
Calendar
Language
Yoruboid
Numerals
Names
Literature
Education & Philosophy
Medicine
Architecture
Yoruba Wikipedia
Yoruba
Lagos Metropolitan AreaLGAsIsland
Amuwo-Odofin
Apapa
Eti-Osa
Lagos Island
Mainland
Ajeromi-Ifelodun
Lagos Mainland
Surulere
Suburban
Agege
Alimosho
Ifako-Ijaiye
Ikeja
Kosofe
Mushin
Ojo
Oshodi-Isolo
Shomolu
Education
Adeniran Ogunsanya College of Education
Augustine University Ilara
Caleb University
CMS Grammar School, Lagos
College of Medicine, University of Lagos
Federal College of Education (Technical), Akoka
Federal College of Fisheries and Marine Technology
Igbobi College
Ikenna Stars Academy
King's College, Lagos
Lagos City Polytechnic
Lagos State University
Lagos State University College of Medicine
Pan-Atlantic University
Queen's College, Lagos
St Gregory's College, Lagos
University of Lagos
Yaba College of Technology
See also: List of schools in Lagos
EconomyTrade & Commerce
Companies
Computer Village
Markets
Lagos Stock Exchange
Yabacon Valley
Ports
Apapa Port
Tin Can Island Port
Shopping Malls
Palms Shopping Mall
Adeniran Ogunsanya Shopping Mall
Ikeja City Mall
Silverbird Galleria
Lagos City Mall
Healthcare
Federal Medical Centre Ebute Metta
First Consultant Hospital
Lagos Island General Hospital
Reddington Hospital
Eko Hospital
St.
Nicholas Hospital, Lagos
Lagoon Hospitals
Lagos University Teaching Hospital
National Orthopaedic Hospital
Creek Hospital
Flying Doctors Nigeria
Yaba Psychiatric Hospital
See also: List of hospitals in Lagos
History
Awori
Akintoye
Kosoko
Henry Stanhope Freeman
Cornelius Alfred Moloney
Lagos Colony
Southern Nigeria Protectorate
Herbert Macaulay
Timeline
Mass mediaNewspapers
The Nation
Business Day
Newswatch
Thisday
Daily Times
Business Hallmark
Complete Sports
Vanguard
Next
The Daily Independent
Television
Lagos Television
Channels Television
Galaxy Television (Nigeria)
Africa Independent Television
Nigerian Television Authority
Radio
100.5 FM
Notable areas and districts
Agege
Ajah
Apapa
Banana Island
Chinatown
Ebute Metta
Festac Town
Iddo Island
Ikeja
Ikoyi
Lekki
Mushin
Obalende
Oshodi
Shomolu
Surulere
Victoria Garden City
Victoria Island
Yaba
Transportation
Arik Air
Ikeja Bus Terminal
IRS Airlines
Lagos Rail Mass Transit
Lagos Bus Rapid Transit System
Lagos Terminus
Lagos Ferry
Murtala Muhammed International Airport
Oyingbo Bus Terminal
Tourist attractionsEvents
Lagos Seafood Festival
GTBank Food and Drink
Lagos International Trade Fair
Lagos Photo Festival
Lagos Black Heritage Festival
Lagos Carnival
Eyo festival
Lagos Fashion Week
Felabration
Lagos Marathon
Lagos International Jazz Festival
Landmarks
Ilojo Bar
Nigerian National Museum
National Arts Theatre
National Gallery of Modern Art, Lagos
Kalakuta Republic
Ikoyi Cemetery
Muson Centre
Tafawa Balewa Square
Tinubu Square
Iga Idunganran
Welcome to Lagos
Unknown Soldier
Lagos City Hall
Federal Palace Hotel
Shitta-Bey Mosque
Sports venues
Lagos National Stadium
Onikan Stadium
Teslim Balogun Stadium
Parks
Jhalobia Recreation Park and Garden
Freedom Park
Buildings and Structures
Carter Bridge
Third Mainland Bridge
Eko Bridge
NECOM
Union Bank
See also: Architecture of Lagos
Category
Commons
Nigeria portal
Lagos StateState capital: IkejaCities
Eko Atlantic
Ikorodu
Ikeja
Lagos
Lekki
Towns
Ajah
Badagry
Epe
Ojo
LGAs
Agege
Ajeromi-Ifelodun
Alimosho
Amuwo-Odofin
Apapa
Badagry
Epe
Eti-Osa
Ibeju-Lekki
Ifako-Ijaiye
Ikeja
Ikorodu
Kosofe
Lagos Island
Lagos Mainland
Mushin
Ojo
Oshodi-Isolo
Somolu
Surulere
GovernmentLeaders
Governor
Chief Justice
Attorney General
Executive Council
Ministries
Education
Finance
Agriculture and Cooperatives
Commerce and Industry
Economic Planning and Budget
Energy and Mineral Resources
Environment
Establishments, Training and Pensions
Health
Home Affairs and Culture
Housing
Information and Strategy
Justice
Rural Development
Science and Technology
Special Studies
Tourism and Inter-governmental Relations
Transport
Waterfront Infrastructure Development
Women Affairs and Poverty Alleviation
Works and Infrastructure
Youth, Sports and Social Development
House of Assembly
Others
Lagos State Civil Service
Head of Service
City Hall, Lagos
Lagos State Police Command
Oba of Lagos
World's 50 most-populous urban areas   
TokyoJakartaDelhiManilaSeoulMumbaiShanghaiNew YorkSão PauloMexico City
Guangzhou–FoshanShenzhenBeijingDhakaOsaka–Kobe–KyotoCairoMoscowBangkokLos AngelesKolkata
LagosBuenos AiresKarachiIstanbulTehranTianjinKinshasa–BrazzavilleChengduRio de JaneiroLahore
LimaBangaloreParisHo Chi Minh CityLondonBogotáChennaiNagoyaHyderabadJohannesburg
ChicagoTaipeiWuhanDongguanHanoiChongqingOnitshaKuala LumpurAhmedabadLuanda
African Games host cities   
Largest cities in Nigeria
Aba
Abakaliki
Abeokuta
Abuja
Ado Ekiti
Akure
Asaba
Awka
Bauchi
Benin City
Bida
Birnin Kebbi
Calabar
Dutse
Eket
Enugu
Gombe
Gusau
Ibadan
Ife
Ikeja
Ikot-Abasi
Ikot Ekpene
Ikoyi
Ilorin
Iseyin
Iwo
Jalingo
Jimeta
Jos
Kaduna
Kano
Katsina
Kontagora
Lafia
Lavun
Lagos
Lokoja
Maiduguri
Makurdi
Minna
Mokwa
Nnewi
Nsukka
Ogbomosho
Okene
Onitsha
Ondo City
Oron
Osogbo
Owerri
Owo
Oyo
Port Harcourt
Potiskum
Sokoto
Suleja
Umuahia
Uyo
Warri
Wukari
Yenagoa
Yola
Zaria
MegacitiesAfrica (3)
Cairo
Kinshasa
Lagos
Asia (28)
Bangalore
Bangkok
Beijing
Chengdu
Chennai
Chongqing
Delhi
Dhaka
Guangzhou
Hangzhou
Ho Chi Minh City
Hyderabad
Istanbul
Jakarta
Karachi
Kolkata
Kyoto–Osaka–Kobe (Keihanshin)
Lahore
Metro Manila
Mumbai
Nagoya
Seoul
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Tehran
Tianjin
Tokyo
Xiamen
Europe (5)
Istanbul
London
Moscow
Paris
Rhine-Ruhr
North America (3)
Los Angeles
Mexico City
New York City
South America (5)
Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Lima
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Cities portal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat (via VIAF)
National libraries
Germany
Czech Republic
Sweden
Other
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 17 September 2022, at 21:56 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
