Latin script - Wikipedia
Latin script
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Writing system used for most European languages
For the Latin script originally used by the ancient Romans to write Latin, see Latin alphabet.
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations.
Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
LatinRomanScript type Alphabet
Time periodc. 700 BC – presentDirectionleft-to-right LanguagesMost Western European languages, including LatinMany Turkic, Finno-Ugric and Eskimo–Aleut languagesBasqueSome Slavic, African, Austronesian, and Austroasiatic languages
Official script in:
Albania
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chile
Colombia
Congo
Democratic Republic of Congo
Costa Rica
Cote D'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Eswatini
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Germany
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Latvia
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Monaco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Suriname
Sweden
Switzerland
Tanzania
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Co-official script in:
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brunei
Chad
Comoros
Djibouti
Eritrea
India
Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Montenegro
Pakistan
Singapore[a]
Somalia
Sudan
European Union
United Nations
Related scriptsParent systemsEgyptian hieroglyphsProto-Sinaitic scriptPhoenician alphabetGreek alphabetOld Italic scriptLatinChild systemsFraser alphabet (Lisu)Osage scriptLatin alphabet(partially) several phonetic alphabets, such as IPA, which have been used to write languages with no native scriptDeseret alphabet(partially) Pollard script (Miao)(partially) Caroline Island script (Woleaian)(indirectly) Cherokee syllabary(indirectly, partially) Yugtun scriptSister systemsCyrillic scriptGlagolitic scriptArmenian alphabetGeorgian scriptCoptic alphabetRunesISO 15924ISO 15924Latn (215), ​LatinUnicodeUnicode aliasLatinUnicode rangeSee Latin characters in Unicode This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. For the distinction between [ ], / / and ⟨ ⟩, see IPA § Brackets and transcription delimiters.
The Latin script, also known as Roman script, is an alphabetic writing system based on the letters of the classical Latin alphabet, derived from a form of the Cumaean Greek version of the Greek alphabet used by the Etruscans.
Several Latin-script alphabets exist, which differ in graphemes, collation and phonetic values from the classical Latin alphabet.
The Latin script is the basis of the International Phonetic Alphabet, and the 26 most widespread letters are the letters contained in the ISO basic Latin alphabet.
Latin script is the basis for the largest number of alphabets of any writing system and is the
most widely adopted writing system in the world.
Latin script is used as the standard method of writing for most Western and Central, and some Eastern, European languages as well as many languages in other parts of the world.
Contents
Name
The script is either called Latin script or Roman script, in reference to its origin in ancient Rome (though some of the capital letters are Greek in origin). In the context of transliteration, the term "romanization" (British English: "romanisation") is often found.
Unicode uses the term "Latin" as does the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).
The numeral system is called the Roman numeral system, and the collection of the elements is known as the Roman numerals.
The numbers 1, 2, 3 ... are Latin/Roman script numbers for the Hindu–Arabic numeral system.
History
Main article: History of the Latin script
Old Italic alphabet
Old Italic alphabet
Letters
Transliteration
Archaic Latin alphabet
Archaic Latin alphabet
As Old Italic
As Latin
The letter ⟨C⟩ was the western form of the Greek gamma, but it was used for the sounds /ɡ/ and /k/ alike, possibly under the influence of Etruscan, which might have lacked any voiced plosives.
Later, probably during the 3rd century BC, the letter ⟨Z⟩ – unneeded to write Latin properly – was replaced with the new letter ⟨G⟩, a ⟨C⟩ modified with a small horizontal stroke, which took its place in the alphabet.
From then on, ⟨G⟩ represented the voiced plosive /ɡ/, while ⟨C⟩ was generally reserved for the voiceless plosive /k/. The letter ⟨K⟩ was used only rarely, in a small number of words such as Kalendae, often interchangeably with ⟨C⟩.
Classical Latin alphabet
After the Roman conquest of Greece in the 1st century BC, Latin adopted the Greek letters ⟨Y⟩ and ⟨Z⟩ (or readopted, in the latter case) to write Greek loanwords, placing them at the end of the alphabet.
An attempt by the emperor Claudius to introduce three additional letters did not last.
Thus it was during the classical Latin period that the Latin alphabet contained 23 letters:
Classical Latin alphabet
Letter
Latin name (majus)
bé
cé
dé
ef
gé
há
ká
el
em
en
pé
qv́
er
es
té
v́
ix
ꟾ graeca
zéta
Latin name
bē
cē
dē
ef
gē
hā
kā
el
em
en
pē
qū
er
es
tē
ix
ī Graeca
zēta
Latin pronunciation (IPA)
aː
beː
keː
deː
eː
ɛf
ɡeː
haː
iː
kaː
ɛl
ɛm
ɛn
oː
peː
kuː
ɛr
ɛs
teː
uː
iks
iː ˈɡraeka
ˈdzeːta
Medieval and later developments
De chalcographiae inventione (1541, Mainz) with the 23 letters. J, U and W are missing.
Jeton from Nuremberg, c. 1553
It was not until the Middle Ages that the letter ⟨W⟩ (originally a ligature of two ⟨V⟩s) was added to the Latin alphabet, to represent sounds from the Germanic languages which did not exist in medieval Latin, and only after the Renaissance did the convention of treating ⟨I⟩ and ⟨U⟩ as vowels, and ⟨J⟩ and ⟨V⟩ as consonants, become established.
Prior to that, the former had been merely allographs of the latter.[citation needed]
With the fragmentation of political power, the style of writing changed and varied greatly throughout the Middle Ages, even after the invention of the printing press.
Early deviations from the classical forms were the uncial script, a development of the Old Roman cursive, and various so-called minuscule scripts that developed from New Roman cursive, of which the insular script developed by Irish literati & derivations of this, such as Carolingian minuscule were the most influential, introducing the lower case forms of the letters, as well as other writing conventions that have since become standard.
The languages that use the Latin script generally use capital letters to begin paragraphs and sentences and proper nouns.
The rules for capitalization have changed over time, and different languages have varied in their rules for capitalization.
Old English, for example, was rarely written with even proper nouns capitalized, whereas Modern English writers and printers of the 17th and 18th century frequently capitalized most and sometimes all nouns – e.g. in the preamble and all of the United States Constitution – a practice still systematically used in Modern German.
ISO basic Latin alphabet
Main article: ISO basic Latin alphabet
ISO basic Latin alphabet
Uppercase Latin alphabet
Lowercase Latin alphabet
The use of the letters I and V for both consonants and vowels proved inconvenient as the Latin alphabet was adapted to Germanic and Romance languages.
W originated as a doubled V (VV) used to represent the Voiced labial–velar approximant /w/ found in Old English as early as the 7th century.
It came into common use in the later 11th century, replacing the letter wynn ⟨Ƿ ƿ⟩, which had been used for the same sound.
In the Romance languages, the minuscule form of V was a rounded u; from this was derived a rounded capital U for the vowel in the 16th century, while a new, pointed minuscule v was derived from V for the consonant.
In the case of I, a word-final swash form, j, came to be used for the consonant, with the un-swashed form restricted to vowel use.
Such conventions were erratic for centuries.
J was introduced into English for the consonant in the 17th century (it had been rare as a vowel), but it was not universally considered a distinct letter in the alphabetic order until the 19th century.
By the 1960s, it became apparent to the computer and telecommunications industries in the First World that a non-proprietary method of encoding characters was needed.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) encapsulated the Latin alphabet in their (ISO/IEC 646) standard.
To achieve widespread acceptance, this encapsulation was based on popular usage.
As the United States held a preeminent position in both industries during the 1960s, the standard was based on the already published American Standard Code for Information Interchange, better known as ASCII, which included in the character set the 26 × 2 (uppercase and lowercase) letters of the English alphabet.
Later standards issued by the ISO, for example ISO/IEC 10646 (Unicode Latin), have continued to define the 26 × 2 letters of the English alphabet as the basic Latin alphabet with extensions to handle other letters in other languages.
Spread
The distribution of the Latin script.
The dark green areas show the countries where the Latin script is the sole main script.
Light green shows countries where Latin co-exists with other scripts.
Latin-script alphabets are sometimes extensively used in areas coloured grey due to the use of unofficial second languages, such as French in Algeria and English in Egypt, and to Latin transliteration of the official script, such as pinyin in China.
Main article: Spread of the Latin script
The Latin alphabet spread, along with Latin, from the Italian Peninsula to the lands surrounding the Mediterranean Sea with the expansion of the Roman Empire.
The eastern half of the Empire, including Greece, Turkey, the Levant, and Egypt, continued to use Greek as a lingua franca, but Latin was widely spoken in the western half, and as the western Romance languages evolved out of Latin, they continued to use and adapt the Latin alphabet.
Middle Ages
With the spread of Western Christianity during the Middle Ages, the Latin alphabet was gradually adopted by the peoples of Northern Europe who spoke Celtic languages (displacing the Ogham alphabet) or Germanic languages (displacing earlier Runic alphabets) or Baltic languages, as well as by the speakers of several Uralic languages, most notably Hungarian, Finnish and Estonian.
The Latin script also came into use for writing the West Slavic languages and several South Slavic languages, as the people who spoke them adopted Roman Catholicism.
The speakers of East Slavic languages generally adopted Cyrillic along with Orthodox Christianity.
The Serbian language uses both scripts, with Cyrillic predominating in official communication and Latin elsewhere, as determined by the Law on Official Use of the Language and Alphabet.
Since the 16th century
As late as 1500, the Latin script was limited primarily to the languages spoken in Western, Northern, and Central Europe.
The Orthodox Christian Slavs of Eastern and Southeastern Europe mostly used Cyrillic, and the Greek alphabet was in use by Greek-speakers around the eastern Mediterranean.
The Arabic script was widespread within Islam, both among Arabs and non-Arab nations like the Iranians, Indonesians, Malays, and Turkic peoples.
Most of the rest of Asia used a variety of Brahmic alphabets or the Chinese script.
Through European colonization the Latin script has spread to the Americas, Oceania, parts of Asia, Africa, and the Pacific, in forms based on the Spanish, Portuguese, English, French, German and Dutch alphabets.
It is used for many Austronesian languages, including the languages of the Philippines and the Malaysian and Indonesian languages, replacing earlier Arabic and indigenous Brahmic alphabets.
Latin letters served as the basis for the forms of the Cherokee syllabary developed by Sequoyah; however, the sound values are completely different.[citation needed]
Under Portuguese missionary influence, a Latin alphabet was devised for the Vietnamese language, which had previously used Chinese characters.  The Latin-based alphabet replaced the Chinese characters in administration in the 19th century with French rule.
Since 19th century
In the late 19th century, the Romanians switched to the Latin alphabet, which they had used until the Council of Florence in 1439, primarily because Romanian is a Romance language.
The Romanians were predominantly Orthodox Christians, and their Church, increasingly influenced by Russia after the fall of Byzantine Greek Constantinople in 1453 and capture of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch, had begun promoting the Slavic Cyrillic.
Since 20th century
In 1928, as part of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's reforms, the new Republic of Turkey adopted a Latin alphabet for the Turkish language, replacing a modified Arabic alphabet.
Most of the Turkic-speaking peoples of the former USSR, including Tatars, Bashkirs, Azeri, Kazakh, Kyrgyz and others, had their writing systems replaced by the Latin-based Uniform Turkic alphabet in the 1930s; but, in the 1940s, all were replaced by Cyrillic.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, three of the newly independent Turkic-speaking republics, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, as well as Romanian-speaking Moldova, officially adopted Latin alphabets for their languages.
Kyrgyzstan, Iranian-speaking Tajikistan, and the breakaway region of Transnistria kept the Cyrillic alphabet, chiefly due to their close ties with Russia.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the majority of Kurds replaced the Arabic script with two Latin alphabets.
Although only the official Kurdish government uses an Arabic alphabet for public documents, the Latin Kurdish alphabet remains widely used throughout the region by the majority of Kurdish-speakers.
In 1957, the People's Republic of China introduced a script reform to the Zhuang language, changing its orthography from unregulated and highly inconsistent use of Chinese characters, known as sawndip, to a Latin script alphabet that used a mixture of Latin, Cyrillic, and IPA letters to represent both the phonemes and tones of the Zhuang language, without the use of diacritics.
In 1982 this was further standardised to use only Latin script letters.
With the collapse of the Derg and subsequent end of decades of Amharic assimilation in 1991, various ethnic groups in Ethiopia dropped the Geʽez script, which was deemed unsuitable for languages outside of the Semitic branch.
In the following years the Kafa, Oromo, Sidama, Somali, and Wolaitta languages switched to Latin while there is continued debate on whether to follow suit for the Hadiyya and Kambaata languages.
On 15 September 1999 the authorities of Tatarstan, Russia, passed a law to make the Latin script a co-official writing system alongside Cyrillic for the Tatar language by 2011. A year later, however, the Russian government overruled the law and banned Latinization on its territory.
In 2015, the government of Kazakhstan announced that a Kazakh Latin alphabet would replace the Kazakh Cyrillic alphabet as the official writing system for the Kazakh language by 2025. There are also talks about switching from the Cyrillic script to Latin in Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan, and Mongolia.
Mongolia, however, has since opted to revive the Mongolian script instead of switching to Latin.
In October 2019, the organization National Representational Organization for Inuit in Canada (ITK) announced that they will introduce a unified writing system for the Inuit languages in the country.
The writing system is based on the Latin alphabet and is modeled after the one used in the Greenlandic language.
On 12 February 2021 the government of Uzbekistan announced it will finalize the transition from Cyrillic to Latin for the Uzbek language by 2023. Plans to switch to Latin originally began in 1993 but subsequently stalled and Cyrillic remained in widespread use.
At present the Crimean Tatar language uses both Cyrillic and Latin.
The use of Latin was originally approved by Crimean Tatar representatives after the Soviet Union's collapse but was never implemented by the regional government.
After Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 the Latin script was dropped entirely.
Nevertheless Crimean Tatars outside of Crimea continue to use Latin and on 22 October 2021 the government of Ukraine approved a proposal endorsed by the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People to switch the Crimean Tatar language to Latin by 2025.
In July 2020, 2.6 billion people (36% of the world population) use the Latin alphabet.
International standards
Main articles: ISO basic Latin alphabet and Latin script in Unicode
By the 1960s, it became apparent to the computer and telecommunications industries in the First World that a non-proprietary method of encoding characters was needed.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) encapsulated the Latin alphabet in their (ISO/IEC 646) standard.
To achieve widespread acceptance, this encapsulation was based on popular usage.
As the United States held a preeminent position in both industries during the 1960s, the standard was based on the already published American Standard Code for Information Interchange, better known as ASCII, which included in the character set the 26 × 2 (uppercase and lowercase) letters of the English alphabet.
Later standards issued by the ISO, for example ISO/IEC 10646 (Unicode Latin), have continued to define the 26 × 2 letters of the English alphabet as the basic Latin alphabet with extensions to handle other letters in other languages.
National standards
The DIN standard DIN 91379 specifies a subset of Unicode letters, special characters, and sequences of letters and diacritic signs to allow the correct representation of names and to simplify data exchange in Europe.
This specification supports all official languages of European Union countries (thus also Greek and Cyrillic for Bulgarian) as well as the official languages of Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland, and also the German minority languages.
To allow the transliteration of names in other writing systems to the Latin script according to the relevant ISO standards all necessary combinations of base letters and diacritic signs are provided.
Efforts are being made to further develop it into a European CEN standard.
As used by various languages
Main article: Latin-script alphabet
In the course of its use, the Latin alphabet was adapted for use in new languages, sometimes representing phonemes not found in languages that were already written with the Roman characters.
To represent these new sounds, extensions were therefore created, be it by adding diacritics to existing letters, by joining multiple letters together to make ligatures, by creating completely new forms, or by assigning a special function to pairs or triplets of letters.
These new forms are given a place in the alphabet by defining an alphabetical order or collation sequence, which can vary with the particular language.
Letters
For a more comprehensive list, see List of Latin-script letters.
Some examples of new letters to the standard Latin alphabet are the Runic letters wynn ⟨Ƿ ƿ⟩ and thorn ⟨Þ þ⟩, and the letter eth ⟨Ð/ð⟩, which were added to the alphabet of Old English.
Another Irish letter, the insular g, developed into yogh ⟨Ȝ ȝ⟩, used in Middle English.
Wynn was later replaced with the new letter ⟨w⟩, eth and thorn with ⟨th⟩, and yogh with ⟨gh⟩. Although the four are no longer part of the English or Irish alphabets, eth and thorn are still used in the modern Icelandic alphabet, while eth is also used by the Faroese alphabet.
Some West, Central and Southern African languages use a few additional letters that have sound values similar to those of their equivalents in the IPA. For example, Adangme uses the letters ⟨Ɛ ɛ⟩ and ⟨Ɔ ɔ⟩, and Ga uses ⟨Ɛ ɛ⟩, ⟨Ŋ ŋ⟩ and ⟨Ɔ ɔ⟩. Hausa uses ⟨Ɓ ɓ⟩ and ⟨Ɗ ɗ⟩ for implosives, and ⟨Ƙ ƙ⟩ for an ejective.
Africanists have standardized these into the African reference alphabet.
Dotted and dotless I — ⟨İ i⟩ and ⟨I ı⟩ — are two forms of the letter I used by the Turkish, Azerbaijani, and Kazakh alphabets.
The Azerbaijani language also has ⟨Ə ə⟩, which represents the near-open front unrounded vowel.
Multigraphs
Main article: Latin-script multigraph
A digraph is a pair of letters used to write one sound or a combination of sounds that does not correspond to the written letters in sequence.
Examples are ⟨ch⟩, ⟨ng⟩, ⟨rh⟩, ⟨sh⟩, ⟨ph⟩, ⟨th⟩  in English, and ⟨ij⟩, ⟨ee⟩, ⟨ch⟩ and ⟨ei⟩ in Dutch.
In Dutch the ⟨ij⟩ is capitalized as ⟨IJ⟩ or the ligature ⟨Ĳ⟩, but never as ⟨Ij⟩, and it often takes the appearance of a ligature ⟨ĳ⟩ very similar to the letter ⟨ÿ⟩ in handwriting.
A trigraph is made up of three letters, like the German ⟨sch⟩, the Breton ⟨c'h⟩ or the Milanese ⟨oeu⟩. In the orthographies of some languages, digraphs and trigraphs are regarded as independent letters of the alphabet in their own right.
The capitalization of digraphs and trigraphs is language-dependent, as only the first letter may be capitalized, or all component letters simultaneously (even for words written in title case, where letters after the digraph or trigraph are left in lowercase).
Ligatures
Main article: Ligature (typography)
A ligature is a fusion of two or more ordinary letters into a new glyph or character.
Examples are ⟨Æ æ⟩ (from ⟨AE⟩, called "ash"), ⟨Œ œ⟩ (from ⟨OE⟩, sometimes called "oethel"), the abbreviation ⟨&⟩ (from Latin: et, lit. 'and', called "ampersand"), and ⟨ẞ ß⟩ (from ⟨ſʒ⟩ or ⟨ſs⟩, the archaic medial form of ⟨s⟩, followed by an ⟨ʒ⟩ or ⟨s⟩, called "sharp S" or "eszett").
Diacritics
The letter ⟨a⟩ with an acute diacritic
Main article: Diacritic
A diacritic, in some cases also called an accent, is a small symbol that can appear above or below a letter, or in some other position, such as the umlaut sign used in the German characters ⟨ä⟩, ⟨ö⟩, ⟨ü⟩ or the Romanian characters ă, â, î, ș, ț. Its main function is to change the phonetic value of the letter to which it is added, but it may also modify the pronunciation of a whole syllable or word, indicate the start of a new syllable, or distinguish between homographs such as the Dutch words een (pronounced [ən]) meaning "a" or "an", and één, (pronounced [e:n]) meaning "one". As with the pronunciation of letters, the effect of diacritics is language-dependent.
English is the only major modern European language that requires no diacritics for its native vocabulary[note 1]. Historically, in formal writing, a diaeresis was sometimes used to indicate the start of a new syllable within a sequence of letters that could otherwise be misinterpreted as being a single vowel (e.g., “coöperative”, “reëlect”), but modern writing styles either omit such marks or use a hyphen to indicate a syllable break (e.g. “cooperative”, “re-elect”). [note 2]
Collation
Main article: Collating sequence
Some modified letters, such as the symbols ⟨å⟩, ⟨ä⟩, and ⟨ö⟩, may be regarded as new individual letters in themselves, and assigned a specific place in the alphabet for collation purposes, separate from that of the letter on which they are based, as is done in Swedish.
In other cases, such as with ⟨ä⟩, ⟨ö⟩, ⟨ü⟩ in German, this is not done; letter-diacritic combinations being identified with their base letter.
The same applies to digraphs and trigraphs.
Different diacritics may be treated differently in collation within a single language.
For example, in Spanish, the character ⟨ñ⟩ is considered a letter, and sorted between ⟨n⟩ and ⟨o⟩ in dictionaries, but the accented vowels ⟨á⟩, ⟨é⟩, ⟨í⟩, ⟨ó⟩, ⟨ú⟩, ⟨ü⟩ are not separated from the unaccented vowels ⟨a⟩, ⟨e⟩, ⟨i⟩, ⟨o⟩, ⟨u⟩.
Capitalization
Main article: Letter case
The languages that use the Latin script today generally use capital letters to begin paragraphs and sentences and proper nouns.
The rules for capitalization have changed over time, and different languages have varied in their rules for capitalization.
Old English, for example, was rarely written with even proper nouns capitalized; whereas Modern English of the 18th century had frequently all nouns capitalized, in the same way that Modern German is written today, e.g.
German: Alle Schwestern der alten Stadt hatten die Vögel gesehen, lit. 'All of the sisters of the old city had seen the birds'.
Romanization
Main article: Romanization
Words from languages natively written with other scripts, such as Arabic or Chinese, are usually transliterated or transcribed when embedded in Latin-script text or in multilingual international communication, a process termed Romanization.
Whilst the Romanization of such languages is used mostly at unofficial levels, it has been especially prominent in computer messaging where only the limited seven-bit ASCII code is available on older systems.
However, with the introduction of Unicode, Romanization is now becoming less necessary.
Note that keyboards used to enter such text may still restrict users to Romanized text, as only ASCII or Latin-alphabet characters may be available.
See also
List of languages by writing system#Latin script
Western Latin character sets (computing)
European Latin Unicode subset (DIN 91379)
Latin letters used in mathematics
Latin omega
Notes
In formal English writing, however, diacritics are often preserved on many loanwords, such as "café", "naïve", "façade", "jalapeño" or the German prefix "über-".
As an example, an article containing a diaeresis in "coöperate" and a cedilla in "façade" as well as a circumflex in the word "crêpe": Grafton, Anthony (23 October 2006). "Books: The Nutty Professors, The history of academic charisma". The New Yorker.
Alongside Chinese and Tamil
References
Citations
Haarmann 2004, p. 96.
"Search results | BSI Group". Bsigroup.com.
Retrieved 12 May 2014.
"Romanisation_systems". Pcgn.org.uk.
Retrieved 12 May 2014.
"ISO 15924 – Code List in English". Unicode.org.
Retrieved 22 July 2013.
"Search – ISO". Iso.org.
Retrieved 12 May 2014.
Crystal, David (2003). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 9780521530330 – via Google Books.
"Zakon O Službenoj Upotrebi Jezika I Pisama" (PDF). Ombudsman.rs. 17 May 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2014.
"Descriptio_Moldaviae". La.wikisource.org. 1714. Retrieved 14 September 2014.
Smith, Lahra (2013). "Review of Making Citizens in Africa: Ethnicity, Gender, and National Identity in Ethiopia". African Studies. 125 (3): 542–544. doi:10.1080/00083968.2015.1067017. S2CID 148544393 – via Taylor & Francis.
Pütz, Martin (1997). Language Choices: Conditions, constraints, and consequences.
John Benjamins Publishing. p. 216. ISBN 9789027275844.
Gemeda, Guluma (18 June 2018). "The History and Politics of the Qubee Alphabet". Ayyaantuu.
Retrieved 16 November 2021.
a b c Yohannes, Mekonnen (2021). "Language Policy in Ethiopia: The Interplay Between Policy and Practice in Tigray Regional State". Language Policy. 24: 33. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-63904-4. ISBN 978-3-030-63903-7. S2CID 234114762 – via Springer Link.
Pasch, Helma (2008). "Competing scripts: The Introduction of the Roman Alphabet in Africa" (PDF). International Journal of the Sociology of Language. 191: 8 – via ResearchGate.
Andrews, Ernest (2018). Language Planning in the Post-Communist Era: The Struggles for Language Control in the New Order in Eastern Europe, Eurasia and China.
Springer. p. 132. ISBN 978-3-319-70926-0.
Faller, Helen (2011). Nation, Language, Islam: Tatarstan's Sovereignty Movement.
Central European University Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-963-9776-84-5.
Kazakh language to be converted to Latin alphabet – MCS RK. Inform.kz (30 January 2015). Retrieved on 28 September 2015.
"Klimkin welcomes discussion on switching to Latin alphabet in Ukraine". UNIAN (27 March 2018).
"Moscow Bribes Bishkek to Stop Kyrgyzstan From Changing to Latin Alphabet". The Jamestown Organization (12 October 2017).
"Kyrgyzstan: Latin (alphabet) fever takes hold". Eurasianet (13 September 2019).
"Russian Influence in Mongolia is Declining". Global Security Review (2 March 2019). 2 March 2019.
Tang, Didi (20 March 2020). "Mongolia abandons Soviet past by restoring alphabet". The Times.
ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 2 March 2021.
"Canadian Inuit Get Common Written Language". High North News (8 October 2019).
Sands, David (12 February 2021). "Latin lives! Uzbeks prepare latest switch to Western-based alphabet". The Washington Times.
Retrieved 15 February 2021.
"Uzbekistan Aims For Full Transition To Latin-Based Alphabet By 2023". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 12 February 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021.
Kuzio, Taras (2007). Ukraine - Crimea - Russia: Triangle of Conflict.
Columbia University Press. p. 106. ISBN 978-3-8382-5761-7.
"Cabinet approves Crimean Tatar alphabet based on Latin letters". Ukrinform. 22 October 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021.
"The world's scripts and alphabets". WorldStandards.
Retrieved 11 August 2020.
"DIN 91379:2022-08: Characters and defined character sequences in Unicode for the electronic processing of names and data exchange in Europe, with CD-ROM". Beuth Verlag.
Retrieved 19 August 2022.
Koordinierungsstelle für IT-Standards (KoSIT). "String.Latin+ 1.2: eine kommentierte und erweiterte Fassung der DIN SPEC 91379. Inklusive einer umfangreichen Liste häufig gestellter Fragen.
Herausgegeben von der Fachgruppe String.Latin. (zip, 1.7 MB)" [String.Latin+ 1.2: Commented and extended version of DIN SPEC 91379.] (in German). Retrieved 19 March 2022.
"Localize Your Font: Turkish i". Glyphs.
Retrieved 28 January 2021.
"The New Yorker's odd mark — the diaeresis". 16 December 2010. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 8 March 2022.
Sources
Haarmann, Harald (2004). Geschichte der Schrift [History of Writing] (in German) (2nd ed.). München: C. H. Beck.
ISBN 978-3-406-47998-4.
Further reading
Boyle, Leonard E. 1976. "Optimist and recensionist: 'Common errors' or 'common variations.'" In Latin script and letters A.D. 400–900: Festschrift presented to Ludwig Bieler on the occasion of his 70th birthday.
Edited by John J. O'Meara and Bernd Naumann, 264–74. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Morison, Stanley. 1972. Politics and script: Aspects of authority and freedom in the development of Graeco-Latin script from the sixth century B.C. to the twentieth century A.D. Oxford: Clarendon.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Latin alphabet.
Library resources about  Latin script 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Unicode collation chart—Latin letters sorted by shape
Diacritics Project – All you need to design a font with correct accents
Latin script
History
Spread
Romanization
Roman numerals
Alphabets (list)
Classical Latin alphabet
ISO basic Latin alphabet
Phonetic alphabets
International Phonetic Alphabet
X-SAMPA
Spelling alphabet
Letters (list)
Letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet
Aa
Bb
Cc
Dd
Ee
Ff
Gg
Hh
Ii
Jj
Kk
Ll
Mm
Nn
Oo
Pp
Qq
Rr
Ss
Tt
Uu
Vv
Ww
Xx
Yy
Zz
MultigraphsDigraphs
Ch
Dž
Dz
Gh
Ij
Lj
Ll
Ly
Nh
Nj
Ny
Qu
Sh
Sz
Th
Ts
Trigraphs
dzs
eau
Tetragraphs
ough
tsch
PentagraphstzschKeyboard layouts (list)
QWERTY
QWERTZ
AZERTY
Dvorak
Colemak
BÉPO
Neo
Standards
ISO/IEC 646
Unicode
Western Latin character sets
Lists
Precomposed Latin characters in Unicode
Letters used in mathematics
List of typographical symbols and punctuation marks
Diacritics
Palaeography
Types of writing systemsOverview
History of writing
Grapheme
Hieroglyph
Lists
Writing systems
undeciphered
inventors
constructed
Languages by writing system / by first written accounts
TypesAbjads
Numerals
Aramaic
Hatran
Arabic
Elifba
Egyptian hieroglyphs
Elymaic
Hebrew
Ashuri
Cursive
Rashi
Solitreo
Tifinagh
Mandaic
Manichaean
Nabataean
Old North Arabian
Pahlavi
Book
Inscriptional
Inscriptional Parthian
Psalter
Pegon
Phoenician
Paleo-Hebrew
Pitman shorthand
Proto-Sinaitic
Punic
Samaritan
South Arabian
Zabur
Musnad
Sogdian
Syriac
ʾEsṭrangēlā
Serṭā
Maḏnḥāyā
Teeline Shorthand
Ugaritic
AbugidasBrahmicNorthern
Bengali–Assamese
Bhaiksuki
Brāhmī
Devanāgarī
Dogri
Gujarati
Gupta
Gurmukhī
Kaithi
Kalinga
Khema
Khojki
Khudabadi
Laṇḍā
Lepcha
Mahajani
Marchen
Meitei
Modi
Multani
Nagari
Nandinagari
Nepalese scripts
Bhujimol
Golmol
Himmol
Kummol
Kvemmol
Pachumol
Pracalit (Newar)
Ranjana
Tamyig
Tirhuta
Limbu
Litumol
Odia
Karani
ʼPhags-pa
Sharada
Siddhaṃ
Soyombo
Sylheti Nagri
Takri
Tibetan
Uchen
Umê
Tocharian
Zanabazar Square
Southern
Ahom
Balinese
Batak
Baybayin
Bhattiprolu
Buda
Buhid
Chakma
Cham
Fakkham
Grantha
Goykanadi
Hanunuo (Hanunó'o)
Javanese
Kadamba
Kannada
Karen
Kawi
Khmer
Khom Thai
Kulitan
Lanna
Langdi
Lao
Leke
Lampung
Lontara
Bilang-bilang
Makasar
Malayalam
Old Maldivian
Dhives Akuru
Eveyla Akuru
Mon–Burmese
Pallava
Pyu
Rejang
Rencong
Saurashtra
Shan
Sinhala
Sukhothai
Sundanese
Old Sundanese
Tagbanwa
Tai Le
New Tai Lue
Tai Noi
Tai Tham
Tai Viet
Lai Tay
Tamil
Tamil-Brahmi
Tanchangya
Telugu
Thai
Tigalari
Vatteluttu
Kolezhuthu
Malayanma
Others
Boyd's syllabic shorthand
Canadian syllabics
Blackfoot
Déné syllabics
Dham
Fox I
Geʽez
Gunjala Gondi
Japanese Braille
Sarati
Jenticha
Kharosthi
Mandombe
Masaram Gondi
Meroitic
Miao
Mwangwego
Pahawh Hmong
Sorang Sompeng
Tengwar
Thaana
Thomas Natural Shorthand
Warang Citi
AlphabetsLinear
Adlam
Armenian
Avestan
Pazend
Avoiuli
Bassa Vah
Borama
Carian
Caucasian Albanian
Cirth
Coelbren
Coorgi–Cox alphabet
Coptic
Cyrillic
Early
Deseret
Duployan shorthand
Chinook writing
Eclectic shorthand
Elbasan
Enochian
Etruscan
Evenki
Fox II
Fraser
Gabelsberger shorthand
Garay
Georgian
Asomtavruli
Nuskhuri
Mkhedruli
Gjirokastër
Glagolitic
Gothic
Gregg shorthand
Greek (archaic forms)
Greco-Iberian alphabet
Hangul
Hanifi
Jenticha
Kaddare
Kayah Li
Klingon
Latin
Beneventan
Blackletter
Carolingian minuscule
Fraktur
Gaelic
Insular
IPA
Kurrent
Merovingian
Sigla
Sütterlin
Tironian notes
Visigothic
Luo
Lycian
Lydian
Manchu
Medefaidrin
Molodtsov
Mongolian
Mru
Mundari Bani
Neo-Tifinagh
N'Ko
Ogham
Oirat
Ol Chiki
Old Hungarian
Old Italic
Old Permic
Orkhon
Old Uyghur
Ol Onal
Osage
Osmanya
Pau Cin Hau
Runic
Anglo-Saxon
Cipher
Dalecarlian
Elder Futhark
Younger Futhark
Gothic
Marcomannic
Medieval
Staveless
Shavian
Sidetic
Sorang Sompeng
Tifinagh
Todhri
Tolong Siki
Vagindra
Vellara
Visible Speech
Vithkuqi
Wancho
Warang Citi
Yezidi
Zaghawa
Non-linear
Braille
Maritime flags
Telegraph code
New York Point
Flag semaphore
Moon type
Ideograms and pictograms
Adinkra
Aztec
Blissymbol
Dongba
Ersu Shaba
Emoji
IConji
Isotype
Kaidā
Miꞌkmaw
Mixtec
New Epoch Notation Painting
Nsibidi
Ojibwe Hieroglyphs
Olmec
Siglas poveiras
Testerian
Yerkish
Zapotec
LogogramsChinese family of scriptsChinese Characters
Simplified
Traditional
Oracle bone script
Bronze Script
Seal Script
large
small
bird-worm
Hanja
Idu
Kanji
Chữ Nôm
Zhuang
Chinese-influenced
Jurchen
Khitan large script
Sui
Tangut
Cuneiform
Akkadian
Assyrian
Elamite
Hittite
Luwian
Sumerian
Other logo-syllabic
Anatolian
Bagam
Cretan
Isthmian
Maya
Proto-Elamite
Yi (Classical)
Logo-consonantal
Demotic
Hieratic
Hieroglyphs
Numerals
Hindu-Arabic
Abjad
Attic (Greek)
Muisca
Roman
Semi-syllabariesFull
Linear Elamite
Celtiberian
Northeastern Iberian
Southeastern Iberian
Khom
Dunging
Redundant
Espanca
Pahawh Hmong
Khitan small script
Southwest Paleohispanic
Zhuyin fuhao
Sign languages
ASLwrite
SignWriting
si5s
Stokoe Notation
Syllabaries
Afaka
Bamum
Bété
Byblos
Canadian Aboriginal
Cherokee
Cypriot
Cypro-Minoan
Ditema tsa Dinoko
Eskayan
Geba
Great Lakes Algonquian
Iban
Idu
Japanese
Hiragana
Katakana
Man'yōgana
Hentaigana
Sōgana
Jindai moji
Kikakui
Kpelle
Linear B
Linear Elamite
Lisu
Loma
Nüshu
Nwagu Aneke script
Old Persian Cuneiform
Sumerian
Vai
Woleai
Yi (Modern)
Yugtun
Braille ⠃⠗⠁⠊⠇⠇⠑Braille cell
International uniformity
ASCII braille
Unicode braille patterns
Braille scriptsFrench-ordered
Albanian
Azerbaijani
Cantonese
Catalan
Chinese (mainland Mandarin) (largely reassigned)
Czech
Dutch
English (Unified English)
Esperanto
French
German
Ghanaian
Guarani
Hawaiian
Hungarian
Iñupiaq
IPA
Irish
Italian
Latvian
Lithuanian
Luxembourgish (extended to 8-dot)
Maltese
Māori
Navajo
Nigerian
Philippine
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Samoan
Slovak
South African
Spanish
Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned)
Turkish
Vietnamese
Welsh
Yugoslav
Zambian
Nordic family
Estonian
Faroese
Icelandic
Northern Sami
Scandinavian
Danish
Finnish
Greenlandic
Norwegian
Swedish
Russian lineage familyi.e.
Cyrillic-mediated scripts
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Kazakh
Kyrgyz
Mongolian
Russian
Tatar
Ukrainian
Egyptian lineage familyi.e.
Arabic-mediated scripts
Arabic
Persian
Urdu (Pakistan)
Indian lineage familyi.e.
Bharati Braille
Devanagari (Hindi / Marathi / Nepali)
Bengali (Bangla / Assamese)
Gujarati
Kannada
Malayalam
Odia
Punjabi
Sinhala
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu (India)
Other scripts
Amharic
Armenian
Burmese
Dzongkha (Bhutanese)
Georgian
Greek
Hebrew
Inuktitut (reassigned vowels)
Khmer
Thai and Lao (Japanese vowels)
Tibetan
Reordered
Algerian Braille (obsolete)
Frequency-based
American Braille (obsolete)
Independent
Chinese semi-syllabaries
Cantonese
Mainland Chinese Mandarin
Taiwanese Mandarin
Two-cell Chinese (Shuangpin)
Japanese
Korean
Eight-dot
Luxembourgish
Kanji
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8)
Symbols in braille
Braille music
Canadian currency marks
Computer Braille Code
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (science; GS8/GS6)
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
Nemeth braille code
Braille technology
Braille e-book
Braille embosser
Braille translator
Braille watch
Mountbatten Brailler
Optical braille recognition
Perforation
Perkins Brailler
Refreshable braille display
Slate and stylus
Braigo
People
Louis Braille
Charles Barbier
Róża Czacka
Valentin Haüy
Harris Mowbray
Thakur Vishva Narain Singh
Sabriye Tenberken
William Bell Wait
Organisations
Braille Institute of America
Braille Without Borders
Japan Braille Library
National Braille Association
Blindness organizations
Schools for the blind
American Printing House for the Blind
Other tactile alphabets
Decapoint
Moon type
New York Point
Night writing
Vibratese
Related topics
Accessible publishing
Braille literacy
RoboBraille
Electronic writing systems
Emoticons
Emoji
Kaomoji
iConji
Unicode
Internet slang variants
Alay (Indonesia)
Denglisch
Doge
DoggoLingo
Fingilish (Persian)
Greeklish
Gyaru-moji (Japan)
Jejemon (Philippines)
Leet ("1337")
Lolspeak / LOLspeak / Kitteh
Martian language (Chinese)
Miguxês (Portuguese)
Padonkaffsky jargon (Russian)
Pseudo-Chinese
SMS language (used in phones)
Translit
Volapuk
Yaminjeongeum (Korean)
Authority control: National libraries 
Ukraine
Latvia
Czech Republic
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 October 2022, at 20:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
