Metallurgy - Wikipedia
Metallurgy
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Field of science that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metals
Smelting, a basic step in obtaining usable quantities of most metals.Casting; pouring molten gold into a mold.Gold was processed in La Luz Gold Mine (pictured) near Siuna, Nicaragua, until 1968.
Metallurgy is a domain of materials science and engineering that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metallic elements, their inter-metallic compounds, and their mixtures, which are known as alloys.
Metallurgy encompasses both the science and the technology of metals; that is, the way in which science is applied to the production of metals, and the engineering of metal components used in products for both consumers and manufacturers.
Metallurgy is distinct from the craft of metalworking.
Metalworking relies on metallurgy in a similar manner to how medicine relies on medical science for technical advancement.
A specialist practitioner of metallurgy is known as a metallurgist. 
The science of metallurgy is further subdivided into two broad categories: chemical metallurgy and physical metallurgy.
Chemical metallurgy is chiefly concerned with the reduction and oxidation of metals, and the chemical performance of metals.  Subjects of study in chemical metallurgy include mineral processing, the extraction of metals, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and chemical degradation (corrosion).  In contrast, physical metallurgy focuses on the mechanical properties of metals, the physical properties of metals, and the physical performance of metals.
Topics studied in physical metallurgy include crystallography, material characterization, mechanical metallurgy, phase transformations, and failure mechanisms.
Historically, metallurgy has predominately focused on the production of metals.
Metal production begins with the processing of ores to extract the metal, and includes the mixture of metals to make alloys.
Metal alloys are often a blend of at least two different metallic elements.
However, non-metallic elements are often added to alloys in order to achieve properties suitable for an application.
The study of metal production is subdivided into ferrous metallurgy (also known as black metallurgy) and non-ferrous metallurgy (also known as colored metallurgy).
Ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on iron, while non-ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on other metals.
The production of ferrous metals accounts for 95% of world metal production.
Modern metallurgists work in both emerging and traditional areas as part of an interdisciplinary team alongside material scientists and other engineers.
Some traditional areas include mineral processing, metal production, heat treatment, failure analysis, and the joining of metals (including welding, brazing, and soldering).  Emerging areas for metallurgists include nanotechnology, superconductors, composites, biomedical materials, electronic materials (semiconductors) and surface engineering.
Many applications, practices, and devices associated or involved in metallurgy were established in ancient China, such as the innovation of the blast furnace, cast iron, hydraulic-powered trip hammers, and double acting piston bellows.
Contents
Etymology and pronunciation
Metallurgy derives from the Ancient Greek μεταλλουργός, metallourgós, "worker in metal", from μέταλλον, métallon, "mine, metal" + ἔργον, érgon, "work" The word was originally an alchemist's term for the extraction of metals from minerals, the ending -urgy signifying a process, especially manufacturing: it was discussed in this sense in the 1797 Encyclopædia Britannica.
In the late 19th century, it was extended to the more general scientific study of metals, alloys, and related processes.
In English, the /mɛˈtælərdʒi/ pronunciation is the more common one in the UK and Commonwealth.
The /ˈmɛtəlɜːrdʒi/ pronunciation is the more common one in the US and is the first-listed variant in various American dictionaries (e.g., Merriam-Webster Collegiate, American Heritage).
History of metallurgy
See also: Alchemy, Chalcolithic, Bronze Age, History of ferrous metallurgy, Metallurgy in pre-Columbian America, Metallurgy in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, Copper metallurgy in Africa, Iron metallurgy in Africa, History of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent, and Non-ferrous extractive metallurgyThis section may show systemic bias.
In particular, there may be a strong bias in favor of the ancient times, with little mention of the Middle Ages and present day development.
It may require cleanup to conform to a higher standard of quality, and to make it neutral in tone.
Please see the discussion on the talk page. (August 2022) Artefacts from the Varna necropolis, BulgariaThe earliest recorded metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found free or "native". Small amounts of natural gold have been found in Spanish caves dating to the late Paleolithic period, 40,000 BC. Silver, copper, tin and meteoric iron can also be found in native form, allowing a limited amount of metalworking in early cultures.
Certain metals, notably tin, lead, and at a higher temperature, copper, can be recovered from their ores by simply heating the rocks in a fire or blast furnace, a process known as smelting.
The first evidence of this extractive metallurgy, dating from the 5th and 6th millennia BC, has been found at archaeological sites in Majdanpek, Jarmovac and Pločnik, in present-day Serbia.
To date, the earliest evidence of copper smelting is found at the Belovode site near Plocnik.
This site produced a copper axe from 5,500 BC, belonging to the Vinča culture.
The earliest use of lead is documented from the late neolithic settlements of Yarim Tepe and Arpachiyah in Iraq.
The artifacts suggest that lead smelting predated copper smelting.
Copper smelting is also documented at this site at about the same time period (soon after 6,000 BC), although the use of lead seems to precede copper smelting.
Early metallurgy is also documented at the nearby site of Tell Maghzaliyah, which seems to be dated even earlier, and completely lacks that pottery.[citation needed] The Balkans were the site of major Neolithic cultures, including Butmir, Vinča, Varna, Karanovo, and Hamangia.
The Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, is a burial site in the western industrial zone of Varna (approximately 4 km from the city centre), internationally considered one of the key archaeological sites in world prehistory.
The oldest gold treasure in the world, dating from 4,600 BC to 4,200 BC, was discovered at the site.
The gold piece dating from 4,500 BC, recently founded in Durankulak, near Varna is another important example.  Other signs of early metals are found from the third millennium BC in places like Palmela (Portugal), Los Millares (Spain), and Stonehenge (United Kingdom). However, the ultimate beginnings cannot be clearly ascertained and new discoveries are both continuous and ongoing.
Mining areas of the ancient Middle East.
Boxes colors: arsenic is in brown, copper in red, tin in grey, iron in reddish brown, gold in yellow, silver in white and lead in black.
Yellow area stands for arsenic bronze, while grey area stands for tin bronze.
In the Near East, about 3,500 BC, it was discovered that by combining copper and tin, a superior metal could be made, an alloy called bronze.
This represented a major technological shift known as the Bronze Age.
The extraction of iron from its ore into a workable metal is much more difficult than for copper or tin.
The process appears to have been invented by the Hittites in about 1200 BC, beginning the Iron Age.
The secret of extracting and working iron was a key factor in the success of the Philistines.
Historical developments in ferrous metallurgy can be found in a wide variety of past cultures and civilizations.
This includes the ancient and medieval kingdoms and empires of the Middle East and Near East, ancient Iran, ancient Egypt, ancient Nubia, and Anatolia (Turkey), Ancient Nok, Carthage, the Greeks and Romans of ancient Europe, medieval Europe, ancient and medieval China, ancient and medieval India, ancient and medieval Japan, amongst others.
Many applications, practices, and devices associated or involved in metallurgy were established in ancient China, such as the innovation of the blast furnace, cast iron, hydraulic-powered trip hammers, and double acting piston bellows.
A 16th century book by Georg Agricola called De re metallica describes the highly developed and complex processes of mining metal ores, metal extraction and metallurgy of the time.
Agricola has been described as the "father of metallurgy".
Extraction
Main article: Extractive metallurgy
Furnace bellows operated by waterwheels, Yuan Dynasty, China.
Extractive metallurgy is the practice of removing valuable metals from an ore and refining the extracted raw metals into a purer form.
In order to convert a metal oxide or sulphide to a purer metal, the ore must be reduced physically, chemically, or electrolytically.
Extractive metallurgists are interested in three primary streams: feed, concentrate (metal oxide/sulphide) and tailings (waste).
After mining, large pieces of the ore feed are broken through crushing or grinding in order to obtain particles small enough, where each particle is either mostly valuable or mostly waste.
Concentrating the particles of value in a form supporting separation enables the desired metal to be removed from waste products.
Mining may not be necessary, if the ore body and physical environment are conducive to leaching.
Leaching dissolves minerals in an ore body and results in an enriched solution.
The solution is collected and processed to extract valuable metals.
Ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal.
Tailings of a previous process may be used as a feed in another process to extract a secondary product from the original ore.
Additionally, a concentrate may contain more than one valuable metal.
That concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents.
Metal and its alloys
Main articles: Metal and Alloy
Iron, the most common metal used in metallurgy, is shown in different forms (cube, chips and nuggets)
Much effort has been placed on understanding iron–carbon alloy system, which includes steels and cast irons.
Plain carbon steels (those that contain essentially only carbon as an alloying element) are used in low-cost, high-strength applications, where neither weight nor corrosion are a major concern.
Cast irons, including ductile iron, are also part of the iron-carbon system.  Iron-Manganese-Chromium alloys (Hadfield-type steels) are also used in non-magnetic applications such as directional drilling.
Other common engineering metals include aluminium, chromium, copper, magnesium, nickel, titanium, zinc, and silicon.
These metals are most often used as alloys with the noted exception of silicon, as it is not a metal.
Stainless steel, particularly Austenitic stainless steels, galvanized steel, nickel alloys, titanium alloys, or occasionally copper alloys are used, where resistance to corrosion is important.
Aluminium alloys and magnesium alloys are commonly used, when a lightweight strong part is required such as in automotive and aerospace applications.
Copper-nickel alloys (such as Monel) are used in highly corrosive environments and for non-magnetic applications.
Nickel-based superalloys like Inconel are used in high-temperature applications such as gas turbines, turbochargers, pressure vessels, and heat exchangers.
For extremely high temperatures, single crystal alloys are used to minimize creep.
In modern electronics, high purity single crystal silicon is essential for metal-oxide-silicon transistors (MOS) and integrated circuits.
Production
In production engineering, metallurgy is concerned with the production of metallic components for use in consumer or engineering products.
This involves production of alloys, shaping, heat treatment and surface treatment of product.
The task of the metallurgist is to achieve balance between material properties, such as cost, weight, strength, toughness, hardness, corrosion, fatigue resistance and performance in temperature extremes.
To achieve this goal, the operating environment must be carefully considered.[citation needed]
Determining the hardness of the metal using the Rockwell, Vickers, and Brinell hardness scales is a commonly used practice that helps better understand the metal's elasticity and plasticity for different applications and production processes.
In a saltwater environment, most ferrous metals and some non-ferrous alloys corrode quickly.
Metals exposed to cold or cryogenic conditions may undergo a ductile to brittle transition and lose their toughness, becoming more brittle and prone to cracking.
Metals under continual cyclic loading can suffer from metal fatigue.
Metals under constant stress at elevated temperatures can creep.
Metalworking processes
Main article: Metalworking
Open-die drop forging (with two dies) of an ingot to be further processed into a wheel
Casting – molten metal is poured into a shaped mold.
Variants of casting include sand casting, investment casting (also called the lost wax process), die casting, and continuous castings.
Each of these forms has advantages for certain metals and applications considering factors like magnetism and corrosion.
Forging – a red-hot billet is hammered into shape.
Rolling – a billet is passed through successively narrower rollers to create a sheet.
Extrusion – a hot and malleable metal is forced under pressure through a die, which shapes it before it cools.
Machining – lathes, milling machines and drills cut the cold metal to shape.
Sintering – a powdered metal is heated in a non-oxidizing environment after being compressed into a die.
Fabrication – sheets of metal are cut with guillotines or gas cutters and bent and welded into structural shape.
Laser cladding – metallic powder is blown through a movable laser beam (e.g. mounted on a NC 5-axis machine). The resulting melted metal reaches a substrate to form a melt pool.
By moving the laser head, it is possible to stack the tracks and build up a three-dimensional piece.
Cold-working processes, in which the product's shape is altered by rolling, fabrication or other processes, while the product is cold, can increase the strength of the product by a process called work hardening.
Work hardening creates microscopic defects in the metal, which resist further changes of shape.
Heat treatment
Heat treating furnace at 1,800 °F (980 °C)
Metals can be heat-treated to alter the properties of strength, ductility, toughness, hardness and resistance to corrosion.
Common heat treatment processes include annealing, precipitation strengthening, quenching, and tempering:
Annealing process softens the metal by heating it and then allowing it to cool very slowly, which gets rid of stresses in the metal and makes the grain structure large and soft-edged so that, when the metal is hit or stressed it dents or perhaps bends, rather than breaking; it is also easier to sand, grind, or cut annealed metal.
Quenching is the process of cooling metal very quickly after heating, thus "freezing" the metal's molecules in the very hard martensite form, which makes the metal harder.
Tempering relieves stresses in the metal that were caused by the hardening process; tempering makes the metal less hard while making it better able to sustain impacts without breaking.
Often, mechanical and thermal treatments are combined in what are known as thermo-mechanical treatments for better properties and more efficient processing of materials.
These processes are common to high-alloy special steels, superalloys and titanium alloys.
Plating
Main article: Plating
A simplified diagram of electroplating copper on a metal
Electroplating is a chemical surface-treatment technique.
It involves bonding a thin layer of another metal such as gold, silver, chromium or zinc to the surface of the product.
This is done by selecting the coating material electrolyte solution, which is the material that is going to coat the workpiece (gold, silver, zinc). There needs to be two electrodes of different materials: one the same material as the coating material and one that is receiving the coating material.
Two electrodes are electrically charged and the coating material is stuck to the work piece.
It is used to reduce corrosion as well as to improve the product's aesthetic appearance.
It is also used to make inexpensive metals look like the more expensive ones (gold, silver).
Shot peening
Main article: Shot peening
Shot peening is a cold working process used to finish metal parts.
In the process of shot peening, small round shot is blasted against the surface of the part to be finished.
This process is used to prolong the product life of the part, prevent stress corrosion failures, and also prevent fatigue.
The shot leaves small dimples on the surface like a peen hammer does, which cause compression stress under the dimple.
As the shot media strikes the material over and over, it forms many overlapping dimples throughout the piece being treated.
The compression stress in the surface of the material strengthens the part and makes it more resistant to fatigue failure, stress failures, corrosion failure, and cracking.
Thermal spraying
Main article: Thermal spraying
Thermal spraying techniques are another popular finishing option, and often have better high temperature properties than electroplated coatings.
Thermal spraying, also known as a spray welding process, is an industrial coating process that consists of a heat source (flame or other) and a coating material that can be in a powder or wire form, which is melted then sprayed on the surface of the material being treated at a high velocity.
The spray treating process is known by many different names such as HVOF (High Velocity Oxygen Fuel), plasma spray, flame spray, arc spray and metalizing.
Characterization
Main article: Characterization
Metallography allows the metallurgist to study the microstructure of metals.
Metallurgists study the microscopic and macroscopic structure of metals using metallography, a technique invented by Henry Clifton Sorby.
In metallography, an alloy of interest is ground flat and polished to a mirror finish.
The sample can then be etched to reveal the microstructure and macrostructure of the metal.
The sample is then examined in an optical or electron microscope, and the image contrast provides details on the composition, mechanical properties, and processing history.
Crystallography, often using diffraction of x-rays or electrons, is another valuable tool available to the modern metallurgist.
Crystallography allows identification of unknown materials and reveals the crystal structure of the sample.
Quantitative crystallography can be used to calculate the amount of phases present as well as the degree of strain to which a sample has been subjected.
See also
Adrien Chenot
Archaeometallurgy
CALPHAD
Carbonyl metallurgy
Cupellation
Experimental archaeometallurgy
Goldbeating
Gold phosphine complex
Metallurgical failure analysis
Mineral industry
Pyrometallurgy
References
Moore, John Jeremy; Boyce, E. A. (1990). Chemical Metallurgy. doi:10.1016/c2013-0-00969-3. ISBN 978-0408053693.
Raghavan, V (2015). Physical Metallurgy: Principles and Practice (3rd ed.). PHI Learning.
ISBN 978-8120351707. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
"Металлургия" Archived 18 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine. in The Great Soviet Encyclopedia. 1979.
a b R. F. Tylecote (1992) A History of Metallurgy ISBN 0901462888
a b Robert K.G. Temple (2007). The Genius of China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention (3rd ed.). London: André Deutsch. pp. 44–56. ISBN 978-0233002026.
"metallurgy". Oxford Learner's Dictionary.
Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Retrieved 29 January 2011.
"History of Gold". Gold Digest.
Archived from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 4 February 2007.
E. Photos, E. (2010). "The Question of Meteoritic versus Smelted Nickel-Rich Iron: Archaeological Evidence and Experimental Results" (PDF). World Archaeology. 20 (3): 403–421. doi:10.1080/00438243.1989.9980081. JSTOR 124562. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2015.
H.I. Haiko, V.S. Biletskyi.
First metals discovery and development the sacral component phenomenon. // Theoretical and Practical Solutions of Mineral Resources Mining // A Balkema Book, London, 2015, р. 227-233. Archived 8 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Radivojević, Miljana; Roberts, Benjamin W. (2021). "Early Balkan Metallurgy: Origins, Evolution and Society, 6200–3700 BC". Journal of World Prehistory. 34 (2): 195–278. doi:10.1007/s10963-021-09155-7. S2CID 237005605. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022.
Radivojević, Miljana; Rehren, Thilo; Pernicka, Ernst; Šljivar, Dušan; Brauns, Michael; Borić, Dušan (2010). "On the origins of extractive metallurgy: New evidence from Europe". Journal of Archaeological Science. 37 (11): 2775. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2010.06.012.
Neolithic Vinca was a metallurgical culture Archived 19 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Stonepages from news sources November 2007
Potts, D.T. (2012). A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East.
Blackwell Companions to the Ancient World.
Wiley. pp. 302–303. ISBN 978-1444360776. Archived from the original on 21 September 2020. Retrieved 19 March 2022.
Archived 12 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine Gems and Gemstones: Timeless Natural Beauty of the Mineral World, By Lance Grande
"World's oldest gold". Archived from the original on 28 September 2019. Retrieved 28 September 2019.
Magazine, Smithsonian; Daley, Jason. "World's Oldest Gold Object May Have Just Been Unearthed in Bulgaria". Smithsonian Magazine.
Archived from the original on 28 September 2019. Retrieved 28 September 2019.
W. Keller (1963) The Bible as History. p. 156. ISBN 034000312X
B. W. Anderson (1975) The Living World of the Old Testament, p. 154, ISBN 0582485983
Karl Alfred von Zittel (1901). HISTORY of Geology and Palaeontology. p. 15. doi:10.5962/bhl.title.33301. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 1 January 2015.
"Metal Hardness Tests: Difference Between Rockwell, Brinell, and Vickers". ESI Engineering Specialties Inc. 14 June 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017.
"Casting Process, Types of Casting Process, Casting Process Tips, Selecting Casting Process, Casting Process Helps". 
Arthur Reardon (2011), Metallurgy for the Non-Metallurgist (2nd ed.), ASM International, ISBN 978-1615038213
Woodford, Chris (2017). "How electroplating works". Explain that Stuff.
Archived from the original on 15 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019.
"What is Shot Peening – How Does Shot Peening Work". 
"Thermal Spray, Plasma Spray, HVOF, Flame Spray, Metalizing & Thermal Spray Coating". , MN. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2017.
External links
Wikisource has the text of the 1879 American Cyclopædia article  Metallurgy.
Media related to Metallurgy at Wikimedia Commons
Learning materials related to Topic:Metallurgical engineering at Wikiversity
Engineering
History
Outline
List of engineering branches
SpecialtiesandInterdisciplinarityCivil
Architectural
Construction
Earthquake
Environmental
Geotechnical
Hydraulic
Mining
Structural
Transportation
Mechanical
Acoustical
Aerospace
Automotive
Marine
Railway
Thermal
Electrical
Computer
outline
Control
Electromechanics
Electronics
Microwaves
Optical
Photonics
Power
Radio Frequency
Telecommunications
Chemical
Biochemical
Biological
Electrochemical
Molecular
Petroleum
Process
Reaction
Other
Agricultural
Audio
Biomedical
Engineering mathematics
Engineering physics
Fire
Food
Industrial
Information
Materials science
Ceramics
Metals
Polymers
Mechatronics
Military
Nanotechnology
Nuclear
Privacy
Robotics
Sanitary
Security
Software
Systems
Genetic
Energy and environmental
Tissue
Bioresource
Engineering education
Bachelor of Engineering
Master of Engineering
Doctor of Engineering
Engineer's degree
Engineering studies
Related topics
Engineer
Glossaries
Engineering
A–L
M–Z
Aerospace engineering
Civil engineering
Electrical and electronics engineering
Mechanical engineering
Structural engineering
Category
Commons
Wikiproject
Portal
Branches of materials scienceMain classes
Metallurgy
Ceramic engineering
Polymer science and Polymer engineering
Material independent
Characterization
Computational
Informatics
Domains
Crystallography
Surface science
Tribology
Microelectronics
Interdisciplinary
Chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Polymer chemistry
Mineralogy
Mining engineering
Nuclear engineering
Physics
Condensed-matter physics
Polymer physics
Soft-matter physics
Solid-state physics
Category
Common
Prehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen spears
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Transverse arrowhead
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest surviving buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Evolutionary origin of religions
Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric music
Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism
Branches of chemistry
Glossary of chemical formulae
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table
Analytical
Instrumental chemistry
Electroanalytical methods
Spectroscopy
IR
Raman
UV-Vis
NMR
Mass spectrometry
EI
ICP
MALDI
Separation process
Chromatography
GC
HPLC
Crystallography
Characterization
Titration
Wet chemistry
Calorimetry
Elemental analysis
Theoretical
Quantum chemistry
Computational chemistry
Mathematical chemistry
Molecular modelling
Molecular mechanics
Molecular dynamics
Physical
Electrochemistry
Spectroelectrochemistry
Photoelectrochemistry
Thermochemistry
Chemical thermodynamics
Surface science
Interface and colloid science
Micromeritics
Cryochemistry
Sonochemistry
Structural chemistry
Chemical physics
Femtochemistry
Chemical kinetics
Spectroscopy
Photochemistry
Spin chemistry
Microwave chemistry
Equilibrium chemistry
Inorganic
Coordination chemistry
Magnetochemistry
Organometallic chemistry
Organolanthanide chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Ceramic chemistry
Organic
Stereochemistry
Alkane stereochemistry
Physical organic chemistry
Organic reactions
Organic synthesis
Retrosynthetic analysis
Enantioselective synthesis
Total synthesis / Semisynthesis
Fullerene chemistry
Polymer chemistry
Petrochemistry
Dynamic covalent chemistry
Biological
Biochemistry
Molecular biology
Cell biology
Chemical biology
Bioorthogonal chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Pharmacology
Clinical chemistry
Neurochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Bioorganometallic chemistry
Bioinorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Interdisciplinarity
Nuclear chemistry
Radiochemistry
Radiation chemistry
Actinide chemistry
Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry
Geochemistry
Biogeochemistry
Photogeochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Atmospheric chemistry
Ocean chemistry
Clay chemistry
Carbochemistry
Food chemistry
Carbohydrate chemistry
Food physical chemistry
Agricultural chemistry
Soil chemistry
Chemistry education
Amateur chemistry
General chemistry
Clandestine chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Forensic toxicology
Post-mortem chemistry
Nanochemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Chemical synthesis
Green chemistry
Click chemistry
Combinatorial chemistry
Biosynthesis
Chemical engineering
Materials science
Metallurgy
Ceramic engineering
Polymer science
See also
History of chemistry
Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Timeline of chemistry
of element discoveries
"The central science"
Chemical reaction
Catalysis
Chemical element
Chemical compound
Atom
Molecule
Ion
Chemical substance
Chemical bond
Alchemy
Quantum mechanics
Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 13 September 2022, at 20:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
