Mughal Empire - Wikipedia
Mughal Empire
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Not to be confused with the Mongol Empire or Moghulistan.
"Mughals" redirects here.
For the ethnic groups, see Mughal people.
Mughal Empire1526–1857The empire at its greatest extent in c. 1700 under Aurangzeb (r. 1658–1707)StatusEmpireCapital
Agra (1526–1530; 1560–1571; 1598–1648)
Kabul (summer capital 1526–1681))
Delhi (1530–1540; 1554–1556; 1639–1857)
Lahore (1540–1554; 1586–1598)
Dhaka (Commercial Capital)
Fatehpur Sikri (1571–1585)
Common languages
Persian (official and court language)
Urdu (language of the ruling classes, later given official status)
Hindustani (lingua franca)
Arabic (for religious ceremonies)
Chagatai Turkic (only initially)
Other Indian languages
Religion State religion:
Sunni Islam (Hanafi)
Din-i Ilahi (1582–1605)
GovernmentUnitary absolute monarchy under a federal structure
Centralized autocracy(1526–1719)
Oligarchic constitutional monarchy (1719–1857)
Emperor[a] (Padshah) • 1526–1530 Babur (first)• 1837–1857 Bahadur Shah II (last)
Historical eraEarly modern• First Battle of Panipat 21 April 1526• Empire interrupted by Sur Empire 1540–1555• Second Battle of Panipat 5 November 1556• Mughal–Rajput Wars 1526–1750• Mughal–Maratha Wars 1680–1707• Baro-Bhuiyan of Bengal–Mughal Wars 1576–1612 (when Bengal finally becomes a part of the Mughal Empire under Islam Khan governor of Jahangir)• Death of Aurangzeb 3 March 1707• Battle of Karnal 24 February 1739• Carnatic Wars 1746–1763• Battle of Plassey 1757• Bengal War 1759–1765• Siege of Delhi 8 June–21 September 1857
Area16904,000,000 km2 (1,500,000 sq mi)Population• 1700 158,400,000
CurrencyRupee, Taka, dam: 73–74 
Preceded by
Succeeded by
Timurid Empire
Delhi Sultanate
Sur Empire
Bengal Sultanate
Rajput states
Chero dynasty
Deccan sultanates
Maratha Empire
Bengal Subah
Durrani Empire
Sikh Empire
Bharatpur State
Hyderabad State
Kingdom of Rohilkhand
Company rule in India
British Raj
The Mughal Empire was an Islamic early-modern empire that controlled much of South Asia between the 16th and 19th centuries.
For some two hundred years, the empire stretched from the outer fringes of the Indus river basin in the west, northern Afghanistan in the northwest, and Kashmir in the north, to the highlands of present-day Assam and Bangladesh in the east, and the uplands of the Deccan Plateau in South India.
The Mughal Empire is conventionally said to have been founded in 1526 by Babur, a warrior chieftain from what is today Uzbekistan, who employed aid from the neighboring Safavid and Ottoman empires, to defeat the Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodhi, in the First Battle of Panipat, and to sweep down the plains of Upper India.
The Mughal imperial structure, however, is sometimes dated to 1600, to the rule of Babur's grandson, Akbar.
This imperial structure lasted until 1720, until shortly after the death of the last major emperor, Aurangzeb, during whose reign the empire also achieved its maximum geographical extent.
The empire's loss of control over the Indian subcontinent was catalyzed by their loss to the Maratha Empire in the Mughal–Maratha Wars.
Reduced subsequently to the region in and around Old Delhi by 1760, the empire was formally dissolved by the British Raj after the Indian Rebellion of 1857. 
Although the Mughal Empire was created and sustained by military warfare, it did not vigorously suppress the cultures and peoples it came to rule; rather it equalized and placated them through new administrative practices, and diverse ruling elites, leading to more efficient, centralised, and standardized rule.
The base of the empire's collective wealth was agricultural taxes, instituted by the third Mughal emperor, Akbar.
These taxes, which amounted to well over half the output of a peasant cultivator, were paid in the well-regulated silver currency, and caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.
The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion.
Burgeoning European presence in the Indian Ocean, and its increasing demand for Indian raw and finished products, created still greater wealth in the Mughal courts.
There was more conspicuous consumption among the Mughal elite, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture, especially during the reign of Shah Jahan.
Among the Mughal UNESCO World Heritage Sites in South Asia are: Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Red Fort, Humayun's Tomb, Lahore Fort, Shalimar Gardens and the Taj Mahal.
Contents
Name
Contemporaries referred to the empire founded by Babur as the Timurid Empire, which reflected the heritage of his dynasty, and this was the term preferred by the Mughals themselves.
The Mughal designation for their own dynasty was Gurkani (Persian: گورکانیان, romanized: Gūrkāniyān, lit. 'sons-in-law'). The use of "Mughal" and "Moghul" derived from the Arabic and Persian corruption of "Mongol", and it emphasised the Mongol origins of the Timurid dynasty.
The term gained currency during the 19th century, but remains disputed by Indologists.
Similar transliterations had been used to refer to the empire, including "Mogul" and "Moghul". Nevertheless, Babur's ancestors were sharply distinguished from the classical Mongols insofar as they were oriented towards Persian rather than Turco-Mongol culture.
The Mughals themselves claimed ultimate descent from Mongol Empire founder Genghis Khan.
Another name for the empire was Hindustan, which was documented in the Ain-i-Akbari, and which has been described as the closest to an official name for the empire.
In the west, the term "Mughal" was used for the emperor, and by extension, the empire as a whole.
History
Main article: Mughal dynasty
Babur and Humayun (1526–1556)
Main articles: Babur and Humayun
South-Asia1525 CE
DELHI SULTANATE(LODIS)
TIMURID EMPIRE(Babur)
SHAH MIRSULTANATE
PHAGMODRUPAS
KHANDESHSULTANATE
BERARSULTANATE
MALWASULTANATE
ARGHUNS
KALMAT
LANGAHSULTANATE
GUJARATSULTANATERAJPUTANA
DIMASA
TRIPWA
AHOM
KAMATAS
CHEROS
BENGALSULTANATE
GAJAPATIEMPIREGONDWANAAHMADNAGARSULTANATE
VIJAYANAGARAEMPIREBIJAPURSULTANATE
BIDARSULTANATE
GOLKONDASULTANATE
MAPS-500-15012535050060080010001175125014001525
Main South Asian polities circa 1525 CE, on the eve of the establishment of the Mughal Empire by Babur.
The Mughal Empire was founded by Babur (reigned 1526–1530), a Central Asian ruler who was descended from the Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur (the founder of the Timurid Empire) on his father's side, and from Genghis Khan on his mother's side.
Ousted from his ancestral domains in Central Asia, Babur turned to India to satisfy his ambitions.
He established himself in Kabul and then pushed steadily southward into India from Afghanistan through the Khyber Pass.
Babur's forces defeated Ibrahim Lodhi in the First Battle of Panipat.
Before the battle, Babur sought divine favour by abjuring liquor, breaking the wine vessels and pouring the wine down a well.
However, by this time Lodhi's empire was already crumbling, and it was actually the Rajput Confederacy which was the strongest power of Northern India under the capable rule of Rana Sanga of Mewar.
He defeated Babar in the Battle of Bayana.
In a decisive battle fought near Agra, the Timurid forces of Babur defeated the Rajput army of Sanga.
This battle was one of the most decisive and historic battles in Indian history, as it sealed the fate of Northern India for the next two centuries.
After the battle, the centre of Mughal power became Agra instead of Kabul.
The preoccupation with wars and military campaigns, however, did not allow the new emperor to consolidate the gains he had made in India.
The instability of the empire became evident under his son, Humayun (reigned 1530–1556), who was forced into exile in Persia by rebels.
The Sur Empire (1540–1555), founded by Sher Shah Suri (reigned 1540–1545), briefly interrupted Mughal rule.
Humayun's exile in Persia established diplomatic ties between the Safavid and Mughal Courts, and led to increasing Persian cultural influence in the later restored Mughal Empire.[citation needed] Humayun's triumphant return from Persia in 1555 restored Mughal rule in some parts of India, but he died in an accident the next year.
Akbar to Aurangzeb (1556–1707)
Main articles: Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan, and Aurangzeb
Akbar holds a religious assembly of different faiths in the Ibadat Khana in Fatehpur Sikri.
Akbar (reigned 1556–1605) was born Jalal-ud-din Muhammad in the Rajput Umarkot Fort, to Humayun and his wife Hamida Banu Begum, a Persian princess.
Akbar succeeded to the throne under a regent, Bairam Khan, who helped consolidate the Mughal Empire in India.
Through warfare and diplomacy, Akbar was able to extend the empire in all directions and controlled almost the entire Indian subcontinent north of the Godavari River.[citation needed] He created a new ruling elite loyal to him, implemented a modern administration, and encouraged cultural developments.
He increased trade with European trading companies.
India developed a strong and stable economy, leading to commercial expansion and economic development.[citation needed] Akbar allowed freedom of religion at his court, and attempted to resolve socio-political and cultural differences in his empire by establishing a new religion, Din-i-Ilahi, with strong characteristics of a ruler cult.
He left his son an internally stable state, which was in the midst of its golden age, but before long signs of political weakness would emerge.
Jahangir (born Salim, reigned 1605–1627) was born to Akbar and his wife Mariam-uz-Zamani, an Indian Rajput princess.
Salim was named after the Indian Sufi saint, Salim Chishti and was raised by the daughter of Chishti.
He "was addicted to opium, neglected the affairs of the state, and came under the influence of rival court cliques". Jahangir distinguished himself from Akbar by making substantial efforts to gain the support of the Islamic religious establishment.
One way he did this was by bestowing many more madad-i-ma'ash (tax-free personal land revenue grants given to religiously learned or spiritually worthy individuals) than Akbar had.
In contrast to Akbar, Jahangir came into conflict with non-Muslim religious leaders, notably the Sikh guru Arjan, whose execution was the first of many conflicts between the Mughal empire and the Sikh community.
Group portrait of Mughal rulers, from Babur to Aurangzeb, with the Mughal ancestor Timur seated in the middle.
On the left: Shah Jahan, Akbar and Babur, with Abu Sa'id of Samarkand and Timur's son, Miran Shah.
On the right: Aurangzeb, Jahangir and Humayun, and two of Timur's other offspring Umar Shaykh and Muhammad Sultan.
Created c. 1707–12
Shah Jahan (reigned 1628–1658) was born to Jahangir and his wife Jagat Gosaini, a Rajput princess.
His reign ushered in the golden age of Mughal architecture.
During the reign of Shah Jahan, the splendour of the Mughal court reached its peak, as exemplified by the Taj Mahal.The cost of maintaining the court, however, began to exceed the revenue coming in.
His reign was called as "The Golden Age of Mughal Architecture". Shah Jahan extended the Mughal empire to the Deccan by ending the Nizam Shahi dynasty, and forced the Adil Shahis and Qutb Shahis to pay tribute.
Shah Jahan's eldest son, the liberal Dara Shikoh, became regent in 1658, as a result of his father's illness.[citation needed] Dara championed a syncretistic Hindu-Muslim culture, emulating his great-grandfather Akbar.
With the support of the Islamic orthodoxy, however, a younger son of Shah Jahan, Aurangzeb (r. 1658–1707), seized the throne.
Aurangzeb defeated Dara in 1659 and had him executed.
Although Shah Jahan fully recovered from his illness, Aurangzeb kept Shah Jahan imprisoned until his death in 1666.: 68  Aurangzeb oversaw an increase in the Islamicization of the Mughal state.
He encouraged conversion to Islam, reinstated the jizya on non-Muslims, and compiled the Fatawa al-Alamgir, a collection of Islamic law.
Aurangzeb also ordered the execution of the Sikh guru Tegh Bahadur, leading to the militarization of the Sikh community.
From the imperial perspective, conversion to Islam integrated local elites into the king's vision of network of shared identity that would join disparate groups throughout the empire in obedience to the Mughal emperor.
He expanded the empire to include almost the whole of South Asia,: 1  but at his death in 1707, "many parts of the empire were in open revolt". Aurangzeb is considered India's most controversial king, with some historians arguing his religious conservatism and intolerance undermined the stability of Mughal society, while other historians question this, noting that he built Hindu temples, employed significantly more Hindus in his imperial bureaucracy than his predecessors did, opposed bigotry against Hindus and Shia Muslims.: 58 
Decline (1707–1857)
Further information: Bahadur Shah Zafar
Delhi under the puppet-king Farrukhsiyar
Shah Alam II on horseback
Aurangzeb's son, Bahadur Shah I, repealed the religious policies of his father and attempted to reform the administration. "However, after his death in 1712, the Mughal dynasty sank into chaos and violent feuds.
In 1719 alone, four emperors successively ascended the throne", as figureheads under the rule of the Sayyid king-makers.
During the reign of Muhammad Shah (reigned 1719–1748), the empire began to break up, and vast tracts of central India passed from Mughal to Maratha hands.
The far-off Indian campaign of Nadir Shah, who had previously reestablished Iranian suzerainty over most of West Asia, the Caucasus, and Central Asia, culminated with the Sack of Delhi and shattered the remnants of Mughal power and prestige.
Many of the empire's elites now sought to control their own affairs, and broke away to form independent kingdoms.[citation needed] As the Mughals tried to suppress the independence of the Nizam in the Deccan, he encouraged the Marathas to invade central and northern India.
But, according to Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal, the Mughal Emperor continued to be the highest manifestation of sovereignty.
Not only the Muslim gentry, but the Maratha, Hindu, and Sikh leaders took part in ceremonial acknowledgments of the emperor as the sovereign of India.
Meanwhile, some regional polities within the increasingly fragmented Mughal Empire, involved themselves and the state in global conflicts, leading only to defeat and loss of territory during the Carnatic Wars and the Bengal War.
The remnants of the empire in 1751
The Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II (1759–1806) made futile attempts to reverse the Mughal decline but ultimately had to seek the protection of the Emir of Afghanistan, Ahmed Shah Abdali, which led to the Third Battle of Panipat between the Maratha Empire and the Afghans (led by Abdali) in 1761. In 1771, the Marathas recaptured Delhi from Afghan control and in 1784 they officially became the protectors of the emperor in Delhi, a state of affairs that continued until the Second Anglo-Maratha War.
Thereafter, the British East India Company became the protectors of the Mughal dynasty in Delhi.
The British East India Company took control of the former Mughal province of Bengal-Bihar in 1793 after it abolished local rule (Nizamat) that lasted until 1858, marking the beginning of British colonial era over the Indian subcontinent.
By 1857 a considerable part of former Mughal India was under the East India Company's control.
After a crushing defeat in the war of 1857–1858 which he nominally led, the last Mughal, Bahadur Shah Zafar, was deposed by the British East India Company and exiled in 1858. Through the Government of India Act 1858 the British Crown assumed direct control of East India Company-held territories in India in the form of the new British Raj.
In 1876 the British Queen Victoria assumed the title of Empress of India.
Portrait of Bahadur Shah II
Causes of decline
Historians have offered numerous explanations for the rapid collapse of the Mughal Empire between 1707 and 1720, after a century of growth and prosperity.
In fiscal terms, the throne lost the revenues needed to pay its chief officers, the emirs (nobles) and their entourages.
The emperor lost authority, as the widely scattered imperial officers lost confidence in the central authorities, and made their own deals with local men of influence.
The imperial army, bogged down in long, futile wars against the more aggressive Marathas, lost its fighting spirit.
Finally came a series of violent political feuds over control of the throne.
After the execution of Emperor Farrukhsiyar in 1719, local Mughal successor states took power in region after region.
Contemporary chroniclers bewailed the decay they witnessed, a theme picked up by the first British historians who wanted to underscore the need for a British-led rejuvenation.
Modern views on the decline
Since the 1970s historians have taken multiple approaches to the decline, with little consensus on which factor was dominant.
The psychological interpretations emphasise depravity in high places, excessive luxury, and increasingly narrow views that left the rulers unprepared for an external challenge.
A Marxist school (led by Irfan Habib and based at Aligarh Muslim University) emphasises excessive exploitation of the peasantry by the rich, which stripped away the will and the means to support the regime.
Karen Leonard has focused on the failure of the regime to work with Hindu bankers, whose financial support was increasingly needed; the bankers then helped the Maratha and the British.
In a religious interpretation, some scholars argue that the Hindu powers revolted against the rule of a Muslim dynasty.
Finally, other scholars argue that the very prosperity of the Empire inspired the provinces to achieve a high degree of independence, thus weakening the imperial court.
Jeffrey G. Williamson has argued that the Indian economy went through deindustrialization in the latter half of the 18th century as an indirect outcome of the collapse of the Mughal Empire, with British rule later causing further deindustrialization.
According to Williamson, the decline of the Mughal Empire led to a decline in agricultural productivity, which drove up food prices, then nominal wages, and then textile prices, which led to India losing a share of the world textile market to Britain even before it had superior factory technology.
Indian textiles, however, still maintained a competitive advantage over British textiles up until the 19th century.
Administration and state
Government
The Mughal Empire had a highly centralised, bureaucratic government, most of which was instituted during the rule of the third Mughal emperor Akbar.  The central government was headed by the Mughal emperor; immediately beneath him were four ministries.
The finance/revenue ministry was responsible for controlling revenues from the empire's territories, calculating tax revenues, and using this information to distribute assignments.
The ministry of the military (army/intelligence) was headed by an official titled mir bakhshi, who was in charge of military organisation, messenger service, and the mansabdari system.
The ministry in charge of law/religious patronage was the responsibility of the sadr as-sudr, who appointed judges and managed charities and stipends.
Another ministry was dedicated to the imperial household and public works.
The empire was divided into suba (provinces), each of which were headed by a provincial governor called a subadar.
The structure of the central government was mirrored at the provincial level; each suba had its own bakhshi, sadr as-sudr, and finance minister that reported directly to the central government rather than the subahdar.
Subas were subdivided into administrative units known as sarkars, which were further divided into groups of villages known as parganas.
Mughal government in the pargana consisted of a Muslim judge and local tax collector.
Capitals
The Mughals had multiple imperial capitals, established over the course of their rule.
These were the cities of Agra, Delhi, Lahore, and Fatehpur Sikri.
Power often shifted back and forth between these capitals.
Sometimes this was necessitated by political and military demands, but shifts also occurred for ideological reasons (for example, Akbar's establishment of Fatehpur Sikri), or even simply because the cost of establishing a new capital was marginal.
Situations where there were two simultaneous capitals happened multiple times in Mughal history.
Certain cities also served as short-term, provincial capitals, as was the case with Aurangzeb's shift to Aurangabad in the Deccan.
The imperial camp, used for military expeditions and royal tours, also served as a kind of mobile, "de-facto" administrative capital.
From the time of Akbar, Mughal camps were huge in scale, accompanied by numerous personages associated with the royal court, as well as soldiers and labourers.
All administration and governance was carried out within them.
The Mughal Emperors spent a significant portion of their ruling period within these camps.
After Aurangzeb, the Mughal capital definitively became the walled city of Shahjahanabad (today Old Delhi).
Law
Police in Delhi under Bahadur Shah II, 1842
The Mughal Empire's legal system was context-specific and evolved over the course of the empire's rule.
Being a Muslim state, the empire employed fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) and therefore the fundamental institutions of Islamic law such as those of the qadi (judge), mufti (jurisconsult), and muhtasib (censor and market supervisor) were well-established in the Mughal Empire.
However, the dispensation of justice also depended on other factors, such as administrative rules, local customs, and political convenience.
This was due to Persianate influences on Mughal ideology, and the fact that the Mughal Empire governed a non-Muslim majority.
Legal ideology
The Mughal Empire followed the Sunni Hanafi system of jurisprudence.
In its early years, the empire relied on Hanafi legal references inherited from its predecessor, the Delhi Sultanate.
These included the al-Hidaya (the best guidance) and the Fatawa al-Tatarkhaniyya (religious decisions of the Emire Tatarkhan). During the Mughal Empire's peak, the Al-Fatawa al-'Alamgiriyya was commissioned by Emperor Aurangzeb.
This compendium of Hanafi law sought to serve as a central reference for the Mughal state that dealt with the specifics of the South Asian context.
The Mughal Empire also drew on Persianate notions of kingship.
Particularly, this meant that the Mughal emperor was considered the supreme authority on legal affairs.
Courts of law
Various kinds of courts existed in the Mughal empire.
One such court was that of the qadi.
The Mughal qadi was responsible for dispensing justice; this included settling disputes, judging people for crimes, and dealing with inheritances and orphans.
The qadi also had additional importance with regards to documents, as the seal of the qadi was required to validate deeds and tax records.
Qadis did not constitute a single position, but made up a hierarchy.
For example, the most basic kind was the pargana (district) qadi.
More prestigious positions were those of the qadi al-quddat (judge of judges) who accompanied the mobile imperial camp, and the qadi-yi lashkar (judge of the army). Qadis were usually appointed by the emperor or the sadr-us-sudr (chief of charities). The jurisdiction of the qadi was availed by Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
The jagirdar (local tax collector) was another kind of official approached, especially for high-stakes cases.
Subjects of the Mughal Empire also took their grievances to the courts of superior officials who held more authority and punitive power than the local qadi.
Such officials included the kotwal (local police), the faujdar (an officer controlling multiple districts and troops of soldiers), and the most powerful, the subahdar (provincial governor). In some cases, the emperor themself dispensed justice directly.
Jahangir was known to have installed a "chain of justice" in the Agra fort that any aggrieved subject could shake to get the attention of the emperor and bypass the inefficacy of officials.
Self-regulating tribunals operating at the community or village level were common, but sparse documentation of them exists.
For example, it is unclear how panchayats (village councils) operated in the Mughal era.
Economy
See also: Economic history of India and Economic history of the Indian subcontinent
The Indian economy was large and prosperous under the Mughal Empire.
During the Mughal era, the gross domestic product (GDP) of India in 1600 was estimated at 22% of the world economy, the second largest in the world, behind only Ming China but larger than Europe.
By 1700, the GDP of Mughal India had risen to 24% of the world economy, the largest in the world, larger than both Qing China and Western Europe.
The Mughal empire was producing about 25% of the world's industrial output up until the 18th century.
India's GDP growth increased under the Mughal Empire, with India's GDP having a faster growth rate during the Mughal era than in the 1,500 years prior to the Mughal era.
Mughal India's economy has been described as a form of proto-industrialization, like that of 18th-century Western Europe prior to the Industrial Revolution.
The Mughals were responsible for building an extensive road system, creating a uniform currency, and the unification of the country.: 185–204  The empire had an extensive road network, which was vital to the economic infrastructure, built by a public works department set up by the Mughals which designed, constructed and maintained roads linking towns and cities across the empire, making trade easier to conduct.
The main base of the empire's collective wealth was agricultural taxes, instituted by the third Mughal emperor, Akbar.
These taxes, which amounted to well over half the output of a peasant cultivator, were paid in the well-regulated silver currency, and caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.
Coinage
Coin of Aurangzeb, minted in Kabul, dated 1691/2
The Mughals adopted and standardised the rupee (rupiya, or silver) and dam (copper) currencies introduced by Sur Emperor Sher Shah Suri during his brief rule.
The currency was initially 48 dams to a single rupee in the beginning of Akbar's reign, before it later became 38 dams to a rupee in the 1580s, with the dam's value rising further in the 17th century as a result of new industrial uses for copper, such as in bronze cannons and brass utensils.
The dam was initially the most common coin in Akbar's time, before being replaced by the rupee as the most common coin in succeeding reigns.
The dam's value was later worth 30 to a rupee towards the end of Jahangir's reign, and then 16 to a rupee by the 1660s.
The Mughals minted coins with high purity, never dropping below 96%, and without debasement until the 1720s.
Despite India having its own stocks of gold and silver, the Mughals produced minimal gold of their own, but mostly minted coins from imported bullion, as a result of the empire's strong export-driven economy, with global demand for Indian agricultural and industrial products drawing a steady stream of precious metals into India.
Around 80% of Mughal India's imports were bullion, mostly silver, with major sources of imported bullion including the New World and Japan, which in turn imported large quantities of textiles and silk from the Bengal Subah province.
Labour
The historian Shireen Moosvi estimates that in terms of contributions to the Mughal economy, in the late 16th century, the primary sector contributed 52%, the secondary sector 18% and the tertiary sector 29%; the secondary sector contributed a higher percentage than in early 20th-century British India, where the secondary sector only contributed 11% to the economy.
In terms of urban-rural divide, 18% of Mughal India's labour force were urban and 82% were rural, contributing 52% and 48% to the economy, respectively.
According to Stephen Broadberry and Bishnupriya Gupta, grain wages in India were comparable to England in the 16th and 17th centuries, but diverged in the 18th century when they fell to 20-40% of England's wages.
This, however, is disputed by Parthasarathi and Sivramkrishna.
Parthasarathi cites his estimates that grain wages for weaving and spinning in mid-18 century Bengal and South India was comparable to Britain.
Similarly, Sivramkrishna analyzed agricultural surveys conducted in Mysore by Francis Buchanan during 1800–1801, arrived at estimates using a "subsistence basket" that aggregated millet income could be almost five times subsistence level, while corresponding rice income was three times that much.
That could be comparable to advance part of Europe.
Due to the scarcity of data, however, more research is needed before drawing any conclusion.
According to Moosvi, Mughal India had a per-capita income, in terms of wheat, 1.24% higher in the late 16th century than British India did in the early 20th century.
This income, however, would have to be revised downwards if manufactured goods, like clothing, would be considered.
Compared to food per-capita, expenditure on clothing was much smaller though, so relative income between 1595 and 1596 should be comparable to 1901–1910. However, in a system where wealth was hoarded by elites, wages were depressed for manual labour.
In Mughal India, there was a generally tolerant attitude towards manual labourers, with some religious cults in northern India proudly asserting a high status for manual labour.
While slavery also existed, it was limited largely to household servants.
Agriculture
Indian agricultural production increased under the Mughal Empire.
A variety of crops were grown, including food crops such as wheat, rice, and barley, and non-food cash crops such as cotton, indigo and opium.
By the mid-17th century, Indian cultivators begun to extensively grow two new crops from the Americas, maize and tobacco.
The Mughal administration emphasised agrarian reform, which began under the non-Mughal emperor Sher Shah Suri, the work of which Akbar adopted and furthered with more reforms.
The civil administration was organised in a hierarchical manner on the basis of merit, with promotions based on performance.
The Mughal government funded the building of irrigation systems across the empire, which produced much higher crop yields and increased the net revenue base, leading to increased agricultural production.
A major Mughal reform introduced by Akbar was a new land revenue system called zabt.
He replaced the tribute system, previously common in India and used by Tokugawa Japan at the time, with a monetary tax system based on a uniform currency.
The revenue system was biased in favour of higher value cash crops such as cotton, indigo, sugar cane, tree-crops, and opium, providing state incentives to grow cash crops, in addition to rising market demand.
Under the zabt system, the Mughals also conducted extensive cadastral surveying to assess the area of land under plow cultivation, with the Mughal state encouraging greater land cultivation by offering tax-free periods to those who brought new land under cultivation.
The expansion of agriculture and cultivation continued under later Mughal emperors including Aurangzeb, whose 1665 firman edict stated: "the entire elevated attention and desires of the Emperor are devoted to the increase in the population and cultivation of the Empire and the welfare of the whole peasantry and the entire people."
Mughal agriculture was in some ways advanced compared to European agriculture at the time, exemplified by the common use of the seed drill among Indian peasants before its adoption in Europe.
While the average peasant across the world was only skilled in growing very few crops, the average Indian peasant was skilled in growing a wide variety of food and non-food crops, increasing their productivity.
Indian peasants were also quick to adapt to profitable new crops, such as maize and tobacco from the New World being rapidly adopted and widely cultivated across Mughal India between 1600 and 1650. Bengali farmers rapidly learned techniques of mulberry cultivation and sericulture, establishing Bengal Subah as a major silk-producing region of the world.
Sugar mills appeared in India shortly before the Mughal era.
Evidence for the use of a draw bar for sugar-milling appears at Delhi in 1540, but may also date back earlier, and was mainly used in the northern Indian subcontinent.
Geared sugar rolling mills first appeared in Mughal India, using the principle of rollers as well as worm gearing, by the 17th century.
According to economic historian Immanuel Wallerstein, citing evidence from Irfan Habib, Percival Spear, and Ashok Desai, per-capita agricultural output and standards of consumption in 17th-century Mughal India were probably higher than in 17th-century Europe and certainly higher than early 20th-century British India.
The increased agricultural productivity led to lower food prices.
In turn, this benefited the Indian textile industry.
Compared to Britain, the price of grain was about one-half in South India and one-third in Bengal, in terms of silver coinage.
This resulted in lower silver coin prices for Indian textiles, giving them a price advantage in global markets.
Industrial manufacturing
Up until 1750, India produced about 25% of the world's industrial output.
Manufactured goods and cash crops from the Mughal Empire were sold throughout the world.
Key industries included textiles, shipbuilding, and steel.
Processed products included cotton textiles, yarns, thread, silk, jute products, metalware, and foods such as sugar, oils and butter.
The growth of manufacturing industries in the Indian subcontinent during the Mughal era in the 17th–18th centuries has been referred to as a form of proto-industrialization, similar to 18th-century Western Europe prior to the Industrial Revolution.
In early modern Europe, there was significant demand for products from Mughal India, particularly cotton textiles, as well as goods such as spices, peppers, indigo, silks, and saltpeter (for use in munitions). European fashion, for example, became increasingly dependent on Mughal Indian textiles and silks.
From the late 17th century to the early 18th century, Mughal India accounted for 95% of British imports from Asia, and the Bengal Subah province alone accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia.
In contrast, there was very little demand for European goods in Mughal India, which was largely self-sufficient, thus Europeans had very little to offer, except for some woolens, unprocessed metals and a few luxury items.
The trade imbalance caused Europeans to export large quantities of gold and silver to Mughal India in order to pay for South Asian imports.
Indian goods, especially those from Bengal, were also exported in large quantities to other Asian markets, such as Indonesia and Japan.
Textile industry
See also: Muslin trade in Bengal and Mughal clothing
Miniature painting - Portrait of an Old Mughal Courtier Wearing Muslin
Muslim Lady Reclining or An Indian Girl with a Hookah, painted in Dacca, 18th century
The largest manufacturing industry in the Mughal Empire was textile manufacturing, particularly cotton textile manufacturing, which included the production of piece goods, calicos, and muslins, available unbleached and in a variety of colours.
The cotton textile industry was responsible for a large part of the empire's international trade.
India had a 25% share of the global textile trade in the early 18th century.
Indian cotton textiles were the most important manufactured goods in world trade in the 18th century, consumed across the world from the Americas to Japan.
By the early 18th century, Mughal Indian textiles were clothing people across the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, Europe, the Americas, Africa, and the Middle East.
The most important centre of cotton production was the Bengal province, particularly around its capital city of Dhaka.
Bengal accounted for more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks imported by the Dutch from Asia, Bengali silk and cotton textiles were exported in large quantities to Europe, Indonesia, and Japan,: 202  and Bengali muslin textiles from Dhaka were sold in Central Asia, where they were known as "daka" textiles.
Indian textiles dominated the Indian Ocean trade for centuries, were sold in the Atlantic Ocean trade, and had a 38% share of the West African trade in the early 18th century, while Indian calicos were a major force in Europe, and Indian textiles accounted for 20% of total English trade with Southern Europe in the early 18th century.
The worm gear roller cotton gin, which was invented in India during the early Delhi Sultanate era of the 13th–14th centuries, came into use in the Mughal Empire sometime around the 16th century, and is still used in India through to the present day.
Another innovation, the incorporation of the crank handle in the cotton gin, first appeared in India sometime during the late Delhi Sultanate or the early Mughal Empire.
The production of cotton, which may have largely been spun in the villages and then taken to towns in the form of yarn to be woven into cloth textiles, was advanced by the diffusion of the spinning wheel across India shortly before the Mughal era, lowering the costs of yarn and helping to increase demand for cotton.
The diffusion of the spinning wheel, and the incorporation of the worm gear and crank handle into the roller cotton gin led to greatly expanded Indian cotton textile production during the Mughal era.
Once, the Mughal emperor Akbar asked his courtiers, which was the most beautiful flower.
Some said rose, from whose petals were distilled the precious itr, others, the lotus, glory of every Indian village.
But Birbal said, “The cotton boll”. There was a scornful laughter and Akbar asked for an explanation.
Birbal said, “Your Majesty, from the cotton boll comes the fine fabric prized by merchants across the seas that has made your empire famous throughout the world.
The perfume of your fame far exceeds the scent of roses and jasmine.
That is why I say the cotton boll is the most beautiful flower.
Shipbuilding industry
Mughal India had a large shipbuilding industry, which was also largely centred in the Bengal province.
Economic historian Indrajit Ray estimates shipbuilding output of Bengal during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries at 223,250 tons annually, compared with 23,061 tons produced in nineteen colonies in North America from 1769 to 1771. He also assesses ship repairing as very advanced in Bengal.
Indian shipbuilding, particularly in Bengal, was advanced compared to European shipbuilding at the time, with Indians selling ships to European firms.
An important innovation in shipbuilding was the introduction of a flushed deck design in Bengal rice ships, resulting in hulls that were stronger and less prone to leak than the structurally weak hulls of traditional European ships built with a stepped deck design.
The British East India Company later duplicated the flushed deck and hull designs of Bengal rice ships in the 1760s, leading to significant improvements in seaworthiness and navigation for European ships during the Industrial Revolution.
Bengal Subah
Main article: Bengal Subah
See also: Muslin trade in Bengal
Ruins of the Great Caravanserai in Dhaka.
The Bengal Subah province was especially prosperous from the time of its takeover by the Mughals in 1590 until the British East India Company seized control in 1757. It was the Mughal Empire's wealthiest province.
Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles.
Overseas, Europeans depended on Bengali products such as cotton textiles, silks, and opium; Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, for example, including more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks.
From Bengal, saltpeter was also shipped to Europe, opium was sold in Indonesia, raw silk was exported to Japan and the Netherlands, and cotton and silk textiles were exported to Europe, Indonesia and Japan.
Akbar played a key role in establishing Bengal as a leading economic centre, as he began transforming many of the jungles there into farms.
As soon as he conquered the region, he brought tools and men to clear jungles in order to expand cultivation and brought Sufis to open the jungles to farming.
Bengal was later described as the Paradise of Nations by Mughal emperors.
The Mughals introduced agrarian reforms, including the modern Bengali calendar.
The calendar played a vital role in developing and organising harvests, tax collection and Bengali culture in general, including the New Year and Autumn festivals.
The province was a leading producer of grains, salt, fruits, liquors and wines, precious metals and ornaments.[page needed] Its handloom industry flourished under royal warrants, making the region a hub of the worldwide muslin trade, which peaked in the 17th and 18th centuries.
The provincial capital Dhaka became the commercial capital of the empire.
The Mughals expanded cultivated land in the Bengal delta under the leadership of Sufis, which consolidated the foundation of Bengali Muslim society.[page needed]
After 150 years of rule by Mughal viceroys, Bengal gained semi-independence as a dominion under the Nawab of Bengal in 1717. The Nawabs permitted European companies to set up trading posts across the region, including firms from Britain, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Portugal and Austria.
An Armenian community dominated banking and shipping in major cities and towns.
The Europeans regarded Bengal as the richest place for trade.
By the late 18th century, the British displaced the Mughal ruling class in Bengal.
Demographics
See also: Demographics of India: History
Population
India's population growth accelerated under the Mughal Empire, with an unprecedented economic and demographic upsurge which boosted the Indian population by 60% to 253% in 200 years during 1500–1700. The Indian population had a faster growth during the Mughal era than at any known point in Indian history prior to the Mughal era.
By the time of Aurangzeb's reign, there were a total of 455,698 villages in the Mughal Empire.
The following table gives population estimates for the Mughal Empire, compared to the total population of India, including the regions of modern Pakistan and Bangladesh, and compared to the world population:
Year
Mughal Empire  population
Total Indian  population
% of Indian  population
World  population
% of world  population
—
—
—
Urbanization
According to Irfan Habib Cities and towns boomed under the Mughal Empire, which had a relatively high degree of urbanization for its time, with 15% of its population living in urban centres.
This was higher than the percentage of the urban population in contemporary Europe at the time and higher than that of British India in the 19th century; the level of urbanization in Europe did not reach 15% until the 19th century.
Under Akbar's reign in 1600, the Mughal Empire's urban population was up to 17 million people, 15% of the empire's total population.
This was larger than the entire urban population in Europe at the time, and even a century later in 1700, the urban population of England, Scotland and Wales did not exceed 13% of its total population, while British India had an urban population that was under 13% of its total population in 1800 and 9% in 1881, a decline from the earlier Mughal era.
By 1700, Mughal India had an urban population of 23 million people, larger than British India's urban population of 22.3 million in 1871.
Those estimates were criticised by Tim Dyson, who consider them exaggerations.
According to Dyson urbanization of Mughal empire was less than 9%.
The historian Nizamuddin Ahmad (1551–1621) reported that, under Akbar's reign, there were 120 large cities and 3200 townships.
A number of cities in India had a population between a quarter-million and half-million people, with larger cities including Agra (in Agra Subah) with up to 800,000 people, Lahore (in Lahore Subah) with up to 700,000 people, Dhaka (in Bengal Subah) with over 1 million people,[full citation needed] and Delhi (in Delhi Subah) with over 600,000 people.
Cities acted as markets for the sale of goods, and provided homes for a variety of merchants, traders, shopkeepers, artisans, moneylenders, weavers, craftspeople, officials, and religious figures.
However, a number of cities were military and political centres, rather than manufacturing or commerce centres.
Culture
See also: Indo-Persian culture
Ghulam Hamdani Mushafi, the poet first believed to have coined the name "Urdu" around 1780 AD for a language that went by a multiplicity of names before his time.
The Mughal Empire was definitive in the early-modern and modern periods of South Asian history, with its legacy in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan seen in cultural contributions such as:
Mir Taqi Mir, an Urdu poet of the 18th century Mughal Empire
The Taj Mahal in the 1870s
Centralised imperial rule that consolidated the smaller polities of South Asia.
The amalgamation of Persian art and literature with Indian art.
Badshahi Mosque, Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan
The development of Mughlai cuisine, an amalgamation of South Asian, Iranian and Central Asian culinary styles.
The development of Mughal clothing, jewelry and fashion, utilizing richly decorated fabrics such as muslin, silk, brocade and velvet.
The standardization of the Hindustani language, and thus the development of Hindi and Urdu.
The introduction of sophisticated Iranian-style waterworks and horticulture through Mughal gardening.
The introduction of Turkish baths into the Indian subcontinent.
The evolution and refinement of Mughal and Indian architecture and in turn, the development of later Rajput and Sikh palatial architecture.
A famous Mughal landmark is the Taj Mahal.
The development of the Pehlwani style of Indian wrestling, a combination of Indian malla-yuddha and Persian varzesh-e bastani.
The construction of Maktab schools, where youth were taught the Quran and Islamic law such as the Fatawa-i-Alamgiri in their indigenous languages.
The development of Hindustani classical music, and instruments such as the sitar.
Buland Darwaza in Fatehpur Sikiri, Agra, India
Architecture
Main articles: Indo-Islamic architecture, Mughal architecture, and Mughal gardens
The Mughals made a major contribution to the Indian subcontinent with the development of their unique Indo-Persian architecture.
Many monuments were built during the Mughal era by the Muslim emperors, especially Shah Jahan, including the Taj Mahal—a UNESCO World Heritage Site considered "the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage", attracting 7–8 million unique visitors a year.
The palaces, tombs, gardens and forts built by the dynasty stand today in Agra, Aurangabad, Delhi, Dhaka, Fatehpur Sikri, Jaipur, Lahore, Kabul, Sheikhupura, and many other cities of India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh, such as: Lalbagh Fort aerial view in Dhaka, Bangladesh  Shalimar Bagh in Srinagar, Kashmir, India
India
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Afghanistan
Taj Mahal in Agra, India
Agra Fort in Agra, India
Buland Darwaza in Agra, India
Akbar's tomb in Sikandra, India
Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani in Sikandra, India
Humayun's Tomb in Delhi, India
Jama Masjid in Delhi, India
Red Fort in Delhi, India
Sunder Nursery in Delhi, India
Purana Qila in Delhi, India
Sher Mandal in Delhi, India
Pinjore Gardens in Pinjore, India
Shalimar Bagh in Srinagar, India
Nishat Bagh in Srinagar, India
Chasma Shahi in Srinagar, India
Pari Mahal in Srinagar, India
Verinag Gardens in Srinagar, India
Allahabad Fort in Prayagraj, India
Shahi Bridge in Jaunpur, India
Bibi Ka Maqbara in Aurangabad, India
Kos Minar in Haryana, India
Baoli Ghaus Ali Shah in Farrukhnagar, India
Badshahi Masjid in Lahore, Pakistan
Shalimar Gardens in Lahore, Pakistan
Lahore Fort in Lahore, Pakistan
Shahi Hammam in Lahore, Pakistan
Wazir Khan Mosque in Lahore, Pakistan
Tomb of Jahangir in Lahore, Pakistan
Tomb of Anarkali in Lahore, Pakistan
Tomb of Nur Jahan in Lahore, Pakistan
Tomb of Asif Khan in Lahore, Pakistan
Begum Shahi Mosque in Lahore, Pakistan
Akbari Sarai in Lahore, Pakistan
Hiran Minar in Sheikhpura, Pakistan
Mahabat Khan Mosque in Peshawar, Pakistan
Shahi Eid Gah Mosque in Multan, Pakistan
Mausoleum of Masum Shah in Sukkur, Pakistan
Losar Baoli in Taxila, Pakistan
Makli Necropolis in Thatta, Pakistan
Shah Jahan Mosque in Thatta, Pakistan
Mughal Eidgah in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Lalbagh Fort in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Shahi Eidgah in Sylhet, Bangladesh
Mughal Tahakhana in Chapai Nawabganj, Bangladesh
Sat Gambuj Mosque in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Masjid-e-Siraj ud-Daulah in Chittagong, Bangladesh
Allakuri Masjid in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Chawkbazar Shahi Masjid in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Laldighi Masjid in Rangpur, Bangladesh
Khan Mohammad Mridha Masjid in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Wali Khan Masjid in Chittagong, Bangladesh
Shaista Khan Masjid, in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Musa Khan Masjid, in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Shahbaz Khan Masjid, in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Kartalab Khan Masjid in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Azimpur Masjid in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Goaldi Masjid in Sonargaon, Bangladesh
Atia Masjid in Tangail, Bangladesh
Arifail Masjid in Brahmanbaria, Bangladesh
Bazra Shahi Masjid in Noakhali, Bangladesh
Masjid Kur in Khulna, Bangladesh
Nayabad Masjid in Dinajpur, Bangladesh
Ghayebi Dighi Masjid in Sylhet, Bangladesh
Hussaini Dalan in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Bara Katra in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Hajiganj Fort in Narayanganj, Bangladesh
Idrakpur Fort in Munshiganj, Bangladesh
Choto Katra in Dhaka, Bangladesh
Sonakanda Fort in Narayanganj, Bangladesh
Bagh-e-Babur in Kabul, Afghanistan
Shahjahani Mosque in Kabul, Afghanistan
Art and literature
Illustration by the 17th-century Mughal artist Ustad Mansur
"Alexander Visits the Sage Plato in His Mountain Cave"; illustration by the 16th-century Indian artist Basawan, in a folio from a quintet of the 13th-century Indian poet Amir Khusrau Dihlavi
Main articles: Mughal painting and Mughal clothing
The Mughal artistic tradition, mainly expressed in painted miniatures, as well as small luxury objects, was eclectic, borrowing from Iranian, Indian, Chinese and Renaissance European stylistic and thematic elements.
Mughal emperors often took in Iranian bookbinders, illustrators, painters and calligraphers from the Safavid court due to the commonalities of their Timurid styles, and due to the Mughal affinity for Iranian art and calligraphy.
Miniatures commissioned by the Mughal emperors initially focused on large projects illustrating books with eventful historical scenes and court life, but later included more single images for albums, with portraits and animal paintings displaying a profound appreciation for the serenity and beauty of the natural world.
For example, Emperor Jahangir commissioned brilliant artists such as Ustad Mansur to realistically portray unusual flora and fauna throughout the empire.
The literary works Akbar and Jahangir ordered to be illustrated ranged from epics like the Razmnama (a Persian translation of the Hindu epic, the Mahabharata) to historical memoirs or biographies of the dynasty such as the Baburnama and Akbarnama, and Tuzk-e-Jahangiri.
Richly-finished albums (muraqqa) decorated with calligraphy and artistic scenes were mounted onto pages with decorative borders and then bound with covers of stamped and gilded or painted and lacquered leather.
Aurangzeb (1658–1707) was never an enthusiastic patron of painting, largely for religious reasons, and took a turn away from the pomp and ceremonial of the court around 1668, after which he probably commissioned no more paintings.
Language
Folio from Farhang-i-Jahangiri, a Persian dictionary compiled during the Mughal era.
Main articles: Persian language in the Indian subcontinent, Persian and Urdu, and Hindustani language
Though the Mughals were of Turko-Mongol origin, their reign enacted the revival and height of the Persian language in the Indian subcontinent.
Accompanied by literary patronage was the institutionalisation of Persian as official and courtly language; this led to Persian reaching nearly the status of a first language for many inhabitants of Mughal India.
Muzaffar Alam argues that the Mughals used Persian purposefully as the vehicle of an overarching Indo-Persian political culture, to unite their diverse empire.
Persian had a profound impact on the languages of South Asia; one such language, today known as Urdu, developed in the imperial capital of Delhi in the late Mughal era.
It began to be used as a literary language in the Mughal court from the reign of Shah Alam II, who described it as the language of his dastans, and replaced Persian as the language of the Muslim elite.
According to Qazvini, by the time of Shah Jahan, the emperor was only familiar with a few Turki words and showed little interest in the study of the language as a child.
Military
Further information: Army of the Mughal Empire, Mughal weapons, and Mughal artillery
Gunpowder warfare
Mughal matchlock rifle, 16th century.
See also: Gunpowder empires and History of gunpowder: India and the Mughal EmpireMughal India was one of the three Islamic gunpowder empires, along with the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Persia.
By the time he was invited by Lodi governor of Lahore, Daulat Khan, to support his rebellion against Lodi Sultan Ibrahim Khan, Babur was familiar with gunpowder firearms and field artillery, and a method for deploying them.
Babur had employed Ottoman expert Ustad Ali Quli, who showed Babur the standard Ottoman formation—artillery and firearm-equipped infantry protected by wagons in the centre and the mounted archers on both wings.
Babur used this formation at the First Battle of Panipat in 1526, where the Afghan and Rajput forces loyal to the Delhi Sultanate, though superior in numbers but without the gunpowder weapons, were defeated.
The decisive victory of the Timurid forces is one reason opponents rarely met Mughal princes in pitched battle over the course of the empire's history.
In India, guns made of bronze were recovered from Calicut (1504) and Diu (1533).
Fathullah Shirazi (c. 1582), a Persian polymath and mechanical engineer who worked for Akbar, developed an early multi gun shot.
As opposed to the polybolos and repeating crossbows used earlier in ancient Greece and China, respectively, Shirazi's rapid-firing gun had multiple gun barrels that fired hand cannons loaded with gunpowder.
It may be considered a version of a volley gun.
Mughal musketeer, 17th century.
By the 17th century, Indians were manufacturing a diverse variety of firearms; large guns in particular, became visible in Tanjore, Dacca, Bijapur and Murshidabad.
Rocketry and explosives
See also: Mysorean rockets and Congreve rocket
In the sixteenth century, Akbar was the first to initiate and use metal cylinder rockets known as bans, particularly against war elephants, during the Battle of Sanbal.
In 1657, the Mughal Army used rockets during the Siege of Bidar.
Prince Aurangzeb's forces discharged rockets and grenades while scaling the walls.
Sidi Marjan was mortally wounded when a rocket struck his large gunpowder depot, and after twenty-seven days of hard fighting Bidar was captured by the Mughals.
In A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, James Riddick Partington described Indian rockets and explosive mines:
The Indian war rockets were formidable weapons before such rockets were used in Europe.
They had bam-boo rods, a rocket-body lashed to the rod, and iron points.
They were directed at the target and fired by lighting the fuse, but the trajectory was rather erratic.
The use of mines and counter-mines with explosive charges of gunpowder is mentioned for the times of Akbar and Jahāngir.
Later, the Mysorean rockets were upgraded versions of Mughal rockets used during the Siege of Jinji by the progeny of the Nawab of Arcot.
Hyder Ali's father Fatah Muhammad the constable at Budikote, commanded a corps consisting of 50 rocketmen (Cushoon) for the Nawab of Arcot.
Hyder Ali realised the importance of rockets and introduced advanced versions of metal cylinder rockets.
These rockets turned fortunes in favour of the Sultanate of Mysore during the Second Anglo-Mysore War, particularly during the Battle of Pollilur.
In turn, the Mysorean rockets were the basis for the Congreve rockets, which Britain deployed in the Napoleonic Wars against France and the War of 1812 against the United States.
Science
Astronomy
See also: Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world and Indian astronomy
While there appears to have been little concern for theoretical astronomy, Mughal astronomers made advances in observational astronomy and produced nearly a hundred Zij treatises.
Humayun built a personal observatory near Delhi; Jahangir and Shah Jahan were also intending to build observatories, but were unable to do so.
The astronomical instruments and observational techniques used at the Mughal observatories were mainly derived from Islamic astronomy.
In the 17th century, the Mughal Empire saw a synthesis between Islamic and Hindu astronomy, where Islamic observational instruments were combined with Hindu computational techniques.
During the decline of the Mughal Empire, the Hindu king Jai Singh II of Amber continued the work of Mughal astronomy.
In the early 18th century, he built several large observatories called Yantra Mandirs, in order to rival Ulugh Beg's Samarkand observatory, and in order to improve on the earlier Hindu computations in the Siddhantas and Islamic observations in Zij-i-Sultani.
The instruments he used were influenced by Islamic astronomy, while the computational techniques were derived from Hindu astronomy.
Chemistry
See also: Alchemy and chemistry in the medieval Islamic world
Sake Dean Mahomed had learned much of Mughal chemistry and understood the techniques used to produce various alkali and soaps to produce shampoo.
He was also a notable writer who described the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II and the cities of Allahabad and Delhi in rich detail and also made note of the glories of the Mughal Empire.
In Britain, Sake Dean Mahomed was appointed as shampooing surgeon to both Kings George IV and William IV.
Metallurgy
See also: History of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent
One of the most remarkable astronomical instruments invented in Mughal India is the lost-wax cast, hollow, seamless, celestial globe.
It was invented in Kashmir by Ali Kashmiri ibn Luqman in 998 AH (1589–90 CE), and twenty other such globes were later produced in Lahore and Kashmir during the Mughal Empire.
Before they were rediscovered in the 1980s, it was believed by modern metallurgists to be technically impossible to produce hollow metal globes without any seams.
A 17th century celestial globe was also made by Diya’ ad-din Muhammad in Lahore, 1668 (now in Pakistan). It is now housed at the National Museum of Scotland.
List of Mughal Emperors
Main article: Mughal emperors
Portrait
Titular Name
Birth Name
Birth
Reign
Death
Notes
Bāburبابر
Zahir-ud-din Muhammadظہیر الدین محمد
Founded the Empire
Humayunہمایوں
Nasir-ud-din Muhammad Humayunنصیر الدین محمد ہمایوں
Humayun was overthrown in 1540 by Sher Shah Suri of the Suri dynasty but returned to the throne in 1555 after the death of Islam Shah Suri (Sher Shah Suri's son and successor).
Akbar-i-Azam اکبر اعظم
Jalal-ud-din Muhammadجلال الدین محمد اکبر
His mother was Persian Hamida Banu Begum.
Jahangirجہانگیر
Nur-ud-din Muhammad Salim نور الدین محمد سلیم
His mother was Rajput princess Mariam-uz-Zamani.
Shah-Jahanشاہ جہان
Shahab-ud-din Muhammad Khurramشہاب الدین محمد خرم
His mother was Rajput princess Jagat Gosaini.
Built Taj Mahal.
Alamgir Iعالمگیر
Muhy-ud-din Muhammad Aurangzeb محی الدین محمداورنگزیب 
His mother was Persian Mumtaz Mahal.
He was married to Safavid dynasty Princess Dilras Banu Begum.
He established Islamic law throughout India.
After his death, His younger Son Azam Shah became the King (for 3 months) .
Bahadur Shah بہادر شاہ
Qutb-ud-Din Muhammad Mu'azzam Shah Alam قطب الدین محمد معزام 
(3 years, 253 days)
He made settlements with the Marathas, tranquillised the Rajputs, and became friendly with the Sikhs in the Punjab.
Jahandar Shahجہاندار شاہ
Mu'izz-ud-Din Jahandar Shah Bahadur معز الدین جہاندار شاہ بہادر 
(0 years, 350 days)
Highly influenced by his Grand Vizier Zulfikar Khan.
Farrukhsiyarفرخ سیر
Farrukhsiyar فرخ سیر
(6 years, 48 days)
Granted a firman to the East India Company in 1717 granting them duty-free trading rights for Bengal, strengthening their posts on the east coast.
The firman or decree helped British East India company to import goods into Bengal without paying customs duty to the government.
Rafi ud-Darajatرفیع الدرجات
Rafi ud-Darajat رفیع الدرجات
(0 years, 98 days)
Rise of Syed Brothers as power brokers.
Shah Jahan IIشاہ جہان دوم
Rafi ud-Daulah شاہ جہاں دوم
June 1696
(0 years, 105 days)
----
Muhammad Shahمحمد شاہ
Roshan Akhtar Bahadur روشن اختر بہادر
(28 years, 212 days)
Got rid of the Syed Brothers.
Fought a long war with the Marathas, losing Deccan and Malwa in the process.
Suffered the invasion of Nader Shah of Persia in 1739. He was the last emperor to possess effective control over the empire.
Ahmad Shah Bahadurاحمد شاہ بہادر
Ahmad Shah Bahadur احمد شاہ بہادر
(6 years, 37 days)
Mughal forces defeated by the Marathas at the Battle of Sikandarabad.
Alamgir IIعالمگیر دوم
Aziz-ud-din عزیز اُلدین
(5 years, 180 days)
Domination of Vizier Imad-ul-Mulk.
Shah Jahan IIIشاہ جہان سوم
Muhi-ul-millat محی اُلملت
(282 days)
Consolidation of power by the Nawab of Bengal-Bihar-Odisha.
Shah Alam IIشاہ عالم دوم
Ali Gauhar علی گوہر
Defeat in the Battle of Buxar.
Muhammad Shah Bahadur Jahan IVشاہ جہان محمد شاه بهادر
Bidar Bakht بیدار بخت 
Enthroned as a puppet Emperor by the Rohilla Ghulam Kadir, following the temporary overthrow of Shah Alam II.
Akbar Shah IIاکبر شاہ دوم
Mirza Akbar میرزا اکبر
Titular figurehead under British protection.
Bahadur Shah IIبہادر شاہ دوم
Abu Zafar Sirajuddin Muhammad Bahadur Shah Zafar ابو ظفر سراج اُلدین محمد بہادر شاہ ظفر
Last Mughal Emperor.
Deposed by the British and was exiled to Burma after the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
See also
Mughal dynasty
Flags of the Mughal Empire
Mughal emperors
List of Mongol states
Mansabdar
Mughal people
Mughal Harem
Mughal weapons
Mughal architecture
Mughlai cuisine
Mughal-Mongol genealogy
Islam in South Asia
References
Footnotes
The title (Mirza) descends to all the sons of the family, without exception.
In the royal family it is placed after the name instead of before it, thus, Abbas Mirza and Hosfiein Mirza.
Mirza is a civil title, and Khan is a military one.
The title of Khan is creative, but not hereditary.
Citations
Samrin, Farah (2005). "The City of Kabul Under the Mughals". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 66: 1307. JSTOR 44145943.
Sinopoli, Carla M. (1994). "Monumentality and Mobility in Mughal Capitals". Asian Perspectives. 33 (2): 294. ISSN 0066-8435. JSTOR 42928323.
Conan 2007, p. 235.
"Islam: Mughal Empire (1500s, 1600s)". BBC. 7 September 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2019.
Pagaza & Argyriades 2009, p. 129.
Morier 1812, p. 601.
Turchin, Peter; Adams, Jonathan M.; Hall, Thomas D. (2006). "East–West Orientation of Historical Empires and Modern States". Journal of World-Systems Research. 12 (2): 219–229. doi:10.5195/JWSR.2006.369. ISSN 1076-156X.
Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 475–504. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. JSTOR 2600793.
a b József Böröcz (2009). The European Union and Global Social Change.
Routledge. p. 21. ISBN 978-1135255800. Retrieved 26 June 2017.
a b c d e f g h i j Richards, John F. (1995). The Mughal Empire.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-56603-2.
Richards, John F. (1995), The Mughal Empire, Cambridge University Press, p. 2, ISBN 978-0-521-56603-2 Quote: "Although the first two Timurid emperors and many of their noblemen were recent migrants to the subcontinent, the dynasty and the empire itself became indisputably Indian.
The interests and futures of all concerned were in India, not in ancestral homelands in the Middle East or Central Asia.
Furthermore, the Mughal empire emerged from the Indian historical experience.
It was the end product of a millennium of Muslim conquest, colonization, and state-building in the Indian subcontinent."
Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 159–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "The realm so defined and governed was a vast territory of some 750,000 square miles [1,900,000 km2], ranging from the frontier with Central Asia in northern Afghanistan to the northern uplands of the Deccan plateau, and from the Indus basin on the west to the Assamese highlands in the east."
Gilbert, Marc Jason (2017), South Asia in World History, Oxford University Press, pp. 75–, ISBN 978-0-19-066137-3 Quote: "Babur then adroitly gave the Ottomans his promise not to attack them in return for their military aid, which he received in the form of the newest of battlefield inventions, the matchlock gun and cast cannons, as well as instructors to train his men to use them."
Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 159–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "Another possible date for the beginning of the Mughal regime is 1600, when the institutions that defined the regime were set firmly in place and when the heartland of the empire was defined; both of these were the accomplishment of Babur’s grandson Akbar."
Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 159–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "The imperial career of the Mughal house is conventionally reckoned to have ended in 1707 when the emperor Aurangzeb, a fifth-generation descendant of Babur, died.
His fifty-year reign began in 1658 with the Mughal state seeming as strong as ever or even stronger.
But in Aurangzeb’s later years the state was brought to the brink of destruction, over which it toppled within a decade and a half after his death; by 1720 imperial Mughal rule was largely finished and an epoch of two imperial centuries had closed."
Richards, John F. (1995), The Mughal Empire, Cambridge University Press, p. xv, ISBN 978-0-521-56603-2 Quote: "By the latter date (1720) the essential structure of the centralized state was disintegrated beyond repair."
Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 159–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "The vaunting of such progenitors pointed up the central character of the Mughal regime as a warrior state: it was born in war and it was sustained by war until the eighteenth century, when warfare destroyed it."
Robb, Peter (2011), A History of India, Macmillan, pp. 108–, ISBN 978-0-230-34549-2 Quote: "The Mughal state was geared for war, and succeeded while it won its battles.  It controlled territory partly through its network of strongholds, from its fortified capitals in Agra, Delhi or Lahore, which defined its heartlands, to the converted and expanded forts of Rajasthan and the Deccan.
The emperors' will was frequently enforced in battle.
Hundreds of army scouts were an important source of information.
But the empire's administrative structure too was defined by and directed at war.
Local military checkpoints or thanas kept order.
Directly appointed imperial military and civil commanders (faujdars) controlled the cavalry and infantry, or the administration, in each region.
The peasantry in turn were often armed, able to provide supporters for regional powers, and liable to rebellion on their own account: continual pacification was required of the rulers."
Gilbert, Marc Jason (2017), South Asia in World History, Oxford University Press, pp. 75–, ISBN 978-0-19-066137-3 Quote: "With Safavid and Ottoman aid, the Mughals would soon join these two powers in a triumvirate of warrior-driven, expansionist, and both militarily and bureaucratically efficient early modern states, now often called "gunpowder empires" due to their common proficiency is using such weapons to conquer lands they sought to control."
Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 115–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7
Robb, Peter (2011), A History of India, Macmillan, pp. 99–100, ISBN 978-0-230-34549-2
a b c Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 152–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7
a b Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 164–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "The resource base of Akbar’s new order was land revenue"
a b Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 158–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "The Mughal empire was based in the interior of a large land-mass and derived the vast majority of its revenues from agriculture."
a b Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 164–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 Quote: "... well over half of the output from the fields in his realm, after the costs of production had been met, is estimated to have been taken from the peasant producers by way of official taxes and unofficial exactions.
Moreover, payments were exacted in money, and this required a well regulated silver currency."
a b Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 152–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "His stipulation that land taxes be paid in cash forced peasants into market networks, where they could obtain the necessary money, while the standardization of imperial currency made the exchange of goods for money easier."
Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 152–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "Above all, the long period of relative peace ushered in by Akbar's power, and maintained by his successors, contributed to India's economic expansion."
Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 186–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "As the European presence in India grew, their demands for Indian goods and trading rights increased, thus bringing even greater wealth to the already flush Indian courts."
Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 186–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "The elite spent more and more money on luxury goods, and sumptuous lifestyles, and the rulers built entire new capital cities at times."
Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006), India Before Europe, Cambridge University Press, pp. 186–, ISBN 978-0-521-80904-7 Quote: "All these factors resulted in greater patronage of the arts, including textiles, paintings, architecture, jewelry, and weapons to meet the ceremonial requirements of kings and princes."
Bose, Sugata; Ayesha Jalal (2004). Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy.
Routledge. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-203-71253-5.
Avari, Burjor (2004). Islamic Civilization in South Asia: A History of Muslim Power and Presence in the Indian Subcontinent.
Routledge. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-415-58061-8.
Zahir ud-Din Mohammad (2002).  Thackston, Wheeler M. (ed.). The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor.
New York: Modern Library. p. xlvi.
ISBN 978-0-375-76137-9. In India the dynasty always called itself Gurkani, after Temür's title Gurkân, the Persianized form of the Mongolian kürägän, 'son-in-law,' a title he assumed after his marriage to a Genghisid princess.
a b Dodgson, Marshall G.S. (2009). The Venture of Islam.
Vol. 3. University of Chicago Press. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-226-34688-5.
Huskin, Frans Husken; Dick van der Meij (2004). Reading Asia: New Research in Asian Studies.
Routledge. p. 104. ISBN 978-1-136-84377-8.
John Walbridge.
God and Logic in Islam: The Caliphate of Reason. p. 165. Persianate Mogul Empire.
Rutherford 2010.
Canfield, Robert L. (2002). Turko-Persia in Historical Perspective.
Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-521-52291-5.
Vanina, Eugenia (2012). Medieval Indian Mindscapes: Space, Time, Society, Man.
Primus Books. p. 47. ISBN 978-93-80607-19-1.
Fontana, Michela (2011). Matteo Ricci: A Jesuit in the Ming Court.
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-4422-0588-8.
Schwartzberg, Joseph E. (1978). A Historical atlas of South Asia.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 39, 147. ISBN 0226742210.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m Berndl, Klaus (2005). National Geographic Visual History of the World.
National Geographic Society. pp. 318–320. ISBN 978-0-7922-3695-5.
Bayley, Christopher.
The European Emergence.
The Mughals Ascendant. p. 151. ISBN 0-7054-0982-1.
Hooja, Rima (2006). A History of Rajasthan.
Rupa. p. 454. ISBN 9788129115010. From Baburs memoirs we learn that Sanga's success against the Mughal advance guard commanded by Abdul Aziz and other forces at Bayana, severely demoralised the fighting spirit of Baburs troops encamped near Sikri.
Bayley, Christopher.
The European Emergence.
The Mughals Ascendant. p. 154. ISBN 0-7054-0982-1.
Ballhatchet, Kenneth A. "Akbar". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved 17 July 2017.
Smith, Vincent Arthur (1917). Akbar the Great Mogul, 1542–1605. Oxford at The Clarendon Press. pp. 13–14.
Begum, Gulbadan (1902). The History of Humāyūn (Humāyūn-Nāma). Translated by Beveridge, Annette S. Royal Asiatic Society. pp. 237–239.
a b Mohammada, Malika (2007). The Foundations of the Composite Culture in India.
Aakar Books. p. 300. ISBN 978-81-89833-18-3.
Gilbert, Marc Jason (2017). South Asia in World History.
Oxford University Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-19-976034-3.
Muhammad-Hadi (1999). Preface to The Jahangirnama.
Translated by Thackston, Wheeler M. Oxford University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-19-512718-8.
Jahangir, Emperor of Hindustan (1999). The Jahangirnama: Memoirs of Jahangir, Emperor of India.
Translated by Thackston, Wheeler M. Oxford University Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-19-512718-8.
Faruqui, Munis D. (2012). The Princes of the Mughal Empire, 1504–1719. Cambridge University Press. pp. 268–269. ISBN 978-1-107-02217-1.
Robb, Peter (2011), A History of India, Macmillan International Higher Education, pp. 97–98, ISBN 978-0-230-34424-2
a b Asher, Catherine B.; Talbot, Cynthia (2006). India before Europe.
Cambridge University Press. p. 267. ISBN 0-521-80904-5. OCLC 61303480.
a b "BBC - Religions - Sikhism: Origins of Sikhism". BBC. 30 September 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2021.
Mehta, Jaswant Lal (1984) [First published 1981]. Advanced Study in the History of Medieval India.
Vol. II (2nd ed.). Sterling Publishers Pvt.
Ltd. p. 59. ISBN 978-81-207-1015-3. OCLC 1008395679.
Singhal, Damodar P. (1983). A History of the Indian People.
Methuen. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-413-48730-8.
Dara Shikoh Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia, by Josef W. Meri, Jere L Bacharach.
Routledge, 2005. ISBN 0-415-96690-6. Page 195-196.
a b c d Truschke, Audrey (2017). Aurangzeb: The Life and Legacy of India's Most Controversial King.
Stanford University Press.
ISBN 978-1-5036-0259-5.
Robb, Peter (2011). A History of India.
Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-230-34424-2.
Abhishek Kaicker (2020). The King and the People: Sovereignty and Popular Politics in Mughal Delhi.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-007067-0.
Copland, Ian; Mabbett, Ian; Roy, Asim;  et al. (2013). A History of State and Religion in India.
Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 978-1-136-45950-4.
Audrey Truschke (2021). the Language of History:Sanskrit Narratives of Indo-Muslim Rule.
Publisher:Columbia University Press.
Columbia University Press (2000). Columbia Chronologies of Asian History and Culture. p. 285.
Richard M. Eaton (2013). Expanding Frontiers in South Asian and World History Essays in Honour of John F. Richards.
Cambridge University Press. p. 21. I consider all this army (Marathas) as my own and I will get my work done through them.
It is necessary to take our hands off Malwa.
God willing, I will enter into an understanding with them and entrust the Mulukgiri(raiding) on that side of the Narmada to them.
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona: Volumes 51-53. Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 1970. p. 94. The Mughal court was hostile to Nizam-ul-Mulk.
If it had the power, it would have crushed him.
To save himself from the hostile intentions of the Emperor, the Nizam did not interfere with the Maratha activities in Malwa and Gujarat.
As revealed in the anecdotes narrated b Lala Mansaram, the Nizam-ul-Mulk considered the Maratha army operating in Malwa and Gujarat as his own
a b Bose, Sugata; Jalal, Ayesha (2004). Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy (2nd ed.). Routledge. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-203-71253-5.
Rathod, N.G. (1994). The Great Maratha Mahadaji Scindia.
New Delhi: Sarup & Sons. p. 8. ISBN 978-8185431529.
Richards, J.F. (1981). "Mughal State Finance and the Premodern World Economy". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 23 (2): 285–308. doi:10.1017/s0010417500013311. JSTOR 178737. S2CID 154809724.
Sir William Wilson Hunter (1908). Imperial gazetteer of India.
Clarendon Press. p. 107.
Habib, Irfan (March 1969). "Potentialities of Capitalistic Development in the Economy of Mughal India". Journal of Economic History. 29 (1): 32–78. doi:10.1017/s0022050700097825. JSTOR 2115498. S2CID 91170802.
Leonard, Karen (April 1979). "The 'Great Firm' Theory of the Decline of the Mughal Empire". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 21 (2): 151–167. doi:10.1017/s0010417500012792. JSTOR 178414. S2CID 54775994.
Hallissey, Robert C. (1977). The Rajput Rebellion Against Aurangzeb.
University of Missouri Press. pp. ix, x, 84. ISBN 978-0-8262-0222-2.
Claude Markovits (2004) [First published 1994 as Histoire de l'Inde Moderne]. A History of Modern India, 1480–1950. Anthem Press. pp. 172–173. ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4.
a b c Jeffrey G. Williamson, David Clingingsmith (August 2005). "India's Deindustrialization in the 18th and 19th Centuries" (PDF). Harvard University.
Retrieved 18 May 2017.
a b Jeffrey G. Williamson (2011). Trade and Poverty: When the Third World Fell Behind.
MIT Press. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-262-29518-5.
Broadberry, Stephen; Gupta, Bishnupriya (2005). Cotton textiles and the great divergence: Lancashire, India and shifting competitive advantage, 1600–1850 (PDF). The Rise, Organization, and Institutional Framework of Factor Markets.
Utrecht University.
Retrieved 5 December 2016.
a b c Robinson, Francis (2009), "Mughal Empire", The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World, Oxford University Press, doi:10.1093/acref/9780195305135.001.0001, ISBN 978-0-19-530513-5, retrieved 28 March 2022
Burton-Page, J.; Islam, Riazul; Athar Ali, M.; Moosvi, Shireen; Moreland, W. H.; Bosworth, C. E.; Schimmel, Annemarie; Koch, Ebba; Hall, Margaret (24 April 2012), "Mug̲h̲als", Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Brill, doi:10.1163/1573-3912_islam_com_0778, retrieved 31 March 2022
a b Conermann, Stephan (4 August 2015), "Mughal Empire", Encyclopedia of Early Modern History Online, Brill, doi:10.1163/2352-0272_emho_com_024206, retrieved 28 March 2022
a b Sinopoli, Carla M. (1994). "Monumentality and Mobility in Mughal Capitals". Asian Perspectives. 33 (2): 294–295. ISSN 0066-8435. JSTOR 42928323.
Sinopoli, Carla M. (1994). "Monumentality and Mobility in Mughal Capitals". Asian Perspectives. 33 (2): 304–305. ISSN 0066-8435. JSTOR 42928323.
Sinopoli, Carla M. (1994). "Monumentality and Mobility in Mughal Capitals". Asian Perspectives. 33 (2): 296 & 298. ISSN 0066-8435. JSTOR 42928323.
Edmund., Bosworth, Clifford (2008). Historic cities of the Islamic world.
Brill. p. 127. ISBN 978-90-04-15388-2. OCLC 231801473.
a b c d e f Chatterjee, Nandini (1 December 2019), "Courts of law, Mughal", Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE, Brill, doi:10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_com_25171, retrieved 13 December 2021
Khalfaoui, Mouez. "Mughal Empire and Law". Oxford Islamic Studies Online.
Conermann, Stephan (4 August 2015), "Mughal Empire", Encyclopedia of Early Modern History Online, Brill, doi:10.1163/2352-0272_emho_com_024206, retrieved 25 March 2022
Chatterjee, Nandini (2014). "Reflections on Religious Difference and Permissive Inclusion in Mughal Law". Journal of Law and Religion. 29 (3): 396–415. doi:10.1017/jlr.2014.20. hdl:10871/15975. ISSN 0748-0814. S2CID 143513602.
Eaton, Richard M. (2019). India in the Persianate Age : 1000-1765. University of California Press. p. 272. ISBN 978-0-520-97423-4. OCLC 1243310832.
a b c d e f g h i j Schmidt, Karl J. (2015). An Atlas and Survey of South Asian History.
Routledge. pp. 100–. ISBN 978-1-317-47681-8.
a b c Maddison, Angus (2003). Development Centre Studies The World Economy Historical Statistics: Historical Statistics.
OECD Publishing. pp. 256–. ISBN 978-92-64-10414-3.
Jeffrey G. Williamson & David Clingingsmith, India's Deindustrialization in the 18th and 19th Centuries Archived 29 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Global Economic History Network, London School of Economics
a b Lex Heerma van Voss; Els Hiemstra-Kuperus; Elise van Nederveen Meerkerk (2010). "The Long Globalization and Textile Producers in India". The Ashgate Companion to the History of Textile Workers, 1650–2000. Ashgate Publishing. p. 255. ISBN 978-0754664284.
"Picture of original Mughal rupiya introduced by Sher Shah Suri". Archived from the original on 5 October 2002. Retrieved 4 August 2017.
Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 464.
a b c d Richards, John F. (2003). The Unending Frontier: An Environmental History of the Early Modern World.
University of California Press. pp. 27–. ISBN 978-0-520-93935-6.
Tracy, James D. (1997). The Political Economy of Merchant Empires: State Power and World Trade, 1350–1750. Cambridge University Press. pp. 97–. ISBN 978-0-521-57464-8.
Moosvi 2015, p. 433.
Maddison, Angus (1971). Class Structure and Economic Growth: India and Pakistan Since the Moghuls.
Taylor & Francis. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-415-38259-5.
Broadberry, Gupta, Stephen, Bishnupriya (2003). "The Early Modern Great Divergence: Wages, Prices and Economic Development in Europe and Asia 1500–1800" (PDF). p. 34.
Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011). Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850. p. 42.
Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011). Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850. p. 39.
Sivramkrishna, Sashi (2009). "Ascertaining Living Standards in Erstwhile Mysore, Southern India, from Francis Buchanan's Journey of 1800–01: An Empirical Contribution to the Great Divergence". Journal of the Economic and Social History. 52 (4): 726.
Sivramkrishna, Sashi (2009). "Ascertaining Living Standards in Erstwhile Mysore, Southern India, from Francis Buchanan's Journey of 1800–01: An Empirical Contribution to the Great Divergence". Journal of the Economic and Social History. 52 (4): 731.
Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011). Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850. p. 45.
Sivramkrishna, Sashi (2009). "Ascertaining Living Standards in Erstwhile Mysore, Southern India, from Francis Buchanan's Journey of 1800–01: An Empirical Contribution to the Great Divergence". Journal of the Economic and Social History. 52 (4): 729.
Moosvi 2015, p. 432.
Moosvi 2015, p. 450.
a b Moosvi, Shireen (December 2011). "The World of Labour in Mughal India (c. 1500–1750)". International Review of Social History. 56 (S19): 245–261. doi:10.1017/S0020859011000526.
Pagaza, Ignacio; Argyriades, Demetrios (2009). Winning the Needed Change: Saving Our Planet Earth.
IOS Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-58603-958-5.
a b Ludden, David (1999). An Agrarian History of South Asia.
Cambridge University Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-521-36424-9.
Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 214.
Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 217.
a b Irfan Habib (2011), Economic History of Medieval India, 1200–1500, p. 53, Pearson Education
Suneja, Vivek (2000). Understanding Business: A Multidimensional Approach to the Market Economy.
Psychology Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-415-23857-1.
Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011), Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850, Cambridge University Press, pp. 39–45, ISBN 978-1-139-49889-0
a b c Om Prakash, "Empire, Mughal", History of World Trade Since 1450, edited by John J. McCusker, vol. 1, Macmillan Reference US, 2006, pp. 237–240, World History in Context.
Retrieved 3 August 2017
Angus Maddison (1995), Monitoring the World Economy, 1820–1992, OECD, p. 30
Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011), Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850, Cambridge University Press, p. 2, ISBN 978-1-139-49889-0
a b Richard Maxwell Eaton (1996), The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760, p. 202, University of California Press
Lakwete, Angela (2003). Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth in Antebellum America.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 1–6. ISBN 978-0-8018-7394-2.
Irfan Habib (2011), Economic History of Medieval India, 1200–1500, pp. 53–54, Pearson Education
Irfan Habib (2011), Economic History of Medieval India, 1200–1500, p. 54, Pearson Education
دكتور محمد نصر. Fashion And Designing Under The Mughals Akbar To Aurangzeb.
A Historical Perspective.
a b Ray, Indrajit (2011). Bengal Industries and the British Industrial Revolution (1757–1857). Routledge. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-136-82552-1.
"Technological Dynamism in a Stagnant Sector: Safety at Sea during the Early Industrial Revolution" (PDF).
Roy, Tirthankar (November 2011). "Where is Bengal? Situating an Indian Region in the Early Modern World Economy". Past & Present. 213 (1): 115–146. doi:10.1093/pastj/gtr009.
Alam, M. Shahid (2016). Poverty From The Wealth of Nations: Integration and Polarization in the Global Economy since 1760. Springer Science+Business Media. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-333-98564-9.
"The paradise of nations". Dhaka Tribune.
Daniyal, Shoaib. "Bengali New Year: how Akbar invented the modern Bengali calendar". Scroll.in.
a b Nanda, J. N. (2005). Bengal: The Unique State.
Concept Publishing Company.
ISBN 978-81-8069-149-2.
Eaton, Richard M. (1996). The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760. University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20507-9.
a b c d e Colin McEvedy; Richard Jones (1978). Atlas of World Population History (PDF). New York: Facts on File. pp. 184–185.
Angus Maddison (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, p. 236, OECD Development Centre
a b c Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 170.
a b c Jean-Noël Biraben, 1980, "An Essay Concerning Mankind's Evolution", Population, Selected Papers, Vol. 4, pp. 1–13
a b c d Eraly, Abraham (2007). The Mughal World: Life in India's Last Golden Age.
Penguin Books India. pp. 5–. ISBN 978-0-14-310262-5.
Paolo Malanima (2009). Pre-Modern European Economy: One Thousand Years (10th–19th Centuries). Brill Publishers. p. 244. ISBN 978-9004178229.
Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 165.
Broadberry, Stephen; Gupta, Bishnupriya (2010). "Indian GDP before 1870: Some preliminary estimates and a comparison with Britain" (PDF). Warwick University. p. 23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2015.
Dyson, Tim (2018). A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day. pp. 63–65.
Irfan Habib; Dharma Kumar; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987). The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF). Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 171.
Social Science Review, Volume 14, Issue 1, p. 126, Dhaka University
Moosvi, Shireen (2008). People, Taxation, and Trade in Mughal India.
Oxford University Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-19-569315-7.
Chaudhuri, K. N. (2008). "Some Reflections on the Town and Country in Mughal India". Modern Asian Studies. 12 (1): 77–96. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00008155. ISSN 0026-749X. S2CID 146558617.
Garcia, Maria Isabel Maldonado. "The Urdu language reforms." Studies 26 (2011): 97.
Mughal Empire – MSN Encarta.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2009.
"Indo-Persian Literature Conference: SOAS: North Indian Literary Culture (1450–1650)". SOAS. Retrieved 28 November 2012.
"Islam: Mughal Empire (1500s, 1600s)". Religions.
BBC. Retrieved 10 June 2018.
Fatma, Sadaf (2012). "Waterworks in Mughal Gardens". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 73: 1268–1278. JSTOR 44156328.
Alter, Joseph S. (May 1992). "The sannyasi and the Indian Wrestler: The Anatomy of a Relationship". American Ethnologist. 19 (2): 317–336. doi:10.1525/ae.1992.19.2.02a00070. ISSN 0094-0496.
Alter, Joseph S. (1992). The Wrestler's Body: Identity and Ideology in North India.
University of California Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-520-07697-6. Wrestling in modern India is a synthesis of two different traditions: the Persian form of the art brought into South Asia by the Moguls, and an indigenous Hindu form.
"Mughal influence on Indian music". The Hindu. 8 February 2000. Retrieved 5 April 2019.
Swarn Lata (2013), The Journey of the Sitar in Indian Classical Music, p. 24, ISBN 978-1475947076
Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "Taj Mahal". UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
Ross Marlay; Clark D. Neher (1999). Patriots and Tyrants: Ten Asian Leaders.
Rowman & Littlefield. p. 269. ISBN 978-0-8476-8442-7.
Crill, Rosemary, and Jariwala, Kapil.
The Indian Portrait, 1560–1860, pp. 23–27, National Portrait Gallery, London, 2010, ISBN 978-1855144095; Beach, Milo Cleveland (1987), Early Mughal painting, Harvard University Press, pp. 33–37, ISBN 978-0674221857, google books
Soucek, Priscilla (1987). "Persian Artists in Mughal India: Influences and Transformations". Muqarnas. 4: 166–181. doi:10.2307/1523102. JSTOR 1523102.
Blunt, Wilfrid (1948). "The Mughal Painters of Natural History". The Burlington Magazine. 90 (539): 48–50. JSTOR 869792.
Sardar, Marika (October 2003). "The Art of the Mughals After 1600". The MET. Archived from the original on 4 February 2019.
Losty, J. P. Roy, Malini (eds), Mughal India: Art, Culture and Empire, 2013, pp. 147, 149, British Library, ISBN 978-0712358705
"2. The Culture and Politics of Persian in Precolonial Hindustan", Literary Cultures in History, University of California Press, pp. 158–167, 2019, doi:10.1525/9780520926738-007, ISBN 978-0-520-92673-8, S2CID 226770775, retrieved 26 July 2021
Abidi, S. A. H.; Gargesh, Ravinder (2008),  Kachru, Braj B; Kachru, Yamuna; Sridhar, S. N (eds.), "Persian in South Asia", Language in South Asia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 105, doi:10.1017/cbo9780511619069.007, ISBN 978-0-511-61906-9, retrieved 26 July 2021
Alam, Muzaffar (2004). The languages of political Islam : India 1200–1800. University of Chicago Press. pp. 134, 144. ISBN 0-226-01100-3. OCLC 469379391.
"14. A Long History of Urdu Literary Culture", Literary Cultures in History, University of California Press, p. 29, 2019, ISBN 978-0-19-565201-7
"14. A Long History of Urdu Literary Culture, Part 1: Naming and Placing a Literary Culture", Literary Cultures in History, University of California Press, pp. 805–863, 2019, doi:10.1525/9780520926738-019, ISBN 978-0-520-92673-8, S2CID 226765648, retrieved 26 July 2021
Matthews, David. "Urdu". Encyclopaedia Iranica.
Banarsi Prasad Saksena (1932). History Of Shahjahan Of Dihli 1932. Indian Press Limited.
Streusand, Douglas E. (2011). Islamic Gunpowder Empires: Ottomans, Safavids, and Mughals.
Philadelphia: Westview Press.
ISBN 978-0-8133-1359-7.
Charles T. Evans. "The Gunpowder Empires". Northern Virginia Community College.
Retrieved 28 December 2010.
Streusand, Douglas E. (2011). Islamic Gunpowder Empires: Ottomans, Safavids, and Mughals.
Philadelphia: Westview Press. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-8133-1359-7.
a b Partington, James Riddick (1999), A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, p. 226, ISBN 978-0-8018-5954-0
Bag, A.K. (2005). "Fathullah Shirazi: Cannon, Multi-barrel Gun and Yarghu". Indian Journal of History of Science. 40 (3): 431–436. ISSN 0019-5235.
Partington, James Riddick (1999), A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, p. 225, ISBN 978-0-8018-5954-0
MughalistanSipahi (19 June 2010). "Islamic Mughal Empire: War Elephants Part 3". Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2012 – via YouTube.
a b Ghulam Yazdani, Bidar, Its History and Monuments, (Motilal Banarsidass, 1995), 15.
Roddam Narasimha (1985). "Rockets in Mysore and Britain, 1750–1850 A.D." National Aerospace Laboratories, India.
Retrieved 30 November 2011.
a b c Sharma, Virendra Nath (1995), Sawai Jai Singh and His Astronomy, Motilal Banarsidass Publ., pp. 8–9, ISBN 978-81-208-1256-7
a b c Baber, Zaheer (1996), The Science of Empire: Scientific Knowledge, Civilization, and Colonial Rule in India, State University of New York Press, pp. 82–89, ISBN 978-0-7914-2919-8
Teltscher, Kate (2000). "The Shampooing Surgeon and the Persian Prince: Two Indians in Early Nineteenth-century Britain". Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies. 2 (3): 409–423. doi:10.1080/13698010020019226. ISSN 1469-929X. S2CID 161906676.
Savage-Smith, Emilie (1985), Islamicate Celestial Globes: Their History, Construction, and Use, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, DC
"Celestial globe". National Museums Scotland.
Retrieved 15 October 2020.
Begum, Gulbadan (1902). The History of Humayun (Humayun-Nama). Royal Asiatic Society. pp. 237–9.
Marc Jason Gilbert (2017). South Asia in World History.
Oxford University Press. p. 79. ISBN 9780199760343.
Emperor of Hindustan Jahangir (2010). The Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri; Or, Memoirs of Jahangir Translated by Alexander Rogers Edited by Henry Beveridge.
General Books LLC. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-152-49040-6.
Mohammada, Malika (1 January 2007). The Foundations of the Composite Culture in India.
Aakar Books. p. 300. ISBN 978-8-189-83318-3.
The Honorary Secretaries, Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal: 1871, (1871) p.97
Further reading
Alam, Muzaffar.
Crisis of Empire in Mughal North India: Awadh & the Punjab, 1707–48 (1988)
Ali, M. Athar (1975), "The Passing of Empire: The Mughal Case", Modern Asian Studies, 9 (3): 385–396, doi:10.1017/s0026749x00005825, JSTOR 311728, S2CID 143861682, on the causes of its collapse
Asher, C.B.; Talbot, C (2008), India Before Europe (1st ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-51750-8
Black, Jeremy. "The Mughals Strike Twice", History Today (April 2012) 62#4 pp. 22–26. full text online
Blake, Stephen P. (November 1979), "The Patrimonial-Bureaucratic Empire of the Mughals", Journal of Asian Studies, 39 (1): 77–94, doi:10.2307/2053505, JSTOR 2053505, S2CID 154527305
Conan, Michel (2007). Middle East Garden Traditions: Unity and Diversity : Questions, Methods and Resources in a Multicultural Perspective.
Dumbarton Oaks.
ISBN 978-0-88402-329-6.
Dale, Stephen F. The Muslim Empires of the Ottomans, Safavids and Mughals (Cambridge U.P. 2009)
Dalrymple, William (2007). The Last Mughal: The Fall of a Dynasty : Delhi, 1857. Random House Digital, Inc.
ISBN 9780307267399.
Faruqui, Munis D. (2005), "The Forgotten Prince: Mirza Hakim and the Formation of the Mughal Empire in India", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 48 (4): 487–523, doi:10.1163/156852005774918813, JSTOR 25165118, on Akbar and his brother
Gommans; Jos.
Mughal Warfare: Indian Frontiers and Highroads to Empire, 1500–1700 (Routledge, 2002) online edition
Gordon, S. The New Cambridge History of India, II, 4: The Marathas 1600–1818 (Cambridge, 1993).
Habib, Irfan.
Atlas of the Mughal Empire: Political and Economic Maps (1982).
Markovits, Claude, ed. (2004) [First published 1994 as Histoire de l'Inde Moderne]. A History of Modern India, 1480–1950 (2nd ed.). London: Anthem Press.
ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4.
Metcalf, B.; Metcalf, T.R. (2006), A Concise History of Modern India (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-68225-1
Moosvi, Shireen (2015) [First published 1987]. The economy of the Mughal Empire, c. 1595: a statistical study (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-908549-1.
Morier, James (1812). "A journey through Persia, Armenia and Asia Minor". The Monthly Magazine.
Vol. 34. R. Phillips.
Richards, John F. (1996). The Mughal Empire.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 9780521566032.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra (1974). The Mughul Empire. B.V. Bhavan.
Richards, J.F. (April 1981), "Mughal State Finance and the Premodern World Economy", Comparative Studies in Society and History, 23 (2): 285–308, doi:10.1017/s0010417500013311, JSTOR 178737, S2CID 154809724
Robb, P. (2001), A History of India, London: Palgrave, ISBN 978-0-333-69129-8
Srivastava, Ashirbadi Lal.
The Mughul Empire, 1526–1803 (1952) online.
Rutherford, Alex (2010). Empire of the Moghul: Brothers at War: Brothers at War.
Headline.
ISBN 978-0-7553-8326-9.
Stein, B. (1998), A History of India (1st ed.), Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-631-20546-3
Stein, B. (2010),  Arnold, D. (ed.), A History of India (2nd ed.), Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6
Culture
Berinstain, V. Mughal India: Splendour of the Peacock Throne (London, 1998).
Busch, Allison.
Poetry of Kings: The Classical Hindi Literature of Mughal India (2011) excerpt and text search
Parodi, Laura E. (2021). "Kabul, a Forgotten Mughal Capital: Gardens, City, and Court at the Turn of the Sixteenth Century". Muqarnas Online. 38 (1): 113–153. doi:10.1163/22118993-00381P05. S2CID 245040517.
Diana Preston; Michael Preston (2007). Taj Mahal: Passion and Genius at the Heart of the Moghul Empire.
Walker & Company.
ISBN 978-0-8027-1673-6.
Schimmel, Annemarie.
The Empire of the Great Mughals: History, Art and Culture (Reaktion 2006)
Welch, S.C.;  et al. (1987). The Emperors' album: images of Mughal India.
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-0-87099-499-9.
Society and economy
Chaudhuri, K.N. (1978), "Some Reflections on the Town and Country in Mughal India", Modern Asian Studies, 12 (1): 77–96, doi:10.1017/s0026749x00008155, JSTOR 311823, S2CID 146558617
Habib, Irfan.
Atlas of the Mughal Empire: Political and Economic Maps (1982).
Habib, Irfan.
Agrarian System of Mughal India (1963, revised edition 1999).
Heesterman, J.C. (2004), "The Social Dynamics of the Mughal Empire: A Brief Introduction", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, 47 (3): 292–297, doi:10.1163/1568520041974729, JSTOR 25165051
Khan, Iqtidar Alam (1976), "The Middle Classes in the Mughal Empire", Social Scientist, 5 (1): 28–49, doi:10.2307/3516601, JSTOR 3516601
Rothermund, Dietmar.
An Economic History of India: From Pre-Colonial Times to 1991 (1993)
Primary sources
Bernier, Francois (1891). Travels in the Mogul Empire, A.D. 1656–1668. Archibald Constable, London.
Hiro, Dilip, ed, Journal of Emperor Babur (Penguin Classics 2007)
The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor ed. by W.M. Thackston Jr. (2002); this was the first autobiography in Islamic literature
Jackson, A.V. et al., eds.
History of India (1907) v. 9. Historic accounts of India by foreign travellers, classic, oriental, and occidental, by A.V.W. Jackson online edition
Jouher (1832). The Tezkereh al vakiat or Private Memoirs of the Moghul Emperor Humayun Written in the Persian language by Jouher A confidential domestic of His Majesty.
Translated by Major Charles Stewart.
John Murray, London.
Older histories
Elliot, Sir H.M., Edited by Dowson, John.
The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians.
The Muhammadan Period; published by London Trubner Company 1867–1877. (Online Copy at Packard Humanities Institute – Other Persian Texts in Translation; historical books: Author List and Title List)
Adams, W.H. Davenport (1893). Warriors of the Crescent.
London: Hutchinson.
Holden, Edward Singleton (1895). The Mogul emperors of Hindustan, A.D. 1398–A.D. 1707. New York : C. Scribner's Sons.
Malleson, G.B. (1896). Akbar and the rise of the Mughal empire.
Oxford : Clarendon Press.
Manucci, Niccolao; tr. from French by François Catrou (1826). History of the Mogul dynasty in India, 1399–1657. London : J.M. Richardson.
Lane-Poole, Stanley (1906). History of India: From Reign of Akbar the Great to the Fall of Moghul Empire (Vol. 4). London, Grolier society.
Manucci, Niccolao; tr. by William Irvine (1907). Storia do Mogor; or, Mogul India 1653–1708, Vol. 1. London, J. Murray.
Manucci, Niccolao; tr. by William Irvine (1907). Storia do Mogor; or, Mogul India 1653–1708, Vol. 2. London, J. Murray.
Manucci, Niccolao; tr. by William Irvine (1907). Storia do Mogor; or, Mogul India 1653–1708, Vol. 3. London, J. Murray.
Owen, Sidney J (1912). The Fall of the Mogul Empire.
London, J. Murray.
External links
Mughal Empire  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity
Mughal India an interactive experience from the British Museum
The Mughal Empire, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Sanjay Subrahmanyam, Susan Stronge & Chandrika Kaul (In Our Time, 26 February 2004)
Sunil Khilnani's "Akbar," From BBC Radio 4's Incarnations: India in 50 Lives.
Mughal EmpireEmperors
Babur
Humayun
Akbar
Jahangir
Shahryar
Shah Jahan
Alamgir I (Aurangzeb)
Muhammad Azam Shah
Bahadur Shah I
Jahandar Shah
Farrukhsiyar
Rafi ud-Darajat
Shah Jahan II
Muhammad Shah
Ahmad Shah Bahadur
Alamgir II
Shah Jahan III
Shah Alam II
Jahan Shah IV
Akbar II
Bahadur Shah II
Battles andconflicts
Battle of Panipat (1526)
Mughal-Rajput Wars
Battle of Khanwa
Battle of Chanderi
Battle of Ghaghra
Siege of Sambhal
Battle of Chausa
Battle of Sirhind (1555)
Battle of Panipat (1556)
Mughal conquest of Malwa
Battle of Thanesar
Gujarat conquest
Siege of Chittorgarh
Siege of Ranthambore
Battle of Tukaroi
Battle of Raj Mahal
Battle of Haldighati
Battle of Bhuchar Mori
Siege of Kandahar
Mughal–Safavid War (1622–1623)
Siege of Orchha
Mughal–Safavid War (1649–1653)
Battle of Samugarh
Battle of Khajwa
Suppression of Tilpat rebellion
Ahom–Mughal conflicts
Siege of Purandhar
Tibet–Ladakh–Mughal War
Mughal–Maratha Wars
Siege of Bijapur
Siege of Jinji
Child's War
Siege of Golconda
Battle of Karnal
Third Battle of Panipat
Battle of Buxar
Carnatic Wars
Bengal War
Battle of Plassey
Indian Rebellion of 1857
Battle of Badli-ki-Serai
Siege of Delhi
Battle of Najafgarh
Battle of Agra
Mughal-Sikh Wars
Architecture
Taj Mahal
Gardens of Babur
Fatehpur Sikri
Tomb of Salim Chishti
Humayun's Tomb
Red Fort
Jama Masjid (Delhi)
Lahore Fort
Jahangir Mahal
Lalbagh Fort
Akbar's Tomb
Agra Fort
Chawk Mosque
Shalimar Gardens
Achabal Gardens
Jahangir's Tomb
Bibi Ka Maqbara
Badshahi Mosque
Shahi Bridge
Shah Jahan Mosque, Thatta
Sheesh Mahal
Sunehri Masjid
Tipu Sultan Mosque
Wazir Khan Mosque
more
Adversaries
Baro-Bhuyan
Isa Khan
Khwaja Usman
Bayazid of Sylhet
Musa Khan
Pratapaditya
Ibrahim Lodi
Rana Sanga
Sher Shah Suri
Hemu
Maharana Pratap
Malik Ambar
Gokula
Pratapaditya
Shivaji
Lachit Borphukan
Khushal Khattak
Sir Josiah Child
Guru Gobind Singh
Henry Every
Bajirao I
Nader Shah
Hector Munro
Provinces
Bengal Subah
Gujarat Subah
Awadh Subah
Delhi Subah
Agra Subah
Lahore Subah
See also
Art
Cuisine
Culture
Flag
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Military
Gunpowder Empires
Painting
Persians
Tribe
Weapons
Timurid dynasty
family tree
Successor states
Sur Empire (interrupted)
Maratha Empire
Rajput states
Jats
Sikh Empire
Nawabs of Bengal
Nawabs of Awadh
Nizam of Hyderabad
Carnatic
Kingdom of Mysore
Rohilkhand
EmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Old Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Spring and Autumn
Warring States
Qin
Eighteen Kingdoms
Han
Three Kingdoms
Jin
Sixteen Kingdoms
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Hittite
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Indo-greek
Bactrian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Hunnic
White
Asian
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese Empire
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
Jīn
Yuan
Uyghur
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Egyptian Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Eastern
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Despotate of Epirus
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese Empire
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Darawiish
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish–Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish
Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire
Agra district topicsHistory
Akbar
Mughal empire
United Provinces of Agra and Oudh
Cities and towns
Achhnera
Agra
Azizpur
Bah
Barhan
Dayalbagh
Dhanauli
Etmadpur
Fatehabad
Fatehpur Sikri
Jagner
Kheragarh
Kiraoli
Nainana Jat
Pinahat
Shamsabad
Swamibagh
Villages
Chamrauli
Barara
Barauli Ahir
Barhan
Bateshwar
Beesalpur
Bichpuri
Chhai Pokhar
Daultabad
Dhimsiri
Digrauta
Doora
Garhi Udairaj
Holipura
Jarar
Kagarol
Karahara
Khanwa
Meoli
Midhakur
Purabirbal
Rudhmuli
Sahara
Saivan
Sakatpur
Sarokhipura
Tarrakpur
Buildings
Agra Fort
Buland Darwaza
Taj Mahal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
State of West BengalCapital: KolkataState symbols
Emblem: Emblem of West Bengal
Animal: Fishing cat
Bird: White-throated kingfisher
Flower: Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli)
Tree: Devil's tree (Saptaparni)
Fish: Ilish
History
Gauda Kingdom
Shashanka
Pala Empire
Sena dynasty
Mallabhum
Cooch Behar State
Sher Shah Suri
Mughal Empire
Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad
East India Company
Battle of Plassey
Bengal Presidency
Great Bengal famine of 1770
Indian Rebellion of 1857
Bengali Renaissance
Bardhaman Raj
Nadia Raj
Jhargram Raj
Sovabazar Raj
Panchkot Raj
Partition of Bengal (1905)
Revolutionary movement for Indian independence
Anushilan Samiti
Jugantar
Bengal famine of 1943
Direct Action Day
Noakhali riots
Partition of Bengal (1947)
Bangladesh Liberation War
Naxalite movement
Geography
Darjeeling Himalayan hill region
Terai
North Bengal plains
Dooars
Rarh region
Sundarbans
Western plateau and high lands
Ganges Delta
Climate
Sandakphu (Highest point)
Protected areas of West Bengal
Rivers of West Bengal
Ganga
Damodar River
Brahmaputra
Teesta
Hooghly River
Khoai
Tiger Hill, Darjeeling
Siliguri Corridor
Governance
Chief Ministers
Governor
Legislative Assembly
Human Rights Commission
Political parties (All India Trinamool Congress
Communist Party (Marxist)
Indian National Congress
Bharatiya Janata Party)
Parliamentary constituencies
Assembly constituencies
CID West Bengal
Kolkata Police
Rights groups
Matua Mahasangha
Bangla Pokkho
Division and DistrictsBurdwan division
Birbhum
Hooghly
Paschim Bardhaman
Purba Bardhaman
Jalpaiguri division
Alipurduar
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Jalpaiguri
Kalimpong
Malda division
Dakshin Dinajpur
Berhampore (declared)
Kandi (declared)
Malda
Murshidabad
Uttar Dinajpur
Medinipur division
Bankura
Bishnupur (declared)
Jhargram
Paschim Medinipur
Purba Medinipur
Purulia
Presidency division
Basirhat (declared)
Howrah
Ichamati (declared)
Kolkata
Nadia
North 24 Parganas
Ranaghat (declared)
Sundarbans (declared)
South 24 Parganas
Cities and towns
Alipore
Asansol
Berhampore
Balurghat
Bankura
Barasat
Bardhaman
Bishnupur
Hugli-Chuchura
Cooch Behar
Darjeeling
Durgapur
Haldia
Howrah
Jalpaiguri
Jaynagar Majilpur
Kalimpong
Kharagpur
Kolkata
Krishnanagar
Kurseong
Malda
Midnapore
Murshidabad
Purulia
Raiganj
Siliguri
Siuri
Tamluk
List of cities in West Bengal by population
Cities and towns by district
Culture
Bengali Renaissance
Bengali calendars
Patachitra
Chalchitra
Arts of West Bengal
Baul
Bhadu
Gombhira
Chhau dance
Cuisine
Rabindra Sangeet
Rabindra Nritya Natya
Holi
Dol Purnima
Prostitution in Kolkata
Pahela Baishakh
Durga Puja
Bhai Phonta
Raksha Bandhan
Ratha Yatra
Architecture of Bengal
Bengal temples
Bengali language
Bengali literature
Feluda
Lalmohan Ganguly
Professor Shonku
Tarini Khuro
Kakababu
Kiriti Roy
Pather Panchali (novel)
Tollywood (Bengali cinema)
Jatra
Ghosts in Bengali culture
GI product
Baluchari sari
Banglar Rosogolla
Bankura horse
Bengal Patachitra
Chhau mask
Darjeeling tea
Dhaniakhali Sari
Dhokra
Fazli (mango)
Gobindobhog
Himsagar
Jaynagarer Moa
Madurkathi
Manasa chali
Mihidana
Nakshi kantha
Sonagachi
Santiniketan Leather Goods
Sitabhog
Tulaipanji
Demographics
Bengali people
Bihari people
Economy of West Bengal
Gurkha
Adivasi
Rajbanshi
Anglo-Indian
Ethnic communities in Kolkata
List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate
Anti-Bengali sentiment in India
People
Rabindranath Tagore
Satyajit Ray
Kazi Nazrul Islam
Anil Kumar Gain
Ritwik Ghatak
Subhas Chandra Bose
Jamini Roy
Nandalal Bose
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Meghnad Saha
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee
Sarat Chandra Bose
Jnanadanandini Devi
Abanindranath Tagore
Satyendranath Tagore
Satyendranath Dutta
Ram Mohan Roy
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
Rani Rashmoni
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
Swami Vivekananda
Sarada Devi
Dwarkanath Tagore
Sukumar Ray
Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury
Lokenath Brahmachari
Michael Madhusudan Dutta
Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay
Sister Nivedita
Mother Teresa
Amartya Sen
Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay
Nihar Ranjan Gupta
Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 22:07 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
