Muhammad - Wikipedia
Muhammad
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Founder and main prophet of Islam (c. 570–632)
This article is about the Islamic prophet.
For other people named Muhammad, see Muhammad (name). For other uses, see Muhammad (disambiguation). For the Islamic view and perspective, see Muhammad in Islam.
The Holy ProphetMuhammadمُحَمَّد"Muhammad, the Messenger of God."inscribed on the gates of the Prophet's Mosque in MedinaPersonalBornc. 570 CE (53 BH)Mecca, Hejaz, ArabiaDied(632-06-08)8 June 632 (11 AH) (aged 61–62)Medina, Hejaz, ArabiaResting placeGreen Dome at al-Masjid an-Nabawi, Medina, Arabia24°28′03″N 39°36′41″E﻿ / ﻿24.46750°N 39.61139°E﻿ / 24.46750; 39.61139﻿ (Green Dome)SpouseSee Muhammad's wivesChildrenSee Muhammad's childrenParentsAbdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib (father)Amina bint Wahb (mother)Known forFounding IslamOther namesRasūl Allāh (Messenger of God)(see Names and titles of Muhammad)RelativesFamily tree of Muhammad, Ahl al-Bayt  ("Family of the House")Arabic namePersonal (Ism)MuḥammadPatronymic (Nasab)Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭālib ibn Hāshim ibn ʿAbd Manāf ibn Quṣayy ibn KilābTeknonymic (Kunya)ʾAbu al-QāsimEpithet (Laqab)Ḵhātam an-Nabiyyīn (Seal of the Prophets)
Part of a series onMuhammad
Life
Mecca
Hijrah
Medina
After Conquest of Mecca
Farewell Pilgrimage (Farewell Sermon)
Hadith
Milestones and records
Career
Military
Diplomatic
Miracles
Quran (First revelation)
Isra and Mi'raj
Splitting of the Moon
Others
Views
Jews
Christians
Perspectives
Islam
Bible
Judaism
Medieval Christian
Historicity
Criticism
Succession
Saqifah
Ghadir Khumm
Companions of Muhammad
Hadith of the pen and paper
Ahl al-Bayt
Praise
Salawat
Naat
Mawlid
Related
Al-Masjid an-Nabawi
Possessions
Relics
Seal
History of Islam
Islam portal
Biography portal
Muhammad ibn Abdullah[n 1] (Arabic: مُحَمَّد ٱبن عَبْد ٱللَّٰه, romanized: Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh, Classical Arabic pronunciation: [muˈħammad]; c. 570 – 8 June 632 CE) was an Arab religious, social, and political leader and the founder of the world religion of Islam.
According to Islamic doctrine, he was a prophet divinely inspired to preach and confirm the monotheistic teachings of Adam, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other prophets.
He is believed to be the Seal of the Prophets within Islam.[n 2] Muhammad united Arabia into a single Muslim polity, with the Quran as well as his teachings and practices forming the basis of Islamic religious belief.
Muhammad was born approximately 570 CE in Mecca.
He was the son of Abdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib and Amina bint Wahb.
His father Abdullah was the son of Quraysh tribal leader Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim, and he died a few months before Muhammad's birth.
His mother Amina died when he was six, leaving Muhammad an orphan.
He was raised under the care of his grandfather, Abd al-Muttalib, and paternal uncle, Abu Talib.
In later years, he would periodically seclude himself in a mountain cave named Hira for several nights of prayer.
When he was 40, Muhammad reported being visited by Gabriel in the cave and receiving his first revelation from God.
In 613, Muhammad started preaching these revelations publicly, proclaiming that "God is One", that complete "submission" (islām) to God is the right way of life (dīn), and that he was a prophet and messenger of God, similar to the other prophets in Islam.
Muhammad's followers were initially few in number, and experienced hostility from Meccan polytheists for 13 years.
To escape ongoing persecution, he sent some of his followers to Abyssinia in 615, before he and his followers migrated from Mecca to Medina (then known as Yathrib) later in 622. This event, the Hijra, marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar, also known as the Hijri Calendar.
In Medina, Muhammad united the tribes under the Constitution of Medina.
In December 629, after eight years of intermittent fighting with Meccan tribes, Muhammad gathered an army of 10,000 Muslim converts and marched on the city of Mecca.
The conquest went largely uncontested and Muhammad seized the city with little bloodshed.
In 632, a few months after returning from the Farewell Pilgrimage, he fell ill and died.
By the time of his death, most of the Arabian Peninsula had converted to Islam.
The revelations (each known as Ayah –  literally, "Sign [of God]") that Muhammad reported receiving until his death form the verses of the Quran, regarded by Muslims as the verbatim "Word of God" on which the religion is based.
Besides the Quran, Muhammad's teachings and practices (sunnah), found in the Hadith and sira (biography) literature, are also upheld and used as sources of Islamic law (see Sharia).
Contents
Quranic names and appellations
Main article: Names and titles of Muhammad
"Muhammad" written in Thuluth, a script variety of Islamic calligraphy
The name Muhammad (/mʊˈhæməd, -ˈhɑːməd/) means "praiseworthy" and appears four times in the Quran.
The Quran also addresses Muhammad in the second person by various appellations; prophet, messenger, servant of God ('abd), announcer (bashir), witness (shahid), bearer of good tidings (mubashshir), warner (nathir), reminder (mudhakkir), one who calls [unto God] (dā'ī), light personified (noor), and the light-giving lamp (siraj munir).
Sources of biographical information
Main articles: Historiography of early Islam and Historicity of Muhammad
Quran
A folio from an early Quran, written in Kufic script (Abbasid period, 8th–9th centuries)
The Quran is the central religious text of Islam.
Muslims believe it represents the words of God revealed by the archangel Gabriel to Muhammad.
The Quran, however, provides minimal assistance for Muhammad's chronological biography; most Quranic verses do not provide significant historical context.
Early biographies
Main article: Prophetic biography
Important sources regarding Muhammad's life may be found in the historic works by writers of the 2nd and 3rd centuries of the Muslim era (AH – 8th and 9th century CE). These include traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad, which provide additional information about Muhammad's life.
The earliest written sira (biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him) is Ibn Ishaq's Life of God's Messenger written c. 767 CE (150 AH). Although the original work was lost, this sira survives as extensive excerpts in works by Ibn Hisham and to a lesser extent by Al-Tabari.
However, Ibn Hisham wrote in the preface to his biography of Muhammad that he omitted matters from Ibn Ishaq's biography that "would distress certain people". Another early history source is the history of Muhammad's campaigns by al-Waqidi (death 207 AH), and the work of Waqidi's secretary Ibn Sa'd al-Baghdadi (death 230 AH).
Many scholars accept these early biographies as authentic, though their accuracy is unascertainable.
Recent studies have led scholars to distinguish between traditions touching legal matters and purely historical events.
In the legal group, traditions could have been subject to invention while historic events, aside from exceptional cases, may have been only subject to "tendential shaping".
Hadith
Main article: Hadith
Other important sources include the hadith collections, accounts of verbal and physical teachings and traditions attributed to Muhammad.
Hadiths were compiled several generations after his death by Muslims including Muhammad al-Bukhari, Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, Muhammad ibn Isa at-Tirmidhi, Abd ar-Rahman al-Nasai, Abu Dawood, Ibn Majah, Malik ibn Anas, al-Daraqutni.
Some Western academics cautiously view the hadith collections as accurate historical sources.
Scholars such as Madelung do not reject the narrations which have been compiled in later periods, but judge them in the context of history and on the basis of their compatibility with the events and figures.
Muslim scholars on the other hand typically place a greater emphasis on the hadith literature instead of the biographical literature, since hadiths maintain a traditional chain of transmission (isnad); the lack of such a chain for the biographical literature makes it unverifiable in their eyes.
Pre-Islamic Arabia
Main articles: Pre-Islamic Arabia, Jahiliyyah, and Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia
Main tribes and settlements of Arabia in Muhammad's lifetime
The Arabian Peninsula was, and still is, largely arid with volcanic soil, making agriculture difficult except near oases or springs.
Towns and cities dotted the landscape, two of the most prominent being Mecca and Medina.
Medina was a large flourishing agricultural settlement, while Mecca was an important financial center for many surrounding tribes.
Communal life was essential for survival in the desert conditions, supporting indigenous tribes against the harsh environment and lifestyle.
Tribal affiliation, whether based on kinship or alliances, was an important source of social cohesion.
Indigenous Arabs were either nomadic or sedentary.
Nomadic groups constantly traveled seeking water and pasture for their flocks, while the sedentary settled and focused on trade and agriculture.
Nomadic survival also depended on raiding caravans or oases; nomads did not view this as a crime.
In pre-Islamic Arabia, gods or goddesses were viewed as protectors of individual tribes, their spirits associated with sacred trees, stones, springs and wells.
As well as being the site of an annual pilgrimage, the Kaaba shrine in Mecca housed 360 idols of tribal patron deities.
Three goddesses were worshipped, in some places as daughters of Allah: Allāt, Manāt and al-'Uzzá. Monotheistic communities existed in Arabia, including Christians and Jews.
Hanifs – native pre-Islamic Arabs who "professed a rigid monotheism" – are also sometimes listed alongside Jews and Christians in pre-Islamic Arabia, although scholars dispute their historicity.
According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad himself was a Hanif and one of the descendants of Ishmael, son of Abraham.
After a century of exhaustive archaeological investigation, no evidence has been found of a historical Abraham or Ishmael.
The second half of the sixth century was a period of political disorder in Arabia and communication routes were no longer secure.
Religious divisions were an important cause of the crisis.
Judaism became the dominant religion in Yemen while Christianity took root in the Persian Gulf area.
In line with broader trends of the ancient world, the region witnessed a decline in the practice of polytheistic cults and a growing interest in a more spiritual form of religion.
While many were reluctant to convert to a foreign faith, those faiths provided intellectual and spiritual reference points.
During the early years of Muhammad's life, the Quraysh tribe to which he belonged became a dominant force in western Arabia.
They formed the cult association of hums, which tied members of many tribes in western Arabia to the Kaaba and reinforced the prestige of the Meccan sanctuary.
To counter the effects of anarchy, Quraysh upheld the institution of sacred months during which all violence was forbidden, and it was possible to participate in pilgrimages and fairs without danger.
Thus, although the association of hums was primarily religious, it also had important economic consequences for the city.
Life
Childhood and early life
Timeline of Muhammad's life
Important dates and locations in the life of Muhammad
Date
Age
Event
c. 570
–
Death of his father, Abdullah
c. 570
Possible date of birth: 12 or 17 Rabi al Awal: in Mecca, Arabia
c. 577
Death of his mother, Amina
c. 583
His grandfather transfers him to Syria
c. 595
Meets and marries Khadijah
c. 599
Birth of Zainab, his first daughter, followed by: Ruqayyah, Umm Kulthum, and Fatima Zahra
Qur'anic revelation begins in the Cave of Hira on the Jabal an-Nour, the "Mountain of Light" near Mecca.
At age 40, Angel Jebreel (Gabriel) was said to appear to Muhammad on the mountain and call him "the Prophet of Allah"
Begins in secret to gather followers in Mecca
c. 613
Begins spreading message of Islam publicly to all Meccans
c. 614
Heavy persecution of Muslims begins
c. 615
Emigration of a group of Muslims to Ethiopia
c. 616
Banu Hashim clan boycott begins
Banu Hashim clan boycott ends
The year of sorrows: Khadija (his wife) and Abu Talib (his uncle) die
c. 620
Isra and Mi'raj (reported ascension to heaven to meet God)
Hijra, emigration to Medina (called Yathrib)
Battle of Badr
Battle of Uhud
Battle of the Trench (also known as the siege of Medina)
The Meccan tribe of Quraysh and the Muslim community in Medina sign a 10-year truce called the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Conquest of Mecca
Farewell pilgrimage, event of Ghadir Khumm, and death, in what is now Saudi Arabia
This box:  viewtalkedit
See also: Mawlid, Family tree of Muhammad, and Muhammad in Mecca
Makkah Al Mukarramah Library (21°25′30″N 39°49′48″E﻿ / ﻿21.42500°N 39.83000°E﻿ / 21.42500; 39.83000﻿ (Bayt al-Mawlid / Makkah Al Mukarramah Library)) is believed to stand on the spot where Muhammad was born, so it is also known as Bayt al-Mawlid
Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim was born in Mecca about the year 570 and his birthday is believed to be in the month of Rabi' al-awwal.
He belonged to the Banu Hashim clan, part of the Quraysh tribe, which was one of Mecca's prominent families, although it appears less prosperous during Muhammad's early lifetime.
Tradition places the year of Muhammad's birth as corresponding with the Year of the Elephant, which is named after the failed destruction of Mecca that year by the Abraha, Yemen's king, who supplemented his army with elephants.
Alternatively some 20th century scholars have suggested different years, such as 568 or 569.
Miniature from Rashid-al-Din Hamadani's Jami al-Tawarikh, c. 1315, illustrating the story of Muhammad's role in re-setting the Black Stone in 605. (Ilkhanate period)
Muhammad's father, Abdullah, died almost six months before he was born.
According to Islamic tradition, soon after birth he was sent to live with a Bedouin family in the desert, as desert life was considered healthier for infants; some western scholars reject this tradition's historicity.
Muhammad stayed with his foster-mother, Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb, and her husband until he was two years old.
At the age of six, Muhammad lost his biological mother Amina to illness and became an orphan.
For the next two years, until he was eight years old, Muhammad was under the guardianship of his paternal grandfather Abd al-Muttalib, of the Banu Hashim clan until his death.
He then came under the care of his uncle Abu Talib, the new leader of the Banu Hashim.
According to Islamic historian William Montgomery Watt there was a general disregard by guardians in taking care of weaker members of the tribes in Mecca during the 6th century, "Muhammad's guardians saw that he did not starve to death, but it was hard for them to do more for him, especially as the fortunes of the clan of Hashim seem to have been declining at that time."
In his teens, Muhammad accompanied his uncle on Syrian trading journeys to gain experience in commercial trade.
Islamic tradition states that when Muhammad was either nine or twelve while accompanying the Meccans' caravan to Syria, he met a Christian monk or hermit named Bahira who is said to have foreseen Muhammad's career as a prophet of God.
Little is known of Muhammad during his later youth as available information is fragmented, making it difficult to separate history from legend.
It is known that he became a merchant and "was involved in trade between the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea." Due to his upright character he acquired the nickname "al-Amin" (Arabic: الامين), meaning "faithful, trustworthy" and "al-Sadiq" meaning "truthful" and was sought out as an impartial arbitrator.
His reputation attracted a proposal in 595 from Khadijah, a successful businesswoman.
Muhammad consented to the marriage, which by all accounts was a happy one.
Several years later, according to a narration collected by historian Ibn Ishaq, Muhammad was involved with a well-known story about setting the Black Stone in place in the wall of the Kaaba in 605 CE. The Black Stone, a sacred object, was removed during renovations to the Kaaba.
The Meccan leaders could not agree which clan should return the Black Stone to its place.
They decided to ask the next man who came through the gate to make that decision; that man was the 35-year-old Muhammad.
This event happened five years before the first revelation by Gabriel to him.
He asked for a cloth and laid the Black Stone in its center.
The clan leaders held the corners of the cloth and together carried the Black Stone to the right spot, then Muhammad laid the stone, satisfying the honor of all.
Beginnings of the Quran
See also: Muhammad's first revelation, History of the Quran, and Wahy
Recite in the name of your Lord who created—Created man from a clinging substance.
Recite, and your Lord is the most Generous—Who taught by the pen—Taught man that which he knew not.
— Quran 96:1–5
Muhammad began to pray alone in a cave named Hira on Mount Jabal al-Nour, near Mecca for several weeks every year.
Islamic tradition holds that during one of his visits to that cave, in the year 610 the angel Gabriel appeared to him and commanded Muhammad to recite verses that would be included in the Quran.
Consensus exists that the first Quranic words revealed were the beginning of Quran 96:1.
Muhammad was deeply distressed upon receiving his first revelations.
After returning home, Muhammad was consoled and reassured by Khadijah and her Christian cousin, Waraqah ibn Nawfal.
He also feared that others would dismiss his claims as being possessed.
Shi'a tradition states Muhammad was not surprised or frightened at Gabriel's appearance; rather he welcomed the angel, as if he was expected.
The initial revelation was followed by a three-year pause (a period known as fatra) during which Muhammad felt depressed and further gave himself to prayers and spiritual practices.
When the revelations resumed he was reassured and commanded to begin preaching: "Thy Guardian-Lord hath not forsaken thee, nor is He displeased."
The cave Hira in the mountain Jabal al-Nour where, according to Muslim belief, Muhammad received his first revelation
Muhammad receiving his first revelation from Gabriel in Jami' al-tawarikh by Rashīd al-Dīn Ṭabīb (1307)
Sahih Bukhari narrates Muhammad describing his revelations as "sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell". Aisha reported, "I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was over)". According to Welch these descriptions may be considered genuine, since they are unlikely to have been forged by later Muslims.
Muhammad was confident that he could distinguish his own thoughts from these messages.
According to the Quran, one of the main roles of Muhammad is to warn the unbelievers of their eschatological punishment (Quran 38:70, Quran 6:19). Occasionally the Quran did not explicitly refer to Judgment day but provided examples from the history of extinct communities and warns Muhammad's contemporaries of similar calamities ( Quran 41:13–16). Muhammad did not only warn those who rejected God's revelation, but also dispensed good news for those who abandoned evil, listening to the divine words and serving God.
Muhammad's mission also involves preaching monotheism: The Quran commands Muhammad to proclaim and praise the name of his Lord and instructs him not to worship idols or associate other deities with God.
The key themes of the early Quranic verses included the responsibility of man towards his creator; the resurrection of the dead, God's final judgment followed by vivid descriptions of the tortures in Hell and pleasures in Paradise, and the signs of God in all aspects of life.
Religious duties required of the believers at this time were few: belief in God, asking for forgiveness of sins, offering frequent prayers, assisting others particularly those in need, rejecting cheating and the love of wealth (considered to be significant in the commercial life of Mecca), being chaste and not committing female infanticide.
Opposition
See also: Persecution of Muslims by Meccans and Migration to Abyssinia
The last verse from An-Najm: "So prostrate to Allah and worship." Muhammad's message of monotheism challenged the traditional order
According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad's wife Khadija was the first to believe he was a prophet.
She was followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr, and adopted son Zaid.
Around 613, Muhammad began to preach to the public ( Quran 26:214). Most Meccans ignored and mocked him, though a few became his followers.
There were three main groups of early converts to Islam: younger brothers and sons of great merchants; people who had fallen out of the first rank in their tribe or failed to attain it; and the weak, mostly unprotected foreigners.
According to Ibn Saad, opposition in Mecca started when Muhammad delivered verses that condemned idol worship and the polytheism practiced by the Meccan forefathers.
However, the Quranic exegesis maintains that it began as Muhammad started public preaching.
As his followers increased, Muhammad became a threat to the local tribes and rulers of the city, whose wealth rested upon the Kaaba, the focal point of Meccan religious life that Muhammad threatened to overthrow.
Muhammad's denunciation of the Meccan traditional religion was especially offensive to his own tribe, the Quraysh, as they were the guardians of the Kaaba.
Powerful merchants attempted to convince Muhammad to abandon his preaching; he was offered admission to the inner circle of merchants, as well as an advantageous marriage.
He refused both of these offers.
Have We not made for him two eyes? And a tongue and two lips? And have shown him the two ways? But he has not broken through the difficult pass.
And what can make you know what is the difficult pass? It is the freeing of a slave.
Or feeding on a day of severe hunger; an orphan of near relationship, or a needy person in misery.
And then being among those who believed and advised one another to patience and advised one another to mercy.
— Quran (90:8–17)
Tradition records at great length the persecution and ill-treatment towards Muhammad and his followers.
Sumayyah bint Khayyat, a slave of a prominent Meccan leader Abu Jahl, is famous as the first martyr of Islam; killed with a spear by her master when she refused to give up her faith.
Bilal, another Muslim slave, was tortured by Umayyah ibn Khalaf who placed a heavy rock on his chest to force his conversion.
In 615, some of Muhammad's followers emigrated to the Ethiopian Kingdom of Aksum and founded a small colony under the protection of the Christian Ethiopian emperor Aṣḥama ibn Abjar.
Ibn Sa'ad mentions two separate migrations.
According to him, most of the Muslims returned to Mecca prior to Hijra, while a second group rejoined them in Medina.
Ibn Hisham and Tabari, however, only talk about one migration to Ethiopia.
These accounts agree that Meccan persecution played a major role in Muhammad's decision to suggest that a number of his followers seek refuge among the Christians in Abyssinia.
According to the famous letter of ʿUrwa preserved in al-Tabari, the majority of Muslims returned to their native town as Islam gained strength and as high ranking Meccans, such as Umar and Hamzah, converted.
However, there is a completely different story on the reason why the Muslims returned from Ethiopia to Mecca.
According to this account—initially mentioned by Al-Waqidi then rehashed by Ibn Sa'ad and Tabari, but not by Ibn Hisham and not by Ibn Ishaq—Muhammad, desperately hoping for an accommodation with his tribe, pronounced a verse acknowledging the existence of three Meccan goddesses considered to be the daughters of Allah.
Muhammad retracted the verses the next day at the behest of Gabriel, claiming that the verses were whispered by the devil himself.
Instead, a ridicule of these gods was offered.[n 3][n 4] This episode, known as "The Story of the Cranes," is also known as "Satanic Verses". According to the story, this led to a general reconciliation between Muhammad and the Meccans, and the Abyssinia Muslims began to return home.
When they arrived Gabriel had informed Muhammad that the two verses were not part of the revelation, but had been inserted by Satan.
Notable scholars at the time argued against the historic authenticity of these verses and the story itself on various grounds.[n 5] Al-Waqidi was severely criticized by Islamic scholars such as Malik ibn Anas, al-Shafi'i, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Nasa'i, al-Bukhari, Abu Dawood, Al-Nawawi and others as a liar and forger.
Later, the incident received some acceptance among certain groups, though strong objections to it continued onwards past the tenth century.
The objections continued until rejection of these verses and the story itself eventually became the only acceptable orthodox Muslim position.
In 616 (or 617), the leaders of Makhzum and Banu Abd-Shams, two important Quraysh clans, declared a public boycott against Banu Hashim, their commercial rival, to pressure it into withdrawing its protection of Muhammad.
The boycott lasted three years but eventually collapsed as it failed in its objective.
During this time, Muhammad was able to preach only during the holy pilgrimage months in which all hostilities between Arabs were suspended.
Isra and Mi'raj
Main article: Isra and Mi'raj
The Masjid Al-Aqsa in Jerusalem, also known as the Haram ash-Sharif or the Temple Mount, takes its name from the "farthest mosque" described in Surah 17, where Muhammad travelled in his night journey.
Islamic tradition states that in 620, Muhammad experienced the Isra and Mi'raj, a miraculous night-long journey said to have occurred with the angel Gabriel.
At the journey's beginning, the Isra, he is said to have traveled from Mecca on a winged steed to "the farthest mosque." Later, during the Mi'raj, Muhammad is said to have toured heaven and hell, and spoke with earlier prophets, such as Abraham, Moses, and Jesus.
Ibn Ishaq, author of the first biography of Muhammad, presents the event as a spiritual experience; later historians, such as Al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir, present it as a physical journey.
Some western scholars[who?] hold that the Isra and Mi'raj journey traveled through the heavens from the sacred enclosure at Mecca to the celestial al-Baytu l-Maʿmur (heavenly prototype of the Kaaba); later traditions indicate Muhammad's journey as having been from Mecca to Jerusalem.[page needed]
Last years before Hijra
Quranic inscriptions on the Dome of the Rock.
It marks the spot Muhammad is believed by Muslims to have ascended to heaven.
Muhammad's wife Khadijah and uncle Abu Talib both died in 619, the year thus being known as the "Year of Sorrow". With the death of Abu Talib, leadership of the Banu Hashim clan passed to Abu Lahab, a tenacious enemy of Muhammad.
Soon afterward, Abu Lahab withdrew the clan's protection over Muhammad.
This placed Muhammad in danger; the withdrawal of clan protection implied that blood revenge for his killing would not be exacted.
Muhammad then visited Ta'if, another important city in Arabia, and tried to find a protector, but his effort failed and further brought him into physical danger.
Muhammad was forced to return to Mecca.
A Meccan man named Mut'im ibn Adi (and the protection of the tribe of Banu Nawfal) made it possible for him to safely re-enter his native city.
Many people visited Mecca on business or as pilgrims to the Kaaba.
Muhammad took this opportunity to look for a new home for himself and his followers.
After several unsuccessful negotiations, he found hope with some men from Yathrib (later called Medina). The Arab population of Yathrib were familiar with monotheism and were prepared for the appearance of a prophet because a Jewish community existed there.
They also hoped, by the means of Muhammad and the new faith, to gain supremacy over Mecca; the Yathrib were jealous of its importance as the place of pilgrimage.
Converts to Islam came from nearly all Arab tribes in Medina; by June of the subsequent year, seventy-five Muslims came to Mecca for pilgrimage and to meet Muhammad.
Meeting him secretly by night, the group made what is known as the "Second Pledge of al-'Aqaba", or, in Orientalists' view, the "Pledge of War". Following the pledges at Aqabah, Muhammad encouraged his followers to emigrate to Yathrib.
As with the migration to Abyssinia, the Quraysh attempted to stop the emigration.
However, almost all Muslims managed to leave.
Hijra
Main article: Hegira
Further information: Military career of Muhammad
The Hijra is the migration of Muhammad and his followers from Mecca to Medina in 622 CE. In June 622, warned of a plot to assassinate him, Muhammad secretly slipped out of Mecca and moved his followers to Medina, 450 kilometres (280 miles) north of Mecca.
Migration to Medina
Timeline of Muhammad in Medina
Invasion of Sawiq
Al Kudr Invasion
Raid on Dhu Amarr, Muhammad raids Ghatafan tribes
Battle of Uhud: Meccans defeat Muslims
Invasion of Hamra al-Asad, successfully terrifies the enemy to cause a retreat
Assassination of Khaled b.
Sufyan
Tragedy of  al Raji and Bir Maona
Banu Nadir expelled after Invasion
Expedition of Badr al-Maw'id, Dhat al-Riqa and Dumat al-Jandal
Battle of the Trench
Invasion of Banu Qurayza, successful siege
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, gains access to Kaaba
Conquest of the Khaybar oasis
First hajj pilgrimage
Attack on Byzantine Empire fails: Battle of Mu'tah
Bloodless conquest of Mecca
Battle of Hunayn
Siege of Ta'if
Attack on Byzantine Empire successful: Expedition of Tabuk
Rules most of the Arabian peninsula
Farewell hajj pilgrimage
Death, on June 8 in Medina
This box:  viewtalkedit
Main article: Muhammad in Medina
A delegation, consisting of the representatives of the twelve important clans of Medina, invited Muhammad to serve as chief arbitrator for the entire community; due to his status as a neutral outsider.
There was fighting in Yathrib: primarily the dispute involved its Arab and Jewish inhabitants, and was estimated to have lasted for around a hundred years before 620. The recurring slaughters and disagreements over the resulting claims, especially after the Battle of Bu'ath in which all clans were involved, made it obvious to them that the tribal concept of blood-feud and an eye for an eye were no longer workable unless there was one man with authority to adjudicate in disputed cases.
The delegation from Medina pledged themselves and their fellow-citizens to accept Muhammad into their community and physically protect him as one of themselves.
Muhammad instructed his followers to emigrate to Medina, until nearly all his followers left Mecca.
Being alarmed at the departure, according to tradition, the Meccans plotted to assassinate Muhammad.
With the help of Ali, Muhammad fooled the Meccans watching him, and secretly slipped away from the town with Abu Bakr.
By 622, Muhammad emigrated to Medina, a large agricultural oasis.
Those who migrated from Mecca along with Muhammad became known as muhajirun (emigrants).
Establishment of a new polity
Main article: Constitution of Medina
Among the first things Muhammad did to ease the longstanding grievances among the tribes of Medina was to draft a document known as the Constitution of Medina, "establishing a kind of alliance or federation" among the eight Medinan tribes and Muslim emigrants from Mecca; this specified rights and duties of all citizens, and the relationship of the different communities in Medina (including the Muslim community to other communities, specifically the Jews and other "Peoples of the Book"). The community defined in the Constitution of Medina, Ummah, had a religious outlook, also shaped by practical considerations and substantially preserved the legal forms of the old Arab tribes.
The first group of converts to Islam in Medina were the clans without great leaders; these clans had been subjugated by hostile leaders from outside.
This was followed by the general acceptance of Islam by the pagan population of Medina, with some exceptions.
According to Ibn Ishaq, this was influenced by the conversion of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh (a prominent Medinan leader) to Islam.
Medinans who converted to Islam and helped the Muslim emigrants find shelter became known as the ansar (supporters). Then Muhammad instituted brotherhood between the emigrants and the supporters and he chose Ali as his own brother.
Beginning of armed conflict
Main article: Battle of Badr
See also: List of expeditions of Muhammad
Campaigns of Muhammad
Abwa'
Safwan
Buwat
Dhu al-'Ushairah
Badr
Kudr
Sawiq
Banu Qaynuqa'
Dhu 'Amar
Bahran
Uhud
Hamra' al-Asad
Banu Nadir
Badr al-Maw'id
Dhat ar-Riqa'
Trench
Banu Qurayza
al-Muraysi'
Banu Lahyan
Hudaybiyyah
Fidak
Khaybar
Mu'tah
Mecca
Hunayn
Tabuk
Autas
Ta'if
Following the emigration, the people of Mecca seized property of Muslim emigrants to Medina.
War would later break out between the people of Mecca and the Muslims.
Muhammad delivered Quranic verses permitting Muslims to fight the Meccans (see sura Al-Hajj,  Quran 22:39–40). According to the traditional account, on 11 February 624, while praying in the Masjid al-Qiblatayn in Medina, Muhammad received revelations from God that he should be facing Mecca rather than Jerusalem during prayer.
Muhammad adjusted to the new direction, and his companions praying with him followed his lead, beginning the tradition of facing Mecca during prayer.
Permission has been given to those who are being fought, because they were wronged.
And indeed, Allah is competent to give them victory.
Those who have been evicted from their homes without right—only because they say, "Our Lord is Allah." And were it not that Allah checks the people, some by means of others, there would have been demolished monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which the name of Allah is much mentioned.
And Allah will surely support those who support Him.
Indeed, Allah is Powerful and Exalted in Might.
— Quran (22:39–40)
Muhammad ordered a number of raids to capture Meccan caravans, but only the 8th of them, the Raid of Nakhla, resulted in actual fighting and capture of booty and prisoners.
In March 624, Muhammad led some three hundred warriors in a raid on a Meccan merchant caravan.
The Muslims set an ambush for the caravan at Badr.
Aware of the plan, the Meccan caravan eluded the Muslims.
A Meccan force was sent to protect the caravan and went on to confront the Muslims upon receiving word that the caravan was safe.
The Battle of Badr commenced.
Though outnumbered more than three to one, the Muslims won the battle, killing at least forty-five Meccans with fourteen Muslims dead.
They also succeeded in killing many Meccan leaders, including Abu Jahl.
Seventy prisoners had been acquired, many of whom were ransomed.
Muhammad and his followers saw the victory as confirmation of their faith and Muhammad ascribed the victory to the assistance of an invisible host of angels.
The Quranic verses of this period, unlike the Meccan verses, dealt with practical problems of government and issues like the distribution of spoils.
The victory strengthened Muhammad's position in Medina and dispelled earlier doubts among his followers.
As a result, the opposition to him became less vocal.
Pagans who had not yet converted were very bitter about the advance of Islam.
Two pagans, Asma bint Marwan of the Aws Manat tribe and Abu 'Afak of the 'Amr b. 'Awf tribe, had composed verses taunting and insulting the Muslims.
They were killed by people belonging to their own or related clans, and Muhammad did not disapprove of the killings.
This report, however, is considered by some to be a fabrication.
Most members of those tribes converted to Islam, and little pagan opposition remained.
Muhammad expelled from Medina the Banu Qaynuqa, one of three main Jewish tribes, but some historians contend that the expulsion happened after Muhammad's death.
According to al-Waqidi, after Abd-Allah ibn Ubaiy spoke for them, Muhammad refrained from executing them and commanded that they be exiled from Medina.
Following the Battle of Badr, Muhammad also made mutual-aid alliances with a number of Bedouin tribes to protect his community from attacks from the northern part of Hejaz.
Conflict with Mecca
Main article: Battle of Uhud
"The Prophet Muhammad and the Muslim Army at the Battle of Uhud", from a 1595 edition of the Mamluk-Turkic Siyer-i Nebi
The Meccans were eager to avenge their defeat.
To maintain economic prosperity, the Meccans needed to restore their prestige, which had been reduced at Badr.
In the ensuing months, the Meccans sent ambush parties to Medina while Muhammad led expeditions against tribes allied with Mecca and sent raiders onto a Meccan caravan.
Abu Sufyan gathered an army of 3000 men and set out for an attack on Medina.
A scout alerted Muhammad of the Meccan army's presence and numbers a day later.
The next morning, at the Muslim conference of war, a dispute arose over how best to repel the Meccans.
Muhammad and many senior figures suggested it would be safer to fight within Medina and take advantage of the heavily fortified strongholds.
Younger Muslims argued that the Meccans were destroying crops, and huddling in the strongholds would destroy Muslim prestige.
Muhammad eventually conceded to the younger Muslims and readied the Muslim force for battle.
Muhammad led his force outside to the mountain of Uhud (the location of the Meccan camp) and fought the Battle of Uhud on 23 March 625. Although the Muslim army had the advantage in early encounters, lack of discipline on the part of strategically placed archers led to a Muslim defeat; 75 Muslims were killed, including Hamza, Muhammad's uncle who became one of the best known martyrs in the Muslim tradition.
The Meccans did not pursue the Muslims; instead, they marched back to Mecca declaring victory.
The announcement is probably because Muhammad was wounded and thought dead.
When they discovered that Muhammad lived, the Meccans did not return due to false information about new forces coming to his aid.
The attack had failed to achieve their aim of completely destroying the Muslims.
The Muslims buried the dead and returned to Medina that evening.
Questions accumulated about the reasons for the loss; Muhammad delivered Quranic verses  3:152 indicating that the defeat was twofold: partly a punishment for disobedience, partly a test for steadfastness.
Abu Sufyan directed his effort towards another attack on Medina.
He gained support from the nomadic tribes to the north and east of Medina; using propaganda about Muhammad's weakness, promises of booty, memories of Quraysh prestige and through bribery.
Muhammad's new policy was to prevent alliances against him.
Whenever alliances against Medina were formed, he sent out expeditions to break them up.
Muhammad heard of men massing with hostile intentions against Medina, and reacted in a severe manner.
One example is the assassination of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, a chieftain of the Jewish tribe of Banu Nadir.
Al-Ashraf went to Mecca and wrote poems that roused the Meccans' grief, anger and desire for revenge after the Battle of Badr.
Around a year later, Muhammad expelled the Banu Nadir from Medina forcing their emigration to Syria; he allowed them to take some possessions, as he was unable to subdue the Banu Nadir in their strongholds.
The rest of their property was claimed by Muhammad in the name of God as it was not gained with bloodshed.
Muhammad surprised various Arab tribes, individually, with overwhelming force, causing his enemies to unite to annihilate him.
Muhammad's attempts to prevent a confederation against him were unsuccessful, though he was able to increase his own forces and stopped many potential tribes from joining his enemies.
Battle of the Trench
Main article: Battle of the Trench
The Masjid al-Qiblatayn, where Muhammad established the new Qibla, or direction of prayer
With the help of the exiled Banu Nadir, the Quraysh military leader Abu Sufyan mustered a force of 10,000 men.
Muhammad prepared a force of about 3,000 men and adopted a form of defense unknown in Arabia at that time; the Muslims dug a trench wherever Medina lay open to cavalry attack.
The idea is credited to a Persian convert to Islam, Salman the Persian.
The siege of Medina began on 31 March 627 and lasted two weeks.
Abu Sufyan's troops were unprepared for the fortifications, and after an ineffectual siege, the coalition decided to return home.
The Quran discusses this battle in sura Al-Ahzab, in verses  33:9–27.
During the battle, the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayza, located to the south of Medina, entered into negotiations with Meccan forces to revolt against Muhammad.
Although the Meccan forces were swayed by suggestions that Muhammad was sure to be overwhelmed, they desired reassurance in case the confederacy was unable to destroy him.
No agreement was reached after prolonged negotiations, partly due to sabotage attempts by Muhammad's scouts.
After the coalition's retreat, the Muslims accused the Banu Qurayza of treachery and besieged them in their forts for 25 days.
The Banu Qurayza eventually surrendered; according to Ibn Ishaq, all the men apart from a few converts to Islam were beheaded, while the women and children were enslaved.
Walid N. Arafat and Barakat Ahmad have disputed the accuracy of Ibn Ishaq's narrative.
Arafat believes that Ibn Ishaq's Jewish sources, speaking over 100 years after the event, conflated this account with memories of earlier massacres in Jewish history; he notes that Ibn Ishaq was considered an unreliable historian by his contemporary Malik ibn Anas, and a transmitter of "odd tales" by the later Ibn Hajar.
Ahmad argues that only some of the tribe were killed, while some of the fighters were merely enslaved.
Watt finds Arafat's arguments "not entirely convincing", while Meir J. Kister has contradicted[clarification needed] the arguments of Arafat and Ahmad.
In the siege of Medina, the Meccans exerted the available strength to destroy the Muslim community.
The failure resulted in a significant loss of prestige; their trade with Syria vanished.
Following the Battle of the Trench, Muhammad made two expeditions to the north, both ended without any fighting.
While returning from one of these journeys (or some years earlier according to other early accounts), an accusation of adultery was made against Aisha, Muhammad's wife.
Aisha was exonerated from accusations when Muhammad announced he had received a revelation confirming Aisha's innocence and directing that charges of adultery be supported by four eyewitnesses (sura 24, An-Nur).
Truce of Hudaybiyyah
Main article: Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
"In your name, O God!This is the treaty of peace between Muhammad Ibn Abdullah and Suhayl Ibn Amr.
They have agreed to allow their arms to rest for ten years.
During this time each party shall be secure, and neither shall injure the other; no secret damage shall be inflicted, but honesty and honour shall prevail between them.
Whoever in Arabia wishes to enter into a treaty or covenant with Muhammad can do so, and whoever wishes to enter into a treaty or covenant with the Quraysh can do so.
And if a Qurayshite comes without the permission of his guardian to Muhammad, he shall be delivered up to the Quraysh; but if, on the other hand, one of Muhammad's people comes to the Quraysh, he shall not be delivered up to Muhammad.
This year, Muhammad, with his companions, must withdraw from Mecca, but next year, he may come to Mecca and remain for three days, yet without their weapons except those of a traveller; the swords remaining in their sheaths."
—The statement of the treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Although Muhammad had delivered Quranic verses commanding the Hajj, the Muslims had not performed it due to Quraysh enmity.
In the month of Shawwal 628, Muhammad ordered his followers to obtain sacrificial animals and to prepare for a pilgrimage (umrah) to Mecca, saying that God had promised him the fulfillment of this goal in a vision when he was shaving his head after completion of the Hajj.
Upon hearing of the approaching 1,400 Muslims, the Quraysh dispatched 200 cavalry to halt them.
Muhammad evaded them by taking a more difficult route, enabling his followers to reach al-Hudaybiyya just outside Mecca.
According to Watt, although Muhammad's decision to make the pilgrimage was based on his dream, he was also demonstrating to the pagan Meccans that Islam did not threaten the prestige of the sanctuaries, that Islam was an Arabian religion.  The Kaaba in Mecca long held a major economic and religious role for the area.
Seventeen months after Muhammad's arrival in Medina, it became the Muslim Qibla, or direction for prayer (salat). The Kaaba has been rebuilt several times; the present structure, built in 1629, is a reconstruction of an earlier building dating to 683.
Negotiations commenced with emissaries traveling to and from Mecca.
While these continued, rumors spread that one of the Muslim negotiators, Uthman bin al-Affan, had been killed by the Quraysh.
Muhammad called upon the pilgrims to make a pledge not to flee (or to stick with Muhammad, whatever decision he made) if the situation descended into war with Mecca.
This pledge became known as the "Pledge of Acceptance" or the "Pledge under the Tree". News of Uthman's safety allowed for negotiations to continue, and a treaty scheduled to last ten years was eventually signed between the Muslims and Quraysh.
The main points of the treaty included: cessation of hostilities, the deferral of Muhammad's pilgrimage to the following year, and agreement to send back any Meccan who emigrated to Medina without permission from their protector.
Many Muslims were not satisfied with the treaty.
However, the Quranic sura "Al-Fath" (The Victory) (Quran  Quran 48:1–29) assured them that the expedition must be considered a victorious one.
It was later that Muhammad's followers realized the benefit behind the treaty.
These benefits included the requirement of the Meccans to identify Muhammad as an equal, cessation of military activity allowing Medina to gain strength, and the admiration of Meccans who were impressed by the pilgrimage rituals.
After signing the truce, Muhammad assembled an expedition against the Jewish oasis of Khaybar, known as the Battle of Khaybar.
This was possibly due to housing the Banu Nadir who were inciting hostilities against Muhammad, or to regain prestige from what appeared as the inconclusive result of the truce of Hudaybiyya.
According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad also sent letters to many rulers, asking them to convert to Islam (the exact date is given variously in the sources). He sent messengers (with letters) to Heraclius of the Byzantine Empire (the eastern Roman Empire), Khosrau of Persia, the chief of Yemen and to some others.
In the years following the truce of Hudaybiyya, Muhammad directed his forces against the Arabs on Transjordanian Byzantine soil in the Battle of Mu'tah.
Final years
Conquest of Mecca
Main articles: Conquest of Mecca and Muhammad after the conquest of Mecca
A depiction of Muhammad (with veiled face) advancing on Mecca from Siyer-i Nebi, a 16th-century Ottoman manuscript.
The angels Gabriel, Michael, Israfil and Azrail, are also shown.
The truce of Hudaybiyyah was enforced for two years.
The tribe of Banu Khuza'a had good relations with Muhammad, whereas their enemies, the Banu Bakr, had allied with the Meccans.
A clan of the Bakr made a night raid against the Khuza'a, killing a few of them.
The Meccans helped the Banu Bakr with weapons and, according to some sources, a few Meccans also took part in the fighting.
After this event, Muhammad sent a message to Mecca with three conditions, asking them to accept one of them.
These were: either the Meccans would pay blood money for the slain among the Khuza'ah tribe, they disavow themselves of the Banu Bakr, or they should declare the truce of Hudaybiyyah null.
The Meccans replied that they accepted the last condition.
Soon they realized their mistake and sent Abu Sufyan to renew the Hudaybiyyah treaty, a request that was declined by Muhammad.
Muhammad began to prepare for a campaign.
In 630, Muhammad marched on Mecca with 10,000 Muslim converts.
With minimal casualties, Muhammad seized control of Mecca.
He declared an amnesty for past offences, except for ten men and women who were "guilty of murder or other offences or had sparked off the war and disrupted the peace". Some of these were later pardoned.
Most Meccans converted to Islam and Muhammad proceeded to destroy all the statues of Arabian gods in and around the Kaaba.
According to reports collected by Ibn Ishaq and al-Azraqi, Muhammad personally spared paintings or frescos of Mary and Jesus, but other traditions suggest that all pictures were erased.
The Quran discusses the conquest of Mecca.
Conquest of Arabia
Main articles: Battle of Hunayn and Expedition to Tabouk
Conquests of Muhammad (green lines) and the Rashidun caliphs (black lines). Shown: Byzantine empire (North and West) & Sassanid-Persian empire (Northeast).
Following the conquest of Mecca, Muhammad was alarmed by a military threat from the confederate tribes of Hawazin who were raising an army double the size of Muhammad's.
The Banu Hawazin were old enemies of the Meccans.
They were joined by the Banu Thaqif (inhabiting the city of Ta'if) who adopted an anti-Meccan policy due to the decline of the prestige of Meccans.
Muhammad defeated the Hawazin and Thaqif tribes in the Battle of Hunayn.
In the same year, Muhammad organized an attack against northern Arabia because of their previous defeat at the Battle of Mu'tah and reports of hostility adopted against Muslims.
With great difficulty he assembled 30,000 men; half of whom on the second day returned with Abd-Allah ibn Ubayy, untroubled by the damning verses which Muhammad hurled at them.
Although Muhammad did not engage with hostile forces at Tabuk, he received the submission of some local chiefs of the region.
He also ordered the destruction of any remaining pagan idols in Eastern Arabia.
The last city to hold out against the Muslims in Western Arabia was Taif.
Muhammad refused to accept the city's surrender until they agreed to convert to Islam and allowed men to destroy the statue of their goddess Al-Lat.
A year after the Battle of Tabuk, the Banu Thaqif sent emissaries to surrender to Muhammad and adopt Islam.
Many bedouins submitted to Muhammad to safeguard against his attacks and to benefit from the spoils of war.
However, the bedouins were alien to the system of Islam and wanted to maintain independence: namely their code of virtue and ancestral traditions.
Muhammad required a military and political agreement according to which they "acknowledge the suzerainty of Medina, to refrain from attack on the Muslims and their allies, and to pay the Zakat, the Muslim religious levy."
Farewell pilgrimage
Main article: Farewell Pilgrimage
See also: The event of Ghadir Khumm
Anonymous illustration of al-Bīrūnī's The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries, depicting Muhammad prohibiting Nasī’ during the Farewell Pilgrimage, 17th-century Ottoman copy of a 14th-century (Ilkhanate) manuscript (Edinburgh codex).
In 632, at the end of the tenth year after migration to Medina, Muhammad completed his first true Islamic pilgrimage, setting precedent for the annual Great Pilgrimage, known as Hajj.
On the 9th of Dhu al-Hijjah Muhammad delivered his Farewell Sermon, at Mount Arafat east of Mecca.
In this sermon, Muhammad advised his followers not to follow certain pre-Islamic customs.
For instance, he said a white has no superiority over a black, nor a black any superiority over a white except by piety and good action.
He abolished old blood feuds and disputes based on the former tribal system and asked for old pledges to be returned as implications of the creation of the new Islamic community.
Commenting on the vulnerability of women in his society, Muhammad asked his male followers to "be good to women, for they are powerless captives (awan) in your households.
You took them in God's trust, and legitimated your sexual relations with the Word of God, so come to your senses people, and hear my words ..." He told them that they were entitled to discipline their wives but should do so with kindness.
He addressed the issue of inheritance by forbidding false claims of paternity or of a client relationship to the deceased and forbade his followers to leave their wealth to a testamentary heir.
He also upheld the sacredness of four lunar months in each year.
According to Sunni tafsir, the following Quranic verse was delivered during this event: "Today I have perfected your religion, and completed my favours for you and chosen Islam as a religion for you" (Quran  Quran 5:3). According to Shia tafsir, it refers to the appointment of Ali ibn Abi Talib at the pond of Khumm as Muhammad's successor, this occurring a few days later when Muslims were returning from Mecca to Medina.
Death and tomb
A few months after the farewell pilgrimage, Muhammad fell ill and suffered for several days with fever, head pain, and weakness.
He died on Monday, 8 June 632, in Medina, at the age of 62 or 63, in the house of his wife Aisha.
With his head resting on Aisha's lap, he asked her to dispose of his last worldly goods (seven coins), then spoke his final words: O Allah, to Ar-Rafiq Al-A'la (exalted friend, highest Friend or the uppermost, highest Friend in heaven).— Muhammad
According to the Encyclopaedia of Islam, Muhammad's death may be presumed to have been caused by Medinan fever exacerbated by physical and mental fatigue.
Academics Reşit Haylamaz and Fatih Harpci say that Ar-Rafiq Al-A'la is referring to God.
Muhammad was buried where he died in Aisha's house.
During the reign of the Umayyad caliph al-Walid I, al-Masjid an-Nabawi (the Mosque of the Prophet) was expanded to include the site of Muhammad's tomb.
The Green Dome above the tomb was built by the Mamluk sultan Al Mansur Qalawun in the 13th century, although the green color was added in the 16th century, under the reign of Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent.
Among tombs adjacent to that of Muhammad are those of his companions (Sahabah), the first two Muslim caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar, and an empty one that Muslims believe awaits Jesus.
When Saud bin Abdul-Aziz took Medina in 1805, Muhammad's tomb was stripped of its gold and jewel ornamentation.
Adherents to Wahhabism, Saud's followers, destroyed nearly every tomb dome in Medina in order to prevent their veneration, and the one of Muhammad is reported to have narrowly escaped.
Similar events took place in 1925, when the Saudi militias retook—and this time managed to keep—the city.
In the Wahhabi interpretation of Islam, burial is to take place in unmarked graves.
Although the practice is frowned upon by the Saudis, many pilgrims continue to practice a ziyarat—a ritual visit—to the tomb.
Al-Masjid an-Nabawi ("the Prophet's mosque") in Medina, Saudi Arabia, with the Green Dome built over Muhammad's tomb in the center
After Muhammad
Further information: Succession to Muhammad, Rashidun, and Muslim conquests
Expansion of the caliphate, 622–750 CE.    Muhammad, 622–632 CE.    Rashidun caliphate, 632–661 CE.    Umayyad caliphate, 661–750 CE.
Muhammad united several of the tribes of Arabia into a single Arab Muslim religious polity in the last years of his life.
With Muhammad's death, disagreement broke out over who his successor would be.
Umar ibn al-Khattab, a prominent companion of Muhammad, nominated Abu Bakr, Muhammad's friend and collaborator.
With additional support Abu Bakr was confirmed as the first caliph.
This choice was disputed by some of Muhammad's companions, who held that Ali ibn Abi Talib, his cousin and son-in-law, had been designated the successor by Muhammad at Ghadir Khumm.
Abu Bakr immediately moved to strike against the Byzantine (or Eastern Roman Empire) forces because of the previous defeat, although he first had to put down a rebellion by Arab tribes in an event that Muslim historians later referred to as the Ridda wars, or "Wars of Apostasy".
The pre-Islamic Middle East was dominated by the Byzantine and Sassanian empires.
The Roman–Persian Wars between the two had devastated the region, making the empires unpopular amongst local tribes.
Furthermore, in the lands that would be conquered by Muslims many Christians (Nestorians, Monophysites, Jacobites and Copts) were disaffected from the Eastern Orthodox Church which deemed them heretics.
Within a decade Muslims conquered Mesopotamia, Byzantine Syria, Byzantine Egypt, large parts of Persia, and established the Rashidun Caliphate.
Islamic social reforms
Main article: Early social changes under Islam
According to William Montgomery Watt, religion for Muhammad was not a private and individual matter but "the total response of his personality to the total situation in which he found himself.
He was responding [not only]... to the religious and intellectual aspects of the situation but also to the economic, social, and political pressures to which contemporary Mecca was subject." Bernard Lewis says there are two important political traditions in Islam—Muhammad as a statesman in Medina, and Muhammad as a rebel in Mecca.
In his view, Islam is a great change, akin to a revolution, when introduced to new societies.
Historians generally agree that Islamic social changes in areas such as social security, family structure, slavery and the rights of women and children improved on the status quo of Arab society.
For example, according to Lewis, Islam "from the first denounced aristocratic privilege, rejected hierarchy, and adopted a formula of the career open to the talents".[which?] Muhammad's message transformed society and moral orders of life in the Arabian Peninsula; society focused on the changes to perceived identity, world view, and the hierarchy of values.[page needed]
Economic reforms addressed the plight of the poor, which was becoming an issue in pre-Islamic Mecca.
The Quran requires payment of an alms tax (zakat) for the benefit of the poor; as Muhammad's power grew he demanded that tribes who wished to ally with him implement the zakat in particular.
Appearance
A hilya containing a description of Muhammad, by Ottoman calligrapher Hâfiz Osman (1642–1698)
In Muhammad al-Bukhari's book Sahih al-Bukhari, in Chapter 61, Hadith 57 & Hadith 60, Muhammad is depicted by two of his companions thus:
God's Messenger was neither very tall nor short, neither absolutely white nor deep brown.
His hair was neither curly nor lank.
God sent him (as a Messenger) when he was forty years old.
Afterwards he resided in Mecca for ten years and in Medina for ten more years.
When God took him unto Him, there was scarcely twenty white hairs in his head and beard.— Anas
The Prophet was of moderate height having broad shoulders (long) hair reaching his ear-lobes.
Once I saw him in a red cloak and I had never seen anyone more handsome than him.— Al-Bara
The description given in Muhammad ibn Isa at-Tirmidhi's book Shama'il al-Mustafa, attributed to Ali ibn Abi Talib and Hind ibn Abi Hala is as follows:
Muhammad was middle-sized, did not have lank or crisp hair, was not fat, had a white circular face, wide black eyes, and long eye-lashes.
When he walked, he walked as though he went down a declivity.
He had the "seal of prophecy" between his shoulder blades ... He was bulky.
His face shone like the moon.
He was taller than middling stature but shorter than conspicuous tallness.
He had thick, curly hair.
The plaits of his hair were parted.
His hair reached beyond the lobe of his ear.
His complexion was azhar [bright, luminous]. Muhammad had a wide forehead, and fine, long, arched eyebrows which did not meet.
Between his eyebrows there was a vein which distended when he was angry.
The upper part of his nose was hooked; he was thick bearded, had smooth cheeks, a strong mouth, and his teeth were set apart.
He had thin hair on his chest.
His neck was like the neck of an ivory statue, with the purity of silver.
Muhammad was proportionate, stout, firm-gripped, even of belly and chest, broad-chested and broad-shouldered.
The "seal of prophecy" between Muhammad's shoulders is generally described as having been a type of raised mole the size of a pigeon's egg.
Another description of Muhammad was provided by Umm Ma'bad, a woman he met on his journey to Medina:
I saw a man, pure and clean, with a handsome face and a fine figure.
He was not marred by a skinny body, nor was he overly small in the head and neck.
He was graceful and elegant, with intensely black eyes and thick eyelashes.
There was a huskiness in his voice, and his neck was long.
His beard was thick, and his eyebrows were finely arched and joined together.
When silent, he was grave and dignified, and when he spoke, glory rose up and overcame him.
He was from afar the most beautiful of men and the most glorious, and close up he was the sweetest and the loveliest.
He was sweet of speech and articulate, but not petty or trifling.
His speech was a string of cascading pearls, measured so that none despaired of its length, and no eye challenged him because of brevity.
In company he is like a branch between two other branches, but he is the most flourishing of the three in appearance, and the loveliest in power.
He has friends surrounding him, who listen to his words.
If he commands, they obey implicitly, with eagerness and haste, without frown or complaint.
Descriptions like these were often reproduced in calligraphic panels (Turkish: hilye), which in the 17th century developed into an art form of their own in the Ottoman Empire.
Household
Further information: Muhammad's wives and Ahl al-Bayt
The tomb of Muhammad is located in the quarters of his third wife, Aisha. (Al-Masjid an-Nabawi, Medina)
Muhammad's life is traditionally defined into two periods: pre-hijra (emigration) in Mecca (from 570 to 622), and post-hijra in Medina (from 622 until 632). Muhammad is said to have had thirteen wives in total (although two have ambiguous accounts, Rayhana bint Zayd and Maria al-Qibtiyya, as wife or concubine). Eleven of the thirteen marriages occurred after the migration to Medina.
At the age of 25, Muhammad married the wealthy Khadijah bint Khuwaylid who was 40 years old.
The marriage lasted for 25 years and was a happy one.
Muhammad did not enter into marriage with another woman during this marriage.
After Khadijah's death, Khawla bint Hakim suggested to Muhammad that he should marry Sawda bint Zama, a Muslim widow, or Aisha, daughter of Um Ruman and Abu Bakr of Mecca.
Muhammad is said to have asked for arrangements to marry both.
Muhammad's marriages after the death of Khadijah were contracted mostly for political or humanitarian reasons.
The women were either widows of Muslims killed in battle and had been left without a protector, or belonged to important families or clans with whom it was necessary to honor and strengthen alliances.
According to traditional sources, Aisha was six or seven years old when betrothed to Muhammad, with the marriage not being consummated until she reached the age of nine or ten years old.
She was therefore a virgin at marriage.
Modern Muslim authors who calculate Aisha's age based on other sources of information, such as a hadith about the age difference between Aisha and her sister Asma, estimate that she was over thirteen and perhaps in her late teens at the time of her marriage.
After migration to Medina, Muhammad, who was then in his fifties, married several more women.
Muhammad performed household chores such as preparing food, sewing clothes, and repairing shoes.
He is also said to have had accustomed his wives to dialogue; he listened to their advice, and the wives debated and even argued with him.
Khadijah is said to have had four daughters with Muhammad (Ruqayyah bint Muhammad, Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad, Zainab bint Muhammad, Fatimah Zahra) and two sons (Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad and Qasim ibn Muhammad, who both died in childhood). All but one of his daughters, Fatimah, died before him.
Some Shi'a scholars contend that Fatimah was Muhammad's only daughter.
Maria al-Qibtiyya bore him a son named Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, but the child died when he was two years old.
Nine of Muhammad's wives survived him.
Aisha, who became known as Muhammad's favourite wife in Sunni tradition, survived him by decades and was instrumental in helping assemble the scattered sayings of Muhammad that form the Hadith literature for the Sunni branch of Islam.
Muhammad's descendants through Fatimah are known as sharifs, syeds or sayyids.
These are honorific titles in Arabic, sharif meaning 'noble' and sayed or sayyid meaning 'lord' or 'sir'. As Muhammad's only descendants, they are respected by both Sunni and Shi'a, though the Shi'a place much more emphasis and value on their distinction.
Zayd ibn Haritha was a slave that Muhammad bought, freed, and then adopted as his son.
He also had a wetnurse.
According to a BBC summary, "the Prophet Muhammad did not try to abolish slavery, and bought, sold, captured, and owned slaves himself.
But he insisted that slave owners treat their slaves well and stressed the virtue of freeing slaves.
Muhammad treated slaves as human beings and clearly held some in the highest esteem".
Legacy
Islamic tradition
Part of a series onMuhammad
Life
Mecca
Hijrah
Medina
After Conquest of Mecca
Farewell Pilgrimage (Farewell Sermon)
Hadith
Milestones and records
Career
Military
Diplomatic
Miracles
Quran (First revelation)
Isra and Mi'raj
Splitting of the Moon
Others
Views
Jews
Christians
Perspectives
Islam
Bible
Judaism
Medieval Christian
Historicity
Criticism
Succession
Saqifah
Ghadir Khumm
Companions of Muhammad
Hadith of the pen and paper
Ahl al-Bayt
Praise
Salawat
Naat
Mawlid
Related
Al-Masjid an-Nabawi
Possessions
Relics
Seal
History of Islam
Islam portal
Biography portal
Main article: Muhammad in Islam
Following the attestation to the oneness of God, the belief in Muhammad's prophethood is the main aspect of the Islamic faith.
Every Muslim proclaims in Shahadah: "I testify that there is no god but God, and I testify that Muhammad is a Messenger of God." The Shahadah is the basic creed or tenet of Islam.
Islamic belief is that ideally the Shahadah is the first words a newborn will hear; children are taught it immediately and it will be recited upon death.
Muslims repeat the shahadah in the call to prayer (adhan) and the prayer itself.
Non-Muslims wishing to convert to Islam are required to recite the creed.
In Islamic belief, Muhammad is regarded as the last prophet sent by God.  Quran 10:37 states that "...it (the Quran) is a confirmation of (revelations) that went before it, and a fuller explanation of the Book—wherein there is no doubt—from The Lord of the Worlds." Similarly,  Quran 46:12 states "...And before this was the book of Moses, as a guide and a mercy.
And this Book confirms (it)...", while  Quran 2:136 commands the believers of Islam to "Say: we believe in God and that which is revealed unto us, and that which was revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus received, and which the prophets received from their Lord.
We make no distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have surrendered."
The Muslim profession of faith, the Shahadah, illustrates the Muslim conception of the role of Muhammad: "There is no god except the God; Muhammad is the Messenger of God." in Topkapı Palace, Istanbul, Turkey
Muslim tradition credits Muhammad with several miracles or supernatural events.
For example, many Muslim commentators and some Western scholars have interpreted the Surah  Quran 54:1–2 as referring to Muhammad splitting the Moon in view of the Quraysh when they began persecuting his followers.
Western historian of Islam Denis Gril believes the Quran does not overtly describe Muhammad performing miracles, and the supreme miracle of Muhammad is identified with the Quran itself.
According to Islamic tradition, Muhammad was attacked by the people of Ta'if and was badly injured.
The tradition also describes an angel appearing to him and offering retribution against the assailants.
It is said that Muhammad rejected the offer and prayed for the guidance of the people of Ta'if.
Calligraphic rendering of "may God honor him and grant him peace", customarily added after Muhammad's name, encoded as a ligature at Unicode code point U+FDFA. ﷺ‎.
The Sunnah represents actions and sayings of Muhammad (preserved in reports known as Hadith) and covers a broad array of activities and beliefs ranging from religious rituals, personal hygiene, and burial of the dead to the mystical questions involving the love between humans and God.
The Sunnah is considered a model of emulation for pious Muslims and has to a great degree influenced the Muslim culture.
The greeting that Muhammad taught Muslims to offer each other, "may peace be upon you" (Arabic: as-salamu 'alaykum) is used by Muslims throughout the world.
Many details of major Islamic rituals such as daily prayers, the fasting and the annual pilgrimage are only found in the Sunnah and not the Quran.
Muslims have traditionally expressed love and veneration for Muhammad.
Stories of Muhammad's life, his intercession and of his miracles have permeated popular Muslim thought and poetry.
Among Arabic odes to Muhammad, Qasidat al-Burda ("Poem of the Mantle") by the Egyptian Sufi al-Busiri (1211–1294) is particularly well-known, and widely held to possess a healing, spiritual power.
The Quran refers to Muhammad as "a mercy (rahmat) to the worlds" (Quran  Quran 21:107). The association of rain with mercy in Oriental countries has led to imagining Muhammad as a rain cloud dispensing blessings and stretching over lands, reviving the dead hearts, just as rain revives the seemingly dead earth (see, for example, the Sindhi poem of Shah ʿAbd al-Latif). Muhammad's birthday is celebrated as a major feast throughout the Islamic world, excluding Wahhabi-dominated Saudi Arabia where these public celebrations are discouraged.
When Muslims say or write the name of Muhammad, they usually follow it with the Arabic phrase ṣallā llahu ʿalayhi wa-sallam (may God honor him and grant him peace) or the English phrase peace be upon him.
In casual writing, the abbreviations SAW (for the Arabic phrase) or PBUH (for the English phrase) are sometimes used; in printed matter, a small calligraphic rendition is commonly used (ﷺ).
Sufism
See also: Sufism
The Sunnah contributed much to the development of Islamic law, particularly from the end of the first Islamic century.
Muslim mystics, known as sufis, who were seeking for the inner meaning of the Quran and the inner nature of Muhammad, viewed the prophet of Islam not only as a prophet but also as a perfect human being.
All Sufi orders trace their chain of spiritual descent back to Muhammad.
Depictions
Main article: Depictions of Muhammad
In line with the hadith's prohibition against creating images of sentient living beings, which is particularly strictly observed with respect to God and Muhammad, Islamic religious art is focused on the word.
Muslims generally avoid depictions of Muhammad, and mosques are decorated with calligraphy and Quranic inscriptions or geometrical designs, not images or sculptures.
Today, the interdiction against images of Muhammad—designed to prevent worship of Muhammad, rather than God—is much more strictly observed in Sunni Islam (85%–90% of Muslims) and Ahmadiyya Islam (1%) than among Shias (10%–15%). While both Sunnis and Shias have created images of Muhammad in the past, Islamic depictions of Muhammad are rare.
They have mostly been limited to the private and elite medium of the miniature, and since about 1500 most depictions show Muhammad with his face veiled, or symbolically represent him as a flame.
Muhammad's entry into Mecca and the destruction of idols.
Muhammad is shown as a flame in this manuscript.
Found in Bazil's Hamla-i Haydari, Jammu and Kashmir, India, 1808.
The earliest extant depictions come from 13th century Anatolian Seljuk and Ilkhanid Persian miniatures, typically in literary genres describing the life and deeds of Muhammad.
During the Ilkhanid period, when Persia's Mongol rulers converted to Islam, competing Sunni and Shi'a groups used visual imagery, including images of Muhammad, to promote their particular interpretation of Islam's key events.
Influenced by the Buddhist tradition of representational religious art predating the Mongol elite's conversion, this innovation was unprecedented in the Islamic world, and accompanied by a "broader shift in Islamic artistic culture away from abstraction toward representation" in "mosques, on tapestries, silks, ceramics, and in glass and metalwork" besides books.
In the Persian lands, this tradition of realistic depictions lasted through the Timurid dynasty until the Safavids took power in the early 16th century.
The Safavaids, who made Shi'i Islam the state religion, initiated a departure from the traditional Ilkhanid and Timurid artistic style by covering Muhammad's face with a veil to obscure his features and at the same time represent his luminous essence.
Concomitantly, some of the unveiled images from earlier periods were defaced.
Later images were produced in Ottoman Turkey and elsewhere, but mosques were never decorated with images of Muhammad.
Illustrated accounts of the night journey (mi'raj) were particularly popular from the Ilkhanid period through the Safavid era.
During the 19th century, Iran saw a boom of printed and illustrated mi'raj books, with Muhammad's face veiled, aimed in particular at illiterates and children in the manner of graphic novels.
Reproduced through lithography, these were essentially "printed manuscripts". Today, millions of historical reproductions and modern images are available in some Muslim-majority countries, especially Turkey and Iran, on posters, postcards, and even in coffee-table books, but are unknown in most other parts of the Islamic world, and when encountered by Muslims from other countries, they can cause considerable consternation and offense.
European appreciation
Muhammad in La vie de Mahomet by M. Prideaux (1699). He holds a sword and a crescent while trampling on a globe, a cross, and the Ten Commandments.
After the Reformation, Muhammad was often portrayed in a similar way.
Guillaume Postel was among the first to present a more positive view of Muhammad when he argued that Muhammad should be esteemed by Christians as a valid prophet.
Gottfried Leibniz praised Muhammad because "he did not deviate from the natural religion". Henri de Boulainvilliers, in his Vie de Mahomed which was published posthumously in 1730, described Muhammad as a gifted political leader and a just lawmaker.
He presents him as a divinely inspired messenger whom God employed to confound the bickering Oriental Christians, to liberate the Orient from the despotic rule of the Romans and Persians, and to spread the knowledge of the unity of God from India to Spain.
Voltaire had a somewhat mixed opinion on Muhammad: in his play Le fanatisme, ou Mahomet le Prophète he vilifies Muhammad as a symbol of fanaticism, and in a published essay in 1748 he calls him "a sublime and hearty charlatan", but in his historical survey Essai sur les mœurs, he presents him as legislator and a conqueror and calls him an "enthusiast." Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in his Social Contract (1762), "brushing aside hostile legends of Muhammad as a trickster and impostor, presents him as a sage legislator who wisely fused religious and political powers." Emmanuel Pastoret published in 1787 his Zoroaster, Confucius and Muhammad, in which he presents the lives of these three "great men", "the greatest legislators of the universe", and compares their careers as religious reformers and lawgivers.
He rejects the common view that Muhammad is an impostor and argues that the Quran proffers "the most sublime truths of cult and morals"; it defines the unity of God with an "admirable concision." Pastoret writes that the common accusations of his immorality are unfounded: on the contrary, his law enjoins sobriety, generosity, and compassion on his followers: the "legislator of Arabia" was "a great man." Napoleon Bonaparte admired Muhammad and Islam, and described him as a model lawmaker and a great man.
Thomas Carlyle in his book On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History (1841) describes "Mahomet" as "A silent great soul; he was one of those who cannot but be in earnest". Carlyle's interpretation has been widely cited by Muslim scholars as a demonstration that Western scholarship validates Muhammad's status as a great man in history.
Ian Almond says that German Romantic writers generally held positive views of Muhammad: "Goethe’s 'extraordinary' poet-prophet, Herder’s nation builder (...) Schlegel’s admiration for Islam as an aesthetic product, enviably authentic, radiantly holistic, played such a central role in his view of Mohammed as an exemplary world-fashioner that he even used it as a scale of judgement for the classical (the dithyramb, we are told, has to radiate pure beauty if it is to resemble 'a Koran of poetry')." After quoting Heinrich Heine, who said in a letter to some friend that "I must admit that you, great prophet of Mecca, are the greatest poet and that your Quran... will not easily escape my memory", John Tolan goes on to show how Jews in Europe in particular held more nuanced views about Muhammad and Islam, being an ethnoreligious minority feeling discriminated, they specifically lauded Al-Andalus, and thus, "writing about Islam was for Jews a way of indulging in a fantasy world, far from the persecution and pogroms of nineteenth-century Europe, where Jews could live in harmony with their non-Jewish neighbors."
Recent writers such as William Montgomery Watt and Richard Bell dismiss the idea that Muhammad deliberately deceived his followers, arguing that Muhammad "was absolutely sincere and acted in complete good faith" and Muhammad's readiness to endure hardship for his cause, with what seemed to be no rational basis for hope, shows his sincerity.
Watt, however, says that sincerity does not directly imply correctness: in contemporary terms, Muhammad might have mistaken his subconscious for divine revelation.
Watt and Bernard Lewis argue that viewing Muhammad as a self-seeking impostor makes it impossible to understand Islam's development.
Alford T. Welch holds that Muhammad was able to be so influential and successful because of his firm belief in his vocation.
Other religions
See also: Jewish views on Muhammad and Muhammad in the Baháʼí Faith
Followers of the Baháʼí Faith venerate Muhammad as one of a number of prophets or "Manifestations of God". He is thought to be the final manifestation, or seal of the Adamic cycle, but consider his teachings to have been superseded by those of Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Baháʼí faith, and the first manifestation of the current cycle.
Druze tradition honors several "mentors" and "prophets", and Muhammad is considered an important prophet of God in the Druze faith, being among the seven prophets who appeared in different periods of history.
Criticism
Main article: Criticism of Muhammad
Criticism of Muhammad has existed since the 7th century, when Muhammad was decried by his non-Muslim Arab contemporaries for preaching monotheism, and by the Jewish tribes of Arabia for his perceived appropriation of Biblical narratives and figures and proclamation of himself as the "Seal of the Prophets".
During the Middle Ages, various Western and Byzantine Christian thinkers criticized Muhammad's morality, and labelled him a false prophet or even the Antichrist, and he was frequently portrayed in Christendom as being either a heretic or as being possessed by demons.
Modern religious and secular criticism of Islam has concerned Muhammad's sincerity in claiming to be a prophet, his morality, his marriages, his ownership of slaves, his treatment of his enemies, his handling of doctrinal matters and his psychological condition.
See also
Ashtiname of Muhammad
Arabian tribes that interacted with Muhammad
Diplomatic career of Muhammad
Glossary of Islam
List of founders of religious traditions
List of notable Hijazis
Muhammad and the Bible
Muhammad in film
Muhammad's views on Christians
Possessions of Muhammad
Relics of Muhammad
References
Notes
He is referred to by many appellations, including Messenger of Allah, The Prophet Muhammad, Allah's Apostle, Last Prophet of Islam, and others; there are also many variant spellings of Muhammad, such as Mohamet, Mohammed, Mahamad, Muhamad, and many others.
The Quranic epithet 'Seal of the Prophets' (khātam an-nabīyīn) is understood by the majority of Muslims to mean that Muhammad was the last of the prophets sent by God.
An alternative view holds that his status as such does not preclude forms of subordinate prophecy upholding Quranic law to subsist within Islam, a view espoused most notably by the modern Ahmadiyya movement.
See:
Fitzpatrick, Coeli; Walker, Adam Hani (2014). Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-61069-178-9.
Friedmann, Yohanan (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval Background.
Oxford University Press. pp. passim.
ISBN 965-264-014-X.
The aforementioned Islamic histories recount that as Muhammad was reciting Sūra Al-Najm (Q.53), as revealed to him by the Archangel Gabriel, Satan tempted him to utter the following lines after verses 19 and 20: "Have you thought of Allāt and al-'Uzzā and Manāt the third, the other; These are the exalted Gharaniq, whose intercession is hoped for." (Allāt, al-'Uzzā and Manāt were three goddesses worshiped by the Meccans). cf Ibn Ishaq, A. Guillaume p. 166.
"Apart from this one-day lapse, which was excised from the text, the Quran is simply unrelenting, unaccommodating and outright despising of paganism." (The Cambridge Companion to Muhammad, Jonathan E. Brockopp, p. 35).
"Although, there could be some historical basis for the story, in its present form, it is certainly a later, exegetical fabrication.
Sura LIII, 1–20 and the end of the sura are not a unity, as is claimed by the story, XXII, 52 is later than LIII, 2107 and is almost certainly Medinan; and several details of the story—the mosque, the sadjda, and others not mentioned in the short summary above do not belong to Meccan setting.
Caetani and J. Burton have argued against the historicity of the story on other grounds.
Burton concluded that the story was invented by jurists so that XXII 52 could serve as a Kuranic proof-text for their abrogation theories." ("Kuran" in the Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd Edition, Vol. 5 (1986), p. 404).
Citations
a b c d e * Conrad, Lawrence I. (1987). "Abraha and Muhammad: some observations apropos of chronology and literary topoi in the early Arabic historical tradition1". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 50 (2): 225–40. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00049016. S2CID 162350288.
Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby (1901). Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan calendars: with rules and tables and explanatory notes on the Julian and Gregorian calendars. G. Bell. p. 465.
Hamidullah, Muhammad (February 1969). "The Nasi', the Hijrah Calendar and the Need of Preparing a New Concordance for the Hijrah and Gregorian Eras: Why the Existing Western Concordances are Not to be Relied Upon" (PDF). The Islamic Review & Arab Affairs: 6–12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2012.
Elizabeth Goldman (1995), p. 63, gives 8 June 632 CE, the dominant Islamic tradition.
Many earlier (primarily non-Islamic) traditions refer to him as still alive at the time of the Muslim conquest of Palestine.
See Stephen J. Shoemaker, The Death of a Prophet: The End of Muhammad's Life and the Beginnings of Islam, page 248, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011.
a b Alford T. Welch; Ahmad S. Moussalli; Gordon D. Newby (2009). "Muḥammad".  In John L. Esposito (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. The Prophet of Islam was a religious, political, and social reformer who gave rise to one of the great civilizations of the world.
From a modern, historical perspective, Muḥammad was the founder of Islam.
From the perspective of the Islamic faith, he was God's Messenger (rasūl Allāh), called to be a "warner," first to the Arabs and then to all humankind.
Esposito (2002b), pp. 4–5.
Peters, F.E. (2003). Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians.
Princeton University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-691-11553-5.
Esposito, John (1998). Islam: The Straight Path (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 9, 12. ISBN 978-0-19-511234-4.
"Early Years". Al-Islam.org. 18 October 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2018.
a b c Watt (1974), p. 7.
a b Encyclopedia of World History (1998), p. 452.
Howarth, Stephen.
Knights Templar. 1985. ISBN 978-0-8264-8034-7 p. 199.
a b Muhammad Mustafa Al-A'zami (2003), The History of The Qur'anic Text: From Revelation to Compilation: A Comparative Study with the Old and New Testaments, pp. 26–27. UK Islamic Academy.
ISBN 978-1-872531-65-6.
"Islam: An Overview – Oxford Islamic Studies Online". 
Anis Ahmad (2009). "Dīn".  In John L. Esposito (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. A second important aspect of the meaning of the term emerges in Meccan revelations concerning the practice of the Prophet Abraham.
Here it stands for the straight path (al-dīn al-ḥanīf) toward which Abraham and other messengers called the people [...] The Qurʿān asserts that this was the path or practice followed by Abraham [...] In the final analysis, dīn encompasses social and spiritual, as well the legal and political behaviour of the believers as a comprehensive way of life, a connotation wider than the word "religion."
F.E. Peters (2003), p. 9.
Esposito (1998), p. 12; (1999) p. 25; (2002) pp. 4–5.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah Buhl, F.; Welch, A.T. (1993). "Muḥammad". Encyclopaedia of Islam.
Vol. 7 (2nd ed.). Brill. pp. 360–376. ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2.
"Muhammad", Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim world.
a b See:
Holt (1977a), p. 57.
Lapidus (2002), pp. 31–32.
"Muhammad" Archived 15 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
Jean-Louis Déclais, Names of the Prophet, Encyclopedia of the Quran.
Quran 2:119
Quran 33:45
Quran 11:2
Quran 88:21
Quran 12:108
Quran 05:15
Quran 33:46
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2007). "Qurʾān". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2013.
Living Religions: An Encyclopaedia of the World's Faiths, Mary Pat Fisher, 1997, p. 338, I.B. Tauris Publishers.
Quran 17:106
Clinton Bennett (1998). In search of Muhammad.
Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 18–19. ISBN 978-0-304-70401-9. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015.
Francis E. Peters (1994). Muhammad and the origins of Islam.
SUNY Press. p. 261. ISBN 978-0-7914-1876-5. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
a b Watt (1953), p. xi.
Reeves (2003), pp. 6–7.
a b S.A. Nigosian (2004), p. 6.
Donner (1998), p. 132.
Holland, Tom (2012). In the Shadow of the Sword.
Doubleday. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-7481-1951-6. Things which it is disgraceful to discuss; matters which would distress certain people; and such reports as I have been told are not to be accepted as trustworthy – all these things have I omitted. [Ibn Hashim, p. 691.]
Watt (1953), p. xv.
a b Lewis (1993), pp. 33–34.
Jonathan, A.C. Brown (2007). The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim: The Formation and Function of the Sunnī Ḥadīth Canon.
Brill Publishers. p. 9. ISBN 978-90-04-15839-9. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. We can discern three strata of the Sunni ḥadīth canon.
The perennial core has been the Ṣaḥīḥayn.
Beyond these two foundational classics, some fourth-/tenth-century scholars refer to a four-book selection that adds the two Sunans of Abū Dāwūd (d. 275/889) and al-Nāsaʾī (d. 303/915). The Five Book canon, which is first noted in the sixth/twelfth century, incorporates the Jāmiʿ of al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892). Finally, the Six Book canon, which hails from the same period, adds either the Sunan of Ibn Mājah (d. 273/887), the Sunan of al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995) or the Muwaṭṭaʾ of Mālik b.
Anas (d. 179/796). Later ḥadīth compendia often included other collections as well.
None of these books, however, has enjoyed the esteem of al-Bukhārīʼs and Muslimʼs works.
Madelung (1997), pp. xi, 19–20.
Nurullah Ardic (21 August 2012), Islam and the Politics of Secularism, Routledge, p. 99, ISBN 978-1-136-48984-6, archived from the original on 22 January 2018
Watt (1953), pp. 1–2.
Watt (1953), pp. 16–18.
Loyal Rue, Religion Is Not about God: How Spiritual Traditions Nurture Our Biological,2005, p. 224.
a b John Esposito, Islam, Expanded edition, Oxford University Press, pp. 4–5.
See:
Esposito, Islam, Extended Edition, Oxford University Press, pp. 5–7.
Quran 3:95.
Ueberweg, Friedrich.
History of Philosophy, Vol. 1: From Thales to the Present Time.
Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 409. ISBN 978-1-4400-4322-2.
Kochler (1982), p. 29.
cf.
Uri Rubin, Hanif, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
See:
Louis Jacobs (1995), p. 272
Turner (2005), p. 16.
Dever, William G. (10 May 2001). What Did the Biblical Writers Know and When Did They Know It?: What Archeology Can Tell Us About the Reality of Ancient Israel.
Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8028-2126-3.
Christian Julien Robin (2012). Arabia and Ethiopia.
In The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity.
OUP USA. pp. 297–299. ISBN 978-0-19-533693-1. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016.
a b c d Christian Julien Robin (2012). Arabia and Ethiopia.
In The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity.
OUP USA. p. 302. ISBN 978-0-19-533693-1. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016.
Christian Julien Robin (2012). Arabia and Ethiopia.
In The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity.
OUP USA. pp. 286–287. ISBN 978-0-19-533693-1. Archived from the original on 4 June 2016.
a b c Christian Julien Robin (2012). Arabia and Ethiopia.
In The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity.
OUP USA. p. 301. ISBN 978-0-19-533693-1. Archived from the original on 17 May 2016.
Muhammad Archived 9 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopedia Britannica.
Retrieved 15 February 2017.
Rodinson, Maxime (2002). Muhammad: Prophet of Islam.
Tauris Parke Paperbacks. p. 38. ISBN 978-1-86064-827-4. Retrieved 12 May 2019.
Esposito, John L., ed. (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-19-512558-0. Retrieved 19 June 2012.
See also  Quran 43:31 cited in EoI; Muhammad.
Marr J.S., Hubbard E., Cathey J.T. (2014): The Year of the Elephant. 
doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.1186833
Retrieved 21 October 2014 (GMT).
The Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity; edited by Scott Fitzgerald Johnson; p. 287.
Muhammad and the Origins of Islam; by Francis E. Peters; p. 88.
Ali, Wijdan (August 1999). "From the Literal to the Spiritual: The Development of the Prophet Muhammad's Portrayal from 13th Century Ilkhanid Miniatures to 17th Century Ottoman Art" (PDF). Proceedings of the 11th International Congress of Turkish Art (7): 3. ISSN 0928-6802. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2004.
Meri, Josef W. (2004). Medieval Islamic civilization.
Vol. 1. Routledge. p. 525. ISBN 978-0-415-96690-0. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 3 January 2013.
a b Watt, "Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb Archived 3 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine", Encyclopaedia of Islam.
Watt, Amina, Encyclopaedia of Islam.
a b c Watt (1974), p. 8.
Armand Abel, Bahira, Encyclopaedia of Islam.
a b Berkshire Encyclopedia of World History (2005), v. 3, p. 1025.
Khan, Majid Ali (1998). Muhammad the final messenger (1998 ed.). India: Islamic Book Service. p. 332. ISBN 978-81-85738-25-3.
Esposito (1998), p. 6.
Dairesi, Hırka-i Saadet; Aydin, Hilmi (2004).  Uğurluel, Talha; Doğru, Ahmet (eds.). The Sacred Trusts: Pavilion of the Sacred Relics, Topkapı Palace Museum, Istanbul.
Tughra Books.
ISBN 978-1-932099-72-0.
Muhammad Mustafa Al-A'zami (2003), The History of The Qur'anic Text: From Revelation to Compilation: A Comparative Study with the Old and New Testaments, p. 24. UK Islamic Academy.
ISBN 978-1-872531-65-6.
Emory C. Bogle (1998), p. 6.
John Henry Haaren, Addison B. Poland (1904), p. 83.
Brown (2003), pp. 72–73.
a b  Quran 96:1 Wensinck, A.J.; Rippen, A. (2002). "Waḥy". Encyclopaedia of Islam.
Vol. 11 (2nd ed.). Brill Academic Publishers. p. 54. ISBN 978-90-04-12756-2.
Esposito (2010), p. 8.
See:
Emory C. Bogle (1998), p. 7.
Rodinson (2002), p. 71.
Quran 93:3.
Brown (2003), pp. 73–74.
Uri Rubin, Muhammad, Encyclopedia of the Quran.
"Center for Muslim-Jewish Engagement". Cmje.org.
Archived from the original on 10 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p. 31.
Quran 38:70.
Quran 6:19.
a b Uri Rubin, Muhammad, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
Daniel C. Peterson, Good News, Encyclopedia of the Quran.
a b Watt (1953), p. 86.
Ramadan (2007), pp. 37–39.
a b c Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam (1977), p. 36.
F.E. Peters (1994), p. 169.
a b c Uri Rubin, Quraysh, Encyclopaedia of the Qur'an.
Jonathan E. Brockopp, Slaves and Slavery, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
W. Arafat, Bilal b.
Rabah, Encyclopedia of Islam.
Horovitz, Josef (1927). "The Earliest Biographies of the Prophet and Their Authors". Islamic Culture. 1 (2): 279–284. doi:10.1163/157005807780220576.
"Muḥammad", Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition.
Edited by P. J. Bearman, Th.
Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs et al.
Brill Online, 2014.
The Cambridge Companion to Muhammad (2010), p. 35.
"Kuran" in the Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd Edition, Vol. 5 (1986), p. 404.
"Muḥammad", Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition.
Edited by P. J. Bearman, Th.
Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs et al.
Brill Online, 2014.
W.N. Arafat (1976). "New Light on the Story of Banu Qurayza and the Jews of Medina". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland: 101–107. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Rizwi Faizer (31 October 2005), Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia, Routledge, p. 754, ISBN 978-1-135-45596-5, archived from the original on 27 February 2017
Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture, ABC-CLIO, 25 April 2014, p. 279, ISBN 978-1-61069-178-9, archived from the original on 19 March 2017
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (1975), The Quran and Hadith, p. 109, ISBN 978-9976-956-87-0, archived from the original on 22 January 2018
Shahab Ahmed, "Satanic Verses" in the Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
F.E. Peters (2003b), p. 96.
a b c Moojan Momen (1985), p. 4.
Oleg Grabar (1 October 2006). The Dome of the Rock.
Harvard University Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-674-02313-0. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
a b Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World (2003), p. 482.
Sells, Michael.
Ascension, Encyclopedia of the Quran.
Jonathan M. Bloom; Sheila Blair (2009). The Grove encyclopedia of Islamic art and architecture.
Oxford University Press. p. 76. ISBN 978-0-19-530991-1. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
Watt (1974), p. 83.
Peterson (2006), pp. 86–89.
Muhammad Mustafa Al-A'zami (2003), The History of The Qur'anic Text: From Revelation to Compilation: A Comparative Study with the Old and New Testaments, pp. 30–31. UK Islamic Academy.
ISBN 978-1-872531-65-6.
Muhammad Mustafa Al-A'zami (2003), The History of The Qur'anic Text: From Revelation to Compilation: A Comparative Study with the Old and New Testaments, p. 29. UK Islamic Academy.
ISBN 978-1-872531-65-6.
a b c d Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam, p. 39.
a b Esposito (1998), p. 17.
Moojan Momen (1985), p. 5.
Watt (1956), p. 175.
Watt (1956), p. 177.
"Ali ibn Abitalib". Encyclopedia Iranica.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2007. Retrieved 25 October 2007.
Fazlur Rahman (1979), p. 21.
John Kelsay (1993), p. 21.
William Montgomery Watt (7 February 1974). Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman.
Oxford University Press. pp. 112–14. ISBN 978-0-19-881078-0. Retrieved 29 December 2011.
a b Ibn Ishaq (translated by Guillaume, A. 1955) The Life of Muhammad.
Oxford University Press, Oxford. pp. 281–287.
Rodinson (2002), p. 164.
Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam, p. 45.
Glubb (2002), pp. 179–86.
Lewis (2002), p. 41.
Watt (1961), p. 123.
Rodinson (2002), pp. 168–69.
Lewis(2002), p. 44.
Russ Rodgers, The Generalship of Muhammad: Battles and Campaigns of the Prophet of Allah (University Press of Florida; 2012) ch 1.
a b Watt (1956), p. 178.
Maulana Muhammad Ali, Muhammad The Prophet, pp. 199–200.
Watt (1956), p. 179.
Zeitlin, Irving M. (2007). The Historical Muhammad.
John Wiley and Sons. p. 148. ISBN 978-0-7456-5488-1.
Faizer, Rizwi (2010). The Life of Muhammad: Al-Waqidi's Kitab al-Maghazi.
Routledge. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-136-92113-1.
Watt (1961), p. 132.
Watt (1961), p. 134.
a b Lewis (1960), p. 45.
C.F. Robinson, Uhud, Encyclopedia of Islam.
Watt (1964), p. 137.
Watt (1974), p. 137.
David Cook (2007), p. 24.
See:
Watt (1981), p. 432
Watt (1964), p. 144.
a b Watt (1956), p. 30.
Watt (1956), p. 34.
Watt (1956), p. 18.
Rubin, Uri (1990). "The Assassination of Kaʿb b. al-Ashraf". Oriens. 32 (1): 65–71. doi:10.2307/1580625. JSTOR 1580625.
Watt (1956), pp. 220–21.
Watt (1956), p. 35.
Watt (1956), pp. 36, 37.
See:
Rodinson (2002), pp. 209–11
Watt (1964), p. 169.
Watt (1964) pp. 170–72.
Peterson (2007), p. 126.
Ramadan (2007), p. 141.
Meri, Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia, p. 754.
Arafat. "New Light on the Story of Banu Qurayza and the Jews of Medina". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 1976: 100–07.
Ahmad, pp. 85–94.
Nemoy, "Barakat Ahmad's "Muhammad and the Jews", p. 325. Nemoy is sourcing Ahmad's Muhammad and the Jews.
Kister, "The Massacre of the Banu Quraiza".
Watt (1956), p. 39.
a b c d e Watt, Aisha, Encyclopedia of Islam.
Learning Islam 8. Islamic Services Foundation. 2009. p. D14. ISBN 978-1-933301-12-9.
Quran 2:196-210
Lings (1987), p. 249.
a b c d Watt, al- Hudaybiya or al-Hudaybiyya Encyclopedia of Islam.
F.E. Peters (25 July 2005). The Monotheists: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Conflict and Competition, Volume I: The Peoples of God.
Princeton University Press. p. 88. ISBN 978-0-691-12372-1. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2011.
Lewis (2002), p. 42.
Lings (1987), p. 255.
Vaglieri, Khaybar, Encyclopedia of Islam.
a b Lings (1987), p. 260.
a b Khan (1998), pp. 250–251.
F. Buhl, Muta, Encyclopedia of Islam.
a b c d Khan (1998), p. 274.
a b c Lings (1987), p. 291.
a b Khan (1998), pp. 274–75.
Lings (1987), p. 292.
Watt (1956), p. 66.
The Message by Ayatullah Ja'far Subhani, chapter 48 Archived 2 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine referencing Sirah by Ibn Hisham, vol.
II, page 409.
Rodinson (2002), p. 261.
Harold Wayne Ballard, Donald N. Penny, W. Glenn Jonas (2002), p. 163.
F.E. Peters (2003), p. 240.
Guillaume, Alfred (1955). The Life of Muhammad.
A translation of Ishaq's "Sirat Rasul Allah". Oxford University Press. p. 552. ISBN 978-0-19-636033-1. Retrieved 8 December 2011. Quraysh had put pictures in the Ka'ba including two of Jesus son of Mary and Mary (on both of whom be peace!). ... The apostle ordered that the pictures should be erased except those of Jesus and Mary.
Quran 110:1–3.
Watt (1974), p. 207.
M.A. al-Bakhit, Tabuk, Encyclopedia of Islam.
Haykal, M.H. (1933) The Life of Muhammad, translated by Isma'il Razi A. al-Faruqi.
The Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs, Cairo, Egypt and University of Chicago.
Husayn, M.J. Biography of Imam 'Ali Ibn Abi-Talib, Translation of Sirat Amir Al-Mu'minin, Translated by: Sayyid Tahir Bilgrami, Ansariyan Publications, Qum, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Lewis (1993), pp. 43–44.
Sultan, Sohaib (March 2011). The Koran For Dummies.
John Wiley and Sons.
ISBN 978-0-7645-5581-7.
Devin J. Stewart, Farewell Pilgrimage, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
Al-Hibri (2003), p. 17.
See:
Tabatabae, Tafsir Al-Mizan, vol. 9, pp. 227–47 Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine
"Comparing the Tafsir of various exegetes". Tafseer Comparison.
Archived from the original on 14 May 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2013.
The Last Prophet Archived 23 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine, p. 3. Lewis Lord of U.S. News & World Report. 7 April 2008.
Reşit Haylamaz (2013). The Luminous Life of Our Prophet.
Tughra Books. p. 355. ISBN 978-1-59784-681-3. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018.
Gülen, Fethullah (2000). Muhammad The Messenger of God.
The Light, Inc. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-932099-83-6.
Tafsir Ibn Kathir (Volume 5). DARUSSALAM. 2003. p. 214. ISBN 978-9960-892-76-4.
Buhl, F.; Welch, A.T. (1993). "Muhammad".  In Bearman, P.; Bianquis, Th.; Bosworth, C.E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W.P. (eds.). Encyclopaedia of Islam.
Vol. 7 (2nd ed.). Brill. p. 374. Then Mumammad suddenly fell ill, presumably of the ordinary Medina fever (al-Farazdak, ix, 13); but this was dangerous to a man physically and mentally overwrought.
Reşit Haylamaz; Fatih Harpci (7 August 2014). Prophet Muhammad – Sultan of Hearts – Vol 2. Tughra Books. p. 472. ISBN 978-1-59784-683-7.
Leila Ahmed (1986), 665–91 (686).
a b F.E. Peters (2003), p. 90 Archived 22 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
Ariffin, Syed Ahmad Iskandar Syed (2005). Architectural Conservation in Islam: Case Study of the Prophet's Mosque.
Penerbit UTM. p. 88. ISBN 978-983-52-0373-2.
"Prophet's Mosque". Archnet.org. 2 May 2005. Archived from the original on 23 March 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
"Isa", Encyclopedia of Islam.
Al-Haqqani, Shaykh Adil; Kabbani, Shaykh Hisham (2002). The Path to Spiritual Excellence.
ISCA. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-1-930409-18-7. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
a b Weston, Mark (2008). Prophets and princes: Saudi Arabia from Muhammad to the present.
John Wiley and Sons. pp. 102–03. ISBN 978-0-470-18257-4. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
a b Behrens-Abouseif, Doris; Vernoit, Stephen (2006). Islamic art in the 19th century: tradition, innovation, and eclecticism.
Brill. p. 22. ISBN 978-90-04-14442-2. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015.
Weston, Mark (2008). Prophets and princes: Saudi Arabia from Muhammad to the present.
John Wiley and Sons. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-470-18257-4. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
Cornell, Vincent J. (2007). Voices of Islam: Voices of the spirit.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-275-98734-3. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
Ernst, Carl W. (2004). Following Muhammad: Rethinking Islam in the contemporary world.
Univ of North Carolina Press. pp. 173–74. ISBN 978-0-8078-5577-5. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
Bennett, Clinton (1998). In search of Muhammad.
Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 182–83. ISBN 978-0-304-70401-9. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015.
Clark, Malcolm (2011). Islam For Dummies.
John Wiley and Sons. p. 165. ISBN 978-1-118-05396-6. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
See:
Holt (1977a), p. 57.
Hourani (2003), p. 22.
Lapidus (2002), p. 32.
Esposito (1998), p. 36.
Madelung (1996), p. 43.
Esposito (1998), pp. 35–36.
Cambridge History of Islam (1970), p. 30.
a b c Lewis (1998) Archived 8 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine
* Watt (1974), p. 234
Robinson (2004), p. 21.
Esposito (1998), p. 98.
R. Walzer, Ak̲h̲lāḳ, Encyclopaedia of Islam Online.
Islamic ethics, Encyclopedia of Ethics.
Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam, p. 34.
Esposito (1998), p. 30.
Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam, p. 52.
"Virtues and Merits of the Prophet (pbuh) and his Companions". Sunnah.com.
Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017.
"Virtues and Merits of the Prophet (pbuh) and his Companions". Sunnah.com.
Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017.
Ali Sultaan Asani; Kamal Abdel-Malek; Annemarie Schimmel (October 1995). Celebrating Muḥammad: images of the prophet in popular Muslim poetry.
University of South Carolina Press.
ISBN 978-1-57003-050-5. Retrieved 5 November 2011.
a b Annemarie Schimmel (1985). And Muhammad is his messenger: the veneration of the Prophet in Islamic piety.
University of North Carolina Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-8078-1639-4. Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 5 November 2011.
Al-Tirmidhi, Shama'il Muhammadiyah Archived 26 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Book 1, Hadith 5 & Book 1, Hadith 7/8.
a b Omid Safi (17 November 2009). Memories of Muhammad: why the Prophet matters.
HarperCollins. pp. 273–274. ISBN 978-0-06-123134-6. Retrieved 5 November 2011.
Carl W. Ernst.
Following Muhammad: Rethinking Islam in the Contemporary World. p. 78.
See for example Marco Schöller,  Banu Qurayza, Encyclopedia of the Quran mentioning the differing accounts of the status of Rayhana.
a b Barbara Freyer Stowasser, Wives of the Prophet, Encyclopedia of the Quran.
Subhani, Jafar. "Chapter 9". The Message.
Ansariyan Publications, Qom.
Archived from the original on 7 October 2010.
Esposito (1998), p. 18.
Bullough (1998), p. 119.
Reeves (2003), p. 46.
Momen (1985), p. 9.
a b c D. A. Spellberg, Politics, Gender, and the Islamic Past: the Legacy of A'isha bint Abi Bakr, Columbia University Press, 1994, p. 40.
Karen Armstrong, Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet, Harper San Francisco, 1992, p. 145.
Karen Armstrong, Muhammad: Prophet For Our Time, HarperPress, 2006, p. 105.
Muhammad Husayn Haykal, The Life of Muhammad, North American Trust Publications (1976), p. 139.
Barlas (2002), pp. 125–26.
A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy.
Oneworld Publications. pp. 143–44. ISBN 978-1-78074-420-9.
A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy.
Oneworld Publications. p. 316. ISBN 978-1-78074-420-9. Evidence that the Prophet waited for Aisha to reach physical maturity before consummation comes from al-Ṭabarī, who says she was too young for intercourse at the time of the marriage contract;
Sahih al-Bukhari, 5:58:234, Sahih al-Bukhari, 5:58:236, Sahih al-Bukhari, 7:62:64, Sahih al-Bukhari, 7:62:65, Sahih al-Bukhari, 7:62:88, Sahih Muslim, 8:3309, 8:3310, 8:3311, 41:4915, Sunan Abu Dawood, 41:4917
Tabari, volume 9, page 131; Tabari, volume 7, page 7.
Barlas, Asma (2012). "Believing Women" in Islam: Unreading Patriarchal Interpretations of the Qur'an.
University of Texas Press. p. 126. On the other hand, however, Muslims who calculate 'Ayesha's age based on details of her sister Asma's age, about whom more is known, as well as on details of the Hijra (the Prophet's migration from Mecca to Madina), maintain that she was over thirteen and perhaps between seventeen and nineteen when she got married.
Such views cohere with those Ahadith that claim that at her marriage Ayesha had "good knowledge of Ancient Arabic poetry and genealogy" and "pronounced the fundamental rules of Arabic Islamic ethics.
"The Concept of Polygamy and the Prophet's Marriages (Chapter: The Other Wives)". Archived from the original on 7 February 2011.
Ali, Muhammad (1997). Muhammad the Prophet.
Ahamadiyya Anjuman Ishaat Islam. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-913321-07-2. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
Ayatollah Qazvini. "Ayesha married the Prophet when she was young? (In Persian and Arabic)". Archived from the original on 26 September 2010.
A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy.
Oneworld Publications. pp. 146–47. ISBN 978-1-78074-420-9.
Tariq Ramadan (2007), pp. 168–69.
Asma Barlas (2002), p. 125.
Armstrong (1992), p. 157.
a b Nicholas Awde (2000), p. 10.
Ordoni (1990), pp. 32, 42–44.
"Ali". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya recorded the list of some names of Muhammad's female-slaves in Zad al-Ma'ad, Part I, p. 116.
"Slavery in Islam". BBC. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2016.
Farah (1994), p. 135.
Esposito (1998), p. 12.
Nigosian, S. A. (2004). Islam: Its History, Teaching, and Practices.
Indiana: Indiana University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-253-21627-4.
A.J. Wensinck, Muʿd̲j̲iza, Encyclopedia of Islam.
a b Denis Gril, Miracles, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
Daniel Martin Varisco, Moon, Encyclopedia of the Qur'an.
"A Restatement of the History of Islam and Muslims" chapter "Muhammad's Visit to Ta’if Archived 26 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine" on al-islam.org.
"Arabic Presentation Forms-A" (PDF). The Unicode Standard, Version 5.2. Mountain View, Ca.: Unicode, Inc. 1 October 2009. Retrieved 9 May 2010.
Muhammad, Encyclopædia Britannica, p. 9.
Suzanne Pinckney Stetkevych (24 May 2010). The mantle odes: Arabic praise poems to the Prophet Muḥammad.
Indiana University Press. p. xii.
ISBN 978-0-253-22206-0. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2012.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Encyclopædia Britannica, Muhammad, p. 13.
Ann Goldman, Richard Hain, Stephen Liben (2006), p. 212.
J. Schacht, Fiḳh, Encyclopedia of Islam.
Muhammad, Encyclopædia Britannica, pp. 11–12.
a b c Kees Wagtendonk (1987). "Images in Islam".  In Dirk van der Plas (ed.). Effigies dei: essays on the history of religions.
Brill. pp. 119–24. ISBN 978-90-04-08655-5. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2011.
John L. Esposito (2011). What everyone needs to know about Islam (2 ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 14–15. ISBN 978-0-19-979413-3. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015.
a b F.E. Peters (10 November 2010). Jesus and Muhammad: Parallel Tracks, Parallel Lives.
Oxford University Press. pp. 159–61. ISBN 978-0-19-974746-7. Archived from the original on 14 June 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2011.
Safi2010 (2 November 2010). 2 November 2010. HarperCollins. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-06-123135-3. Archived from the original on 14 June 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2011.
a b c Safi, Omid (5 May 2011). "Why Islam does (not) ban images of the Prophet". Washington Post.
Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2011.
a b c Freek L. Bakker (15 September 2009). The challenge of the silver screen: an analysis of the cinematic portraits of Jesus, Rama, Buddha and Muhammad.
Brill. pp. 207–09. ISBN 978-90-04-16861-9. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2011.
Christiane Gruber (2009). "Between Logos (Kalima) and Light (Nur): Representations of the Muslim Prophet Muhammad in Islamic Painting".  In Gulru Necipoglu (ed.). Muqarnas.
Vol. 26. Brill. pp. 234–35. ISBN 978-90-04-17589-1. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012.
a b c Johan Elverskog (2010). Buddhism and Islam on the Silk Road.
University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-8122-4237-9.
Johan Elverskog (2010). Buddhism and Islam on the Silk Road.
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 164–69. ISBN 978-0-8122-4237-9.
Christiane Gruber (2011). "When Nubuvvat encounters Valayat: Safavid painting of the "Prophet" Mohammad's Mi'raj, c. 1500–50".  In Pedram Khosronejad (ed.). The Art and Material Culture of Iranian Shi'ism: Iconography and Religious Devotion in Shi'i Islam. I. B. Tauris. pp. 46–47. ISBN 978-1-84885-168-9. Archived from the original on 2 January 2017.
Elizabeth Edwards; Kaushik Bhaumik (2008). Visual sense: a cultural reader.
Berg. p. 344. ISBN 978-1-84520-741-0. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
D. Fairchild Ruggles (2011). Islamic Art and Visual Culture: An Anthology of Sources.
John Wiley and Sons. p. 56. ISBN 978-1-4051-5401-7. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
a b Ali Boozari (2010). "Persian illustrated lithographed books on the miʻrāj: improving children's Shi'i beliefs in the Qajar period".  In Christiane J. Gruber; Frederick Stephen Colby (eds.). The Prophet's ascension: cross-cultural encounters with the Islamic mi'rāj tales.
Indiana University Press. pp. 252–54. ISBN 978-0-253-35361-0. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015.
Lewis (2002).
Warraq, Ibn (2007). Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism.
Prometheus Books. p. 147. ISBN 978-1-61592-020-4. Indeed, [Postel's] greater tolerance for other religions was much in evidence in Πανθενωδια: compostio omnium dissidiorum, where, astonishingly for the sixteenth century, he argued that Muhammad ought to be esteemed even in Christendom as a genuine prophet.
a b c d Brockopp, Jonathan E (2010). The Cambridge Companion to Muḥammad.
New York: Cambridge UP. pp. 240–42. ISBN 978-0-521-71372-6.
Talk Of Napoleon At St.
Helena (1903), pp. 279–80.
Brockopp, Jonathan E., ed. (2010). The Cambridge Companion to Muhammad.
Cambridge Companions to Religion.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-71372-6. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013.
Younos, Farid (2010). Islamic Culture.
Cambridge Companions to Religion.
AuthorHouse. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-4918-2344-6.
Carlyle, Thomas (1841). On heroes, hero worship and the heroic in history.
London: James Fraser. p. 87.
Kecia Ali (2014). The Lives of Muhammad.
Harvard UP. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-674-74448-6. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015.
Ian Almond, History of Islam in German Thought: From Leibniz to Nietzsche, Routledge (2009), p. 93.
Tolan, John. "The Prophet Muhammad: A Model of Monotheistic Reform for Nineteenth-Century Ashkenaz." Common Knowledge, vol. 24 no. 2, 2018, pp. 256–279.
Watt, Bell (1995) p. 18.
Watt (1974), p. 232.
Watt (1974), p. 17.
Watt, The Cambridge History of Islam, p. 37.
Lewis (1993), p. 45.
Smith, P. (1999). A Concise Encyclopedia of the Baháʼí Faith.
Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications. p. 251. ISBN 978-1-85168-184-6.
"A Baháʼí Approach to the Claim of Finality in Islam". bahai-library.com.
Archived from the original on 19 June 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016.
C. Brockman, Norbert (2011). Encyclopedia of Sacred Places, 2nd Edition [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. p. 259. ISBN 978-1-59884-655-3.
Hitti, Philip K. (1928). The Origins of the Druze People and Religion: With Extracts from Their Sacred Writings.
Library of Alexandria. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-4655-4662-3.
Dana, Nissim (2008). The Druze in the Middle East: Their Faith, Leadership, Identity and Status.
Michigan University press. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-903900-36-9.
Gottheil, Richard; Montgomery, Mary W.; Grimme, Hubert (1906). "Mohammed". Jewish Encyclopedia.
Kopelman Foundation.
Norman A. Stillman (1979). The Jews of Arab Lands: A History and Source Book.
Jewish Publication Society. p. 236. ISBN 978-0-8276-0198-7.
Andrew G. Bostom, The Legacy of Islamic Antisemitism: From Sacred Texts to Solemn History, p. 21.
a b Quinn, Frederick (2008). "The Prophet as Antichrist and Arab Lucifer (Early Times to 1600)". The Sum of All Heresies: The Image of Islam in Western Thought.
New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 17–54. ISBN 978-0-19-532563-8.
Goddard, Hugh (2000). "The First Age of Christian-Muslim Interaction (c. 830/215)". A History of Christian-Muslim Relations.
Edinburgh University Press. pp. 34–41. ISBN 978-1-56663-340-6.
Curtis, Michael (2009). Orientalism and Islam: European Thinkers on Oriental Despotism in the Middle East and India.
New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-521-76725-5.
Buhl, F.; Welch, A.T. (1993). "Muḥammad". Encyclopaedia of Islam. 7 (2nd ed.). Brill. pp. 360–376. ISBN 90-04-09419-9.
Cimino, Richard (December 2005). ""No God in Common": American Evangelical Discourse on Islam after 9/11". Review of Religious Research. 47 (2): 162–74. doi:10.2307/3512048. JSTOR 3512048.
Willis, John Ralph, ed. (2013). Slaves and Slavery in Muslim Africa: Islam and the Ideology of Enslavement.
Vol. 1. New York: Routledge. pp. vii–xi, 3–26. ISBN 978-0-7146-3142-4.; Willis, John Ralph, ed. (1985). Slaves and Slavery in Muslim Africa: The Servile Estate.
Vol. 2. New York: Routledge. pp. vii–xi.
ISBN 978-0-7146-3201-8.
Spellberg, Denise A. (1996). Politics, Gender, and the Islamic Past: The Legacy of 'A'isha Bint Abi Bakr.
Columbia University Press. pp. 39–40. ISBN 978-0-231-07999-0.
Sources
A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2011). Muhammad: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-955928-2.
A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy.
Oneworld Publications.
ISBN 978-1-78074-420-9.
Ahmed, Leila (Summer 1986). "Women and the Advent of Islam". Signs. 11 (4): 665–91. doi:10.1086/494271. S2CID 144943406.
Ali, Kecia (2014). The Lives of Muhammad.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-74448-6.
Ali, Muhammad Mohar (1997). The Biography of the Prophet and the Orientalists.
King Fahd Complex for the Printing of the Holy Qur'an.
ISBN 978-9960-770-68-0.
Wijdan, Ali (28 August 1999). "From the Literal to the Spiritual: The Development of Prophet Muhammad's Portrayal from 13th century Ilkhanid Miniatures to 17th century Ottoman Art". Proceedings of the 11th International Congress of Turkish Art (7): 1–24.
Armstrong, Karen (1992). Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet.
Harpercollins.
ISBN 978-0-06-250886-7.
Awde, Nicholas (2000). Women in Islam: An Anthology from the Quran and Hadith.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-7007-1012-6.
Ballard, Harold Wayne; Donald N. Penny; W. Glenn Jonas (2002). A Journey of Faith: An Introduction to Christianity.
Mercer University Press.
ISBN 978-0-86554-746-9.
Barlas, Asma (2002). Believing Women in Islam.
University of Texas Press.
ISBN 978-0-292-70904-1.
Bogle, Emory C. (1998). Islam: Origin and Belief.
Texas University Press.
ISBN 978-0-292-70862-4.
Brown, Daniel (2003). A New Introduction to Islam.
Blackwell Publishing Professional.
ISBN 978-0-631-21604-9.
Bullough, Vern L; Brenda Shelton; Sarah Slavin (1998). The Subordinated Sex: A History of Attitudes Toward Women.
University of Georgia Press.
ISBN 978-0-8203-2369-5.
Cohen, Mark R. (1995). Under Crescent and Cross (Reissue ed.). Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-01082-3.
Dakake, Maria Massi (2008). The Charismatic Community: Shi'ite Identity in Early Islam.
SUNY Press.
ISBN 978-0-7914-7033-6.
Donner, Fred (1998). Narratives of Islamic Origins: The Beginnings of Islamic Historical Writing.
Darwin Press.
ISBN 978-0-87850-127-4.
Ernst, Carl (2004). Following Muhammad: Rethinking Islam in the Contemporary World.
University of North Carolina Press.
ISBN 978-0-8078-5577-5.
Esposito, John (1998). Islam: The Straight Path.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-511233-7.
Esposito, John (1999). The Islamic Threat: Myth Or Reality?. Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-513076-8.
Esposito, John (2002). What Everyone Needs to Know About Islam.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0.
Farah, Caesar (1994). Islam: Beliefs and Observances (5th ed.). Barron's Educational Series.
ISBN 978-0-8120-1853-0.
Glubb, John Bagot (2002) . The Life and Times of Muhammad.
Hodder and Stoughton.
ISBN 978-0-8154-1176-5.
Goldman, Elizabeth (1995). Believers: spiritual leaders of the world.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-508240-1.
Goldman, Ann; Richard Hain; Stephen Liben (2006). Oxford Textbook of Palliative Care for Children.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-852653-7.
Haaren, John Henry; Addison B. Poland (1904). Famous Men of the Middle Ages.
University Publishing Company.
ISBN 978-1-882514-05-2.
Al-Hibri, Azizah Y. (2003). "An Islamic Perspective on Domestic Violence". 27 Fordham International Law Journal 195.
Holt, P. M.; Ann K. S. Lambton; Bernard Lewis (1977). The Cambridge History of Islam (paperback). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-29135-4.
Hourani, Albert; Ruthven, Malise (2003). A History of the Arab Peoples.
Belknap Press; Revised edition.
ISBN 978-0-674-01017-8.
ibn Isa, Muhammad (Imam Tirmidhi) (2011). Syama'il Muhammadiyah: KeanggunanMu Ya Rasulullah (Hardcover) (in Arabic and Malay). Malaysia: PTS Islamika Sdn.
Bhd. p. 388. ISBN 978-967-366-064-3.
Ishaq, Ibn (2002).  Guillaume, Alfred (ed.). The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ibn Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-636033-1.
Jacobs, Louis (1995). The Jewish Religion: A Companion.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-826463-7.
Kelsay, John (1993). Islam and War: A Study in Comparative Ethics.
Westminster John Knox Press.
ISBN 978-0-664-25302-8.
Khan, Majid Ali (1998). Muhammad The Final Messenger.
Islamic Book Service, New Delhi, 110002 (India). ISBN 978-81-85738-25-3.
Kochler, Hans (1982). Concept of Monotheism in Islam & Christianity. I.P.O. ISBN 978-3-7003-0339-8.
Lapidus, Ira (2002). A History of Islamic Societies (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-77933-3.
Larsson, Göran (2003). Ibn Garcia's Shu'Ubiyya Letter: Ethnic and Theological Tensions in Medieval Al-Andalus.
Brill Academic Publishers.
ISBN 978-90-04-12740-1.
Lewis, Bernard (2002) . The Arabs in History.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-280310-8.
Lewis, Bernard (1992). Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry (Reprint ed.). Oxford University Press, US. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5.
Lewis, Bernard (21 January 1998). "Islamic Revolution". The New York Review of Books.
Lings, Martin (1983). Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources.
Islamic Texts Society.
ISBN 978-0-946621-33-0. US edn. by Inner Traditions International, Ltd.
Madelung, Wilferd (1997). The Succession to Muhammad: A Study of the Early Caliphate.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-64696-3.
Momen, Moojan (1985). An Introduction to Shi'i Islam: The History and Doctrines of Twelver Shiʻism.
Yale University Press.
ISBN 978-0-300-03531-5.
Neusner, Jacob (2003). God's Rule: The Politics of World Religions.
Georgetown University Press.
ISBN 978-0-87840-910-5.
Nigosian, S. A. (2004). Islam:Its History, Teaching, and Practices.
Indiana University Press.
ISBN 978-0-253-21627-4.
Ordoni, Abu Muhammad; Muhammad Kazim Qazwini (1992). Fatima the Gracious.
Ansariyan Publications.
ASIN B000BWQ7N6.
Peters, Francis Edward (2003). Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-11553-5.
Peters, Francis Edward (2003). The Monotheists: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Conflict and Competition.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-11461-3. ASIN: B0012385Z6.
Peters, Francis Edward (1994). Muhammad and the Origins of Islam.
SUNY Press.
ISBN 978-0-7914-1876-5.
Peters, F.E. (1991). "The Quest of the Historical Muhammad". International Journal of Middle East Studies. 23 (3): 291–315. doi:10.1017/S0020743800056312. S2CID 162433825.
Peterson, Daniel (2007). Muhammad, Prophet of God.
Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.
ISBN 978-0-8028-0754-0.
Rahman, Fazlur (1979). Islam.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-70281-0.
Ramadan, Tariq (2007). In the Footsteps of the Prophet: Lessons from the Life of Muhammad.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-530880-8.
Reeves, Minou (2003). Muhammad in Europe: A Thousand Years of Western Myth-Making.
NYU Press.
ISBN 978-0-8147-7564-6.
Robinson, David (2004). Muslim Societies in African History.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-82627-3.
Rodinson, Maxime (2002). Muhammad: Prophet of Islam.
Tauris Parke Paperbacks.
ISBN 978-1-86064-827-4.
Rue, Loyal (2005). Religion Is Not about God: How Spiritual Traditions Nurture Our Biological.
Rutgers.
ISBN 978-0-8135-3955-3.
Serin, Muhittin (1998). Hattat Aziz Efendi.
Istanbul.
ISBN 978-975-7663-03-4. OCLC 51718704.
Sikand, Yoginder (2004). Muslims in India since 1947: Islamic perspectives on inter-faith relations.
London: RoutledgeCurzon.
ISBN 978-0-415-31486-2.
Tabatabae, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn.
AL-MIZAN:AN EXEGESIS OF THE QUR'AN, translation by S. Saeed Rizvi.
WOFIS. ISBN 978-964-6521-14-8.
Teed, Peter (1992). A Dictionary of Twentieth Century History.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-211676-5.
Turner, Colin (2005). Islam: The Basics.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-34106-6.
Watt, W. Montgomery (1961). Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-881078-0. (New edition 1974)
Watt, W. Montgomery (1956). Muhammad at Medina.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-577307-1.
Watt, W. Montgomery (1953). Muhammad at Mecca.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-577277-7. ASIN: B000IUA52A.
Further reading
See also: List of biographies of Muhammad
Berg, Herbert, ed. (2003). Method and Theory in the Study of Islamic Origins. E. J. Brill.
ISBN 978-90-04-12602-2.
Cook, Michael (1983). Muhammad.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-287605-8.
Guillaume, Alfred (1955). The Life of Muhammad: A translation of Ibn Ishaq's Sirat Rasul Allah.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0-19-636033-1.
Hamidullah, Muhammad (1998). The Life and Work of the Prophet of Islam.
Islamabad: Islamic Research Institute.
ISBN 978-969-8413-00-2.
Motzki, Harald, ed. (2000). The Biography of Muhammad: The Issue of the Sources – Islamic History and Civilization: Studies and Texts, Vol. 32. Brill.
ISBN 978-90-04-11513-2.
Musa, A.Y. Hadith as Scripture: Discussions on The Authority Of Prophetic Traditions in Islam, New York: Palgrave, 2008
Rubin, Uri (1995). The Eye of the Beholder: The Life of Muhammad as Viewed by the Early Muslims (A Textual Analysis). Darwin Press.
ISBN 978-0-87850-110-6.
Schimmel, Annemarie (1985). And Muhammad is His Messenger: The Veneration of the Prophet in Islamic Piety.
The University of North Carolina Press.
ISBN 978-0-8078-4128-0.
Ali, Tariq, "Winged Words" (review of Maxime Rodinson, Muhammad, translated by Anne Carter, NYRB, March 2021, 373 pp., ISBN 978 1 68137 492 5), London Review of Books, vol. 43, no. 12 (17 June 2021), pp. 11–14.
External links
Muhammad  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteData from Wikidata
Muhammad at Curlie
MuhammadRelativesParents
Abdullah ibn Abd al-Muttalib
Aminah
Foster parents
Sobia
Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb
Foster brothers and sisters
Hamza ibn Abd al-Muttalib (Uncle)
Abu Salama Abd Allah ibn Abd al-Asad
Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith
Wives
Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Sawda bint Zamʿa
Aisha
Hafsa bint Umar
Zaynab bint Khuzayma
Umm Salama
Zaynab bint Jahsh
Jawairia bint Harith
Maria al-Qibtiyya
Ramla bint Abi Sufyan
Safiyya bint Huyayy
Maymunah bint al-Harith
ChildrenChildren
Qasim ibn Muhammad
Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad
Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
Zainab bint Muhammad
Ruqayyah bint Muhammad
Umm Kulthum bint Muhammad
Fatimah
Zayd ibn Harithah (Adopted)
Grandchildren
Hasan ibn Ali
Husayn ibn Ali
Muhsin ibn Ali
Zaynab bint Ali
Umm Kulthum bint Ali
Umamah bint Zainab
Miracles
Quran
Splitting of the Moon
Isra and Mi'raj
Events
Hijra
Expeditions
Farewell Pilgrimage
Farewell Sermon
Delegates Year
Year of Sorrow
Aqaba pledge of allegiance
Muhammad's visit to Ta'if
People
Abu Bakr
Umar
Uthman (Son-in-law)
Ali (Son-in-law and Cousin)
Ja'far ibn Abi Talib (Cousin)
Hamza ibn Abdul-Muttalib (Uncle)
Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib (Uncle)
Abū Lahab (Uncle)
Al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib (Uncle)
Abd al-Muttalib (Grandfather)
Ibn Abbas (Cousin)
Abu Sufyan ibn Harb
Waraqah ibn Nawfal
Zayd ibn Harithah (Khadija's slave and Adopted son)
Hassan ibn Thabit (poet)
Bilal ibn Rabah
Anas ibn Malik
Umm Ayman
Gabriel
Related topics
Mawlid
Naat
Durood
Salam
Al-Burda
Tala' al Badru 'Alayna
Family tree of Muhammad
Muhammad's letters to the heads of state
Names and titles of Muhammad
Hadith
Muhammad and the Bible
Related things
Possessions of Muhammad
Sacred Relics (Topkapı Palace)
Pulpit
Qaswa (Camel)
Seal of Muhammad
BooksHadith
Sahih al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim
Jami` at-Tirmidhi
Sunan ibn Majah
Sunan Abu Dawood
Al-Sunan al-Sughra
Kitab al-Kafi
Books about
Sirat Ibn Hisham
Al-Muwahib al-Ladunniyyah
Sirat-un-Nabi
Ar-Raheeq Al-Makhtum
Sirat-un-Nabi
Ash-Shifa
Shama'il Muhammadiyah
Durood
Durod e Ibrahimi
Dala'il al-Khayrat
PlacesCities
Mecca
Medina
Ta'if
Khaybar
Jerusalem
Abyssinia
Mutah
Tabuk
Symbolic
Jabal al-Nour
Mount Uhud
Jabal Thawr
Mina, Saudi Arabia
Muzdalifah
Mount Arafat
Green Dome
Al-Baqi'
Mosques
Masjid al-Haram
Al-Masjid an-Nabawi
Masjid al-Aqsa
Mosque with the two Qiblas
Quba Mosque
Articles related to Muhammad
Prophets in the Quranآدمإدريسنوحهودصالحإبراهيملوطإسماعيل
Adam
Adam
Idris
Enoch (?)
Nuh
Noah
Hud
Eber (?)
Salih
Selah (?)
Ibrahim
Abraham
Lut
Lot
Ismail
Ishmael
إسحاقيعقوبيوسفأيوبشُعيبموسىهارونذو الكفلداود
Is'haq
Isaac
Yaqub
Jacob
Yusuf
Joseph
Ayyub
Job
Shuayb
Jethro (?)
Musa
Moses
Harun
Aaron
Dhul-Kifl
Ezekiel (?)
Gautama Buddha (?)
Daud
David
سليمانإلياسإليسعيونسزكريايحيىعيسىمُحمد
Sulaiman
Solomon
Ilyas
Elijah
Al-Yasa
Elisha
Yunus
Jonah
Zakariya
Zechariah
Yahya
John
Isa
Jesus
Muhammad
Muhammad
Note: Muslims believe that there were many prophets sent by God to mankind.
The Islamic prophets above are only the ones mentioned by name in the Quran.
People and things in the QuranCharactersNon-humans
Allāh ('The God')
Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Karīm (Generous)
AnimalsRelated
The baqarah (cow) of Israelites
The dhiʾb (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph
The fīl (elephant) of the Abyssinians
Ḥimār (Domesticated donkey)
The hud-hud (hoopoe) of Solomon
The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave
The namlah (female ant) of Solomon
The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah
The nāqat (she-camel) of Ṣāliḥ
Non-related
ʿAnkabūt (Female spider)
Dābbat al-Arḍ (Beast of the Earth)
Ḥimār (Wild ass)
Naḥl (Honey bee)
Qaswarah ('Lion', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter')
Malāʾikah (Angels)
Angels of Hell
Mālik
Zabāniyah
Bearers of the Throne
Harut and Marut
Kirāman Kātibīn (Honourable Scribes)
Raqib
Atid
Munkar and Nakir
Riḍwan
Archangels
Jibrīl (Gabriel, chief)
Ar-Rūḥ ('The Spirit')
Ar-Rūḥ al-Amīn ('The Trustworthy Spirit')
Ar-Rūḥ al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit')
Angel of the Trumpet (Isrāfīl or Raphael)
Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael)
Mīkāil (Michael)
Jinn (Genies)
Jann
ʿIfrīt
Qarīn
Sila
Shayāṭīn (Demons)
Iblīs ash-Shayṭān (the (chief) Devil)
Mārid ('Rebellious one')
Others
Ghilmān or Wildān
Ḥūr
ProphetsMentioned
Ādam (Adam)
Al-Yasaʿ (Elisha)
Ayyūb (Job)
Dāwūd (David)
Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?)
Hārūn (Aaron)
Hūd (Eber?)
Idrīs (Enoch?)
Ilyās (Elijah)
ʿImrān (Joachim the father of Maryam)
Isḥāq (Isaac)
Ismāʿīl (Ishmael)
Dhabih Ullah
Lūṭ (Lot)
Ṣāliḥ
Shuʿayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab?)
Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd (Solomon son of David)
ʿUzair (Ezra?)
Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā (John the Baptist the son of Zechariah)
Yaʿqūb (Jacob)
Isrāʾīl (Israel)
Yūnus (Jonah)
Dhūn-Nūn ('He of the Fish (or Whale)' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)')
Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūt ('Companion of the Whale')
Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb (Joseph son of Jacob)
Zakariyyā (Zechariah)
Ulul-ʿAzm('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will')
Muḥammad
Aḥmad
Other names and titles of Muhammad
ʿĪsā (Jesus)
Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah)
Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary)
Mūsā Kalīmullāh (Moses He who spoke to God)
Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh (Abraham Friend of God)
Nūḥ (Noah)
Debatable ones
Dhūl-Qarnain
Luqmān
Maryam (Mary)
Ṭālūt (Saul or Gideon?)
Implied
Irmiyā (Jeremiah)
Ṣamūʾīl (Samuel)
Yūshaʿ ibn Nūn (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses)
People of ProphetsGood ones
Adam's immediate relatives
Martyred son
Wife
Believer of Ya-Sin
Family of Noah
Father Lamech
Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos
Luqman's son
People of Abraham
Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo
Ishmael's mother
Isaac's mother
People of Jesus
Disciples (including Peter)
Mary's mother
Zechariah's wife
People of Solomon
Mother
Queen of Sheba
Vizier
Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son)
People of Joseph
Brothers (including Binyāmin (Benjamin) and Simeon)
Egyptians
ʿAzīz (Potiphar, Qatafir or Qittin)
Malik (King Ar-Rayyān ibn Al-Walīd))
Wife of ʿAzīz (Zulaykhah)
Mother
People of Aaron and Moses
Egyptians
Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura)
Imraʾat Firʿawn (Āsiyá bint Muzāḥim the Wife of Pharaoh, who adopted Moses)
Magicians of the Pharaoh
Wise, pious man
Moses' wife
Moses' sister-in-law
Mother
Sister
Evil ones
Āzar (possibly Terah)
Firʿawn (Pharaoh of Moses' time)
Hāmān
Jālūt (Goliath)
Qārūn (Korah, cousin of Moses)
As-Sāmirī
Abū Lahab
Slayers of Ṣāliḥ's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr)
Implied ornot specified
Abraha
Abu Bakr
Bal'am/Balaam
Barṣīṣā
Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua
Luqman's son
Nebuchadnezzar II
Nimrod
Rahmah the wife of Ayyub
Shaddad
GroupsMentioned
Aṣḥāb al-Jannah
People of Paradise
People of the Burnt Garden
Aṣḥāb as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath)
Jesus' apostles
Ḥawāriyyūn (Disciples of Jesus)
Companions of Noah's Ark
Aṣḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm (Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?
Companions of the Elephant
People of al-Ukhdūd
People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin
People of Yathrib or Medina
Qawm Lūṭ (People of Sodom and Gomorrah)
Nation of Noah
Tribes, ethnicitiesor families
‘Ajam
Ar-Rūm (literally 'The Romans')
Banī Isrāʾīl (Children of Israel)
Muʾtafikāt (Sodom and Gomorrah)
People of Ibrahim
People of Ilyas
People of Nuh
People of Shuaib
Ahl Madyan People of Madyan)
Aṣḥāb al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood')
Qawm Yūnus (People of Jonah)
Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog
People of Fir'aun
Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad)
Aṣḥāb Muḥammad (Companions of Muhammad)
Anṣār (literally 'Helpers')
Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina)
People of Mecca
Wife of Abu Lahab
Children of Ayyub
Sons of Adam
Wife of Nuh
Wife of Lut
Yaʾjūj wa Maʾjūj (Gog and Magog)
Son of Nuh
Aʿrāb (Arabs or Bedouins)
ʿĀd (people of Hud)
Companions of the Rass
Qawm Tubbaʿ (People of Tubba)
People of Sabaʾ or Sheba
Quraysh
Thamūd (people of Ṣāliḥ)
Aṣḥāb al-Ḥijr ('Companions of the Stoneland')
Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household')
Household of Abraham
Brothers of Yūsuf
Lot's daughters
Progeny of Imran
Household of Moses
Household of Muhammad
ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim
Daughters of Muhammad
Muhammad's wives
Household of Salih
Implicitlymentioned
Amalek
Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah)
Banu Nadir
Banu Qaynuqa
Banu Qurayza
Iranian people
Umayyad Dynasty
Aus and Khazraj
People of Quba
Religious groups
Ahl al-Dhimmah
Kāfirūn
disbelievers
Majūs Zoroastrians
Munāfiqūn (Hypocrites)
Muslims
Believers
Ahl al-Kitāb (People of the Book)
Naṣārā (Christian(s) or People of the Injil)
Ruhban (Christian monks)
Qissis (Christian priest)
Yahūd (Jews)
Ahbār (Jewish scholars)
Rabbani/Rabbi
Sabians
Polytheists
Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad
Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot
LocationsMentioned
Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land')
'Blessed' Land'
Al-Jannah (Paradise, literally 'The Garden')
Jahannam (Hell)
Door of Hittah
Madyan (Midian)
Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn
Miṣr (Mainland Egypt)
Salsabīl (A river in Paradise)
In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan)
Al-Aḥqāf ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills')
Iram dhāt al-ʿImād (Iram of the Pillars)
Al-Madīnah (formerly Yathrib)
ʿArafāt and Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām
Al-Ḥijr (Hegra)
Badr
Ḥunayn
Makkah (Mecca)
Bakkah
Ḥaraman Āminan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure')
Kaʿbah (Kaaba)
Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham)
Safa and Marwa
Sabaʾ (Sheba)
ʿArim Sabaʾ (Dam of Sheba)
Rass
Sinai Region or Tīh Desert
Al-Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa)
Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai)
Al-Buqʿah Al-Mubārakah ('The Blessed Place')
Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor
In Mesopotamia
Al-Jūdiyy
Munzalanm-Mubārakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed')
Bābil (Babylon)
Qaryat Yūnus ('Township of Jonah,' that is Nineveh)
Religious locations
Bayʿa (Church)
Miḥrāb
Monastery
Masjid (Mosque, literally 'Place of Prostration')
Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām ('The Sacred Grove')
Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā (Al-Aqsa Mosque, literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration')
Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca)
Masjid al-Dirar
A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly:
Masjid Qubāʾ (Quba Mosque)
The Prophet's Mosque
Salat (Synagogue)
Implied
Antioch
Antakya
Arabia
Al-Ḥijāz (literally 'The Barrier')
Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il
Cave of Hira
Ghār ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull)
Hudaybiyyah
Ta'if
Ayla
Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn
Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha
Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia)
Canaan
Cave of Seven Sleepers
Dār an-Nadwa
Jordan River
Nile River
Palestine River
Paradise of Shaddad
Events, incidents, occasions or times
Incident of Ifk
Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree)
Event of Mubahala
Sayl al-ʿArim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba)
The Farewell Pilgrimage
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Battles ormilitary expeditions
Battle of al-Aḥzāb ('the Confederates')
Battle of Badr
Battle of Hunayn
Battle of Khaybar
Battle of Uhud
Expedition of Tabuk
Conquest of Mecca
Days
Al-Jumuʿah (The Friday)
As-Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday)
Days of battles
Days of Hajj
Doomsday
Months of theIslamic calendar
Ash-Shahr Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred or Forbidden Month)
Ramaḍān
Pilgrimages
Al-Ḥajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage)
Al-ʿUmrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage)
Times for prayeror remembranceTimes for Duʿāʾ ('Invocation'), Ṣalāh and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Taḥmīd ('Praising'), Takbīr and Tasbīḥ):
Al-ʿAshiyy (The Afternoon or the Night)
Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings')
Al-Bukrah ('The Morning')
Aṣ-Ṣabāḥ ('The Morning')
Al-Layl ('The Night')
Al-ʿIshāʾ ('The Late-Night')
Aẓ-Ẓuhr ('The Noon')
Dulūk ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun')
Al-Masāʾ ('The Evening')
Qabl al-Ghurūb ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)')
Al-Aṣīl ('The Afternoon')
Al-ʿAṣr ('The Afternoon')
Qabl ṭulūʿ ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun')
Al-Fajr ('The Dawn')Implied
Ghadir Khumm
Laylat al-Mabit
The first pilgrimage
OtherHoly books
Al-Injīl (The Gospel of Jesus)
Al-Qurʾān (The Book of Muhammad)
Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrāhīm (Scroll(s) of Abraham)
At-Tawrāt (The Torah)
Ṣuḥuf-i-Mūsā (Scroll(s) of Moses)
Tablets of Stone
Az-Zabūr (The Psalms of David)
Umm al-Kitāb ('Mother of the Book(s)')
Objects of peopleor beings
Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles
Noah's Ark
Staff of Musa
Tābūt as-Sakīnah (Casket of Shekhinah)
Throne of Bilqis
Trumpet of Israfil
Mentioned idols(cult images)
'Ansāb
Jibt and Ṭāghūt (False god)
Of Israelites
Baʿal
The ʿijl (golden calf statue) of Israelites
Of Noah's people
Nasr
Suwāʿ
Wadd
Yaghūth
Yaʿūq
Of Quraysh
Al-Lāt
Al-ʿUzzā
Manāt
Celestial bodiesMaṣābīḥ (literally 'lamps'):
Al-Qamar (The Moon)
Kawākib (Planets)
Al-Arḍ (The Earth)
Nujūm (Stars)
Ash-Shams (The Sun)Plant matter
Baṣal (Onion)
Fūm (Garlic or wheat)
Shaṭʾ (Shoot)
Sūq (Plant stem)
Zarʿ (Seed)
Fruits
ʿAdas (Lentil)
Baql (Herb)
Qith-thāʾ (Cucumber)
Rummān (Pomegranate)
Tīn (Fig)
Zaytūn (Olive)
In Paradise
Forbidden fruit of Adam
Bushes, treesor plants
Plants of Sheba
Athl (Tamarisk)
Sidr (Lote-tree)
Līnah (Tender Palm tree)
Nakhl (Date palm)
Sidrat al-Muntahā
Zaqqūm
Liquids
Māʾ (Water or fluid)
Nahr (River)
Yamm (River or sea)
Sharāb (Drink)
Note: Names are sorted alphabetically.
Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship)
Islam topicsOutline of IslamBeliefs
God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad
In Islam
Prophets of Islam
Angels
Revelation
Qadar
Judgement Day
Five Pillars
Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj
HistoryLeaders
Timeline of Islamic history
Succession to Muhammad
Early conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman
Religious texts
Quran
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah
Story of Prophets
Denominations
Sunni
Ash'ari, Maturidi and Hanbali
Sufi
Salafi
Shia
Twelver Shia
Isma'ilism
Alawites
Alevism
Bektashi Alevism
Zaidiyyah
Ibadi
Nation of Islam
Ahmadiyya
Lahori
Quranism
Non-denominational
LifeCulture
Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Flags
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science
Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
LawJurisprudenceEconomics
Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba
Hygiene
Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu
FamilyMarriageSex
Haya
Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Nikah
Nikah mut'ah
Zina
Other aspects
Baligh
Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military
POWs
Slavery
Sources of law
Theological
kalam
Schools of islamic jurisprudence
Islamic studiesArts
Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery
Medieval science
Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics
Philosophy
Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological
Other areas
Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature
poetry
Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques
OtherOther religions
Christianity
Mormonism
Protestantism
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism
Apostasy
Apostasy in Islam by country
Ex-Muslims
List of former Muslims
List of ex-Muslim organisations
Related topics
Criticism of Islam
Muhammad
Quran
Cultural Muslim
Islamism
Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Islamophobia
Incidents
Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism
Islam portal
Category
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Depictions of MuhammadHistory
Muhammad in Islam
Aniconism in Islam
Hadith
collections
Ibn Ishaq
Ibn Hisham
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari
Hilya
Controversies
Lars Vilks drawings
Everybody Draw Mohammed Day
The Satanic Verses controversy
Trial of Ghazi Beji and Jabeur Mejri
Jyllands-Posten cartoons
Descriptions
Reprints
Opinions
Timeline
Akkari-Laban dossier
Protest outside the Danish embassy in London
Bombing of Danish embassy in Islamabad
Charlie Hebdo
Issue No. 1011
Issue No. 1178
Je suis Charlie
BooksBiographies  of Muhammad (Category)
Sirah Rasul Allah
Shama'il Muhammadiyah
Sirat-un-Nabi
Al-Sira Al-Nabawiyya (Ibn Kathir)
Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya
Al-Khasais-ul-Kubra
Siyer-i Nebi
Marzban-nama
Ar-Raheeq Al-Makhtum
Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet
Muhammad: A Prophet for Our Time
Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources
The Life and Religion of Mohammed
Muhammad
Muhammad at Mecca
Muhammad at Medina
Captain Stormfield's Visit to Heaven
Inferno
Izhar ul-Haqq
Mahomet
Muhammad: The "Banned" Images
Rangila Rasul
Seeing Islam as Others Saw It
The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History
The Cartoons that Shook the World
The Jewel of Medina
The Quest for the Historical Muhammad
The Truth About Muhammad
Vita Mahumeti
Films (Category)
Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet
Muhammad: The Last Prophet
The Message
Islam: Empire of Faith
Innocence of Muslims
Islam: What the West Needs to Know
Fetih 1453
Muhammad: The Messenger of God
Bilal
Television
Muhammad: The Final Legacy
The Life of Muhammad
Islam: The Untold Story
Omar
Khaybar
South Park
"Super Best Friends"
"Cartoon Wars Part I"
"Cartoon Wars Part II"
"200"
"201"
Video games
Quraish
Muslim Massacre
Faith Fighter
Category
Commons
Islam portal
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Sweden
Art research institutes
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
MusicBrainz artist
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
İslâm Ansiklopedisi
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisourceWikiversity
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 20:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
