North America - Wikipedia
North America
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Continent in the Northern Hemisphere
"North American" redirects here.
For other uses, see North American (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Northern America or Northern United States.
North AmericaArea24,709,000 km2 (9,540,000 sq mi) (3rd)Population592,296,233 (2021; 4th)Population density25.7/km2 (66.4/sq mi) (2021)[a]GDP (PPP)$30.61 trillion (2022 est.; 2nd)GDP (nominal)$29.01 trillion (2022 est.; 2nd)GDP per capita$57,410 (2022 est.; 2nd)[c]ReligionsChristianity (74.6%)No religion (19.2%)Judaism (1.6%)Islam (1.3%)Hinduism (1.2%)Other (2.1%)DemonymNorth AmericanCountries23 sovereign statesDependencies23 non-sovereign territoriesLanguagesEnglish, Spanish, French, Dutch, Danish, indigenous languages, and many othersTime zonesUTC−10:00 to UTC±00:00Largest citiesList of urban areas:New York CityMexico CityLos AngelesChicagoBostonTorontoDallas–Fort WorthSan Francisco Bay AreaHoustonMiamiPhiladelphiaUN M49 code003 – North America019 – Americas001 – World
Map of populous North America showing physical, political and population characteristics as per 2018
North America is a continent in the Northern Hemisphere and almost entirely within the Western Hemisphere.[b] It is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea, and to the west and south by the Pacific Ocean.
Because it is on the North American Tectonic Plate, Greenland is included as a part of North America geographically.
North America covers an area of about 24,709,000 square kilometres (9,540,000 square miles), about 16.5% of Earth's land area and about 4.8% of its total surface.
North America is the third-largest continent by area, following Asia and Africa, and the fourth by population after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
In 2013, its population was estimated at nearly 579 million people in 23 independent states, or about 7.5% of the world's population.
In human geography and in the English-speaking world outside the United States, particularly in Canada, "North America" and "North American" can refer to just Canada and the United States together.
North America was reached by its first human populations during the Last Glacial Period, via crossing the Bering land bridge approximately 20,000 to 17,000 years ago.
The so-called Paleo-Indian period is taken to have lasted until about 10,000 years ago (the beginning of the Archaic or Meso-Indian period). The classic stage spans roughly the 6th to 13th centuries.
The first recorded Europeans to visit North America (other than Greenland) were the Norse around 1000 AD. Christopher Columbus's arrival in 1492 sparked a transatlantic exchange which included migrations of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the early modern period.
Present-day cultural and ethnic patterns reflect interactions between European colonists, indigenous peoples, African slaves, immigrants from Europe, Asia, and the descendants of these groups.
Owing to Europe's colonization of the Americas, most North Americans speak European languages such as English, Spanish or French, and their cultures commonly reflect Western traditions.
However, in parts of Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America, there are indigenous populations continuing their cultural traditions and speaking native languages.
Contents
Name
Further information: Naming of the Americas, New Spain, Turtle Island (Native American folklore), and Vinland
Map of North America, from 1621
The Americas are usually accepted as having been named after the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci by the German cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann.
Vespucci, who explored South America between 1497 and 1502, was the first European to suggest that the Americas were not the East Indies, but a different landmass previously unknown by Europeans.
In 1507, Waldseemüller produced a world map, in which he placed the word "America" on the continent of South America, in the middle of what is today Brazil.
He explained the rationale for the name in the accompanying book Cosmographiae Introductio: "ab Americo inventore ... quasi Americi terram sive Americam (from Americus the discoverer ... as if it were the land of Americus, thus America)". What was known about North American continent was referred to as Parias above what is today Mexico.
A 1553 world map published by Petrus Apianus in his Charta Cosmographica, Cum Ventorum Propria Natura et Operatione, North America was called Baccalearum, meaning "realm of the Cod fish", in reference to the abundance of Cod fish on the east coast.
For Waldseemüller, no one should object to the naming of the land after its discoverer.
He used the Latinized version of Vespucci's name (Americus Vespucius), but in its feminine form "America", following the examples of "Europa", "Asia" and "Africa". Later, other mapmakers extended the name America to the northern continent, dropping the usage of "Parias". In 1538, Gerard Mercator used America on his map of the world for all the Western Hemisphere.
Some argue that because the convention is to use the surname for naming discoveries (except in the case of royalty), the derivation from "Amerigo Vespucci" could be put in question.
In 1874, Thomas Belt published the indigenous name of the Amerrisque Mountains of Central America; the next year, Jules Marcou suggested that the name of the continent stemmed from that of the mountain range.
Marcou corresponded with Augustus Le Plongeon, who wrote: "The name AMERICA or AMERRIQUE in the Mayan language means, a country of perpetually strong wind, or the Land of the Wind, and ... the [suffixes] can mean ... a spirit that breathes, life itself."
Mercator on his map called North America "America or New India" (America sive India Nova). The Spanish Empire called its territories in North and South America "Las Indias"; the state body overseeing them was the Council of the Indies.
Extent
The totality of North America seen by the Apollo 16 crew, with Canada being covered by clouds
The United Nations formally recognizes "North America" as comprising three areas: Northern America, Central America, and the Caribbean.
This has been formally defined by the UN Statistics Division.
"Northern America", as a term distinct from "North America", excludes Central America, which itself may or may not include Mexico (see Central America § Different definitions). In the limited context of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the term covers Canada, the United States, and Mexico, which are the three signatories of that treaty.
France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Romania, Greece, and the countries of Latin America use a six-continent model, with the Americas viewed as a single continent and North America designating a subcontinent comprising Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Saint Pierre et Miquelon (politically part of France), and often Greenland, and Bermuda.
North America has been historically referred to by other names.
Spanish North America (New Spain) was often referred to as Northern America,[citation needed] and this was the first official name given to Mexico.
Regions
Further information: List of regions of Canada and List of regions of the United States
Geographically, the North American continent has many regions and subregions.
These include cultural, economic, and geographic regions.
Economic regions included those formed by trade blocs, such as the North American Trade Agreement bloc and Central American Trade Agreement.
Linguistically and culturally, the continent could be divided into Anglo-America and Latin America.
Anglo-America includes most of Northern America, Belize, and Caribbean islands with English-speaking populations (though sub-national entities, such as Louisiana and Quebec, have large Francophone populations; in Quebec, French is the sole official language).
The southern part of the North American continent is composed of two regions.
These are Central America and the Caribbean.
The north of the continent maintains recognized regions as well.
In contrast to the common definition of "North America", which encompasses the whole continent, the term "North America" is sometimes used to refer only to Mexico, Canada, the United States, and Greenland.
The term Northern America refers to the northernmost countries and territories of North America: the United States, Bermuda, St.
Pierre and Miquelon, Canada, and Greenland.
Although the term does not refer to a unified region, Middle America—not to be confused with the Midwestern United States—groups the regions of Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean.
North America's largest countries by land area, Canada and the United States, also have well-defined and recognized regions.
In the case of Canada, these are (from east to west) Atlantic Canada, Central Canada, Canadian Prairies, the British Columbia Coast, and Northern Canada.
These regions also contain many subregions.
In the case of the United States—and in accordance with the US Census Bureau definitions—these regions are: New England, Mid-Atlantic, South Atlantic states, East North Central states, West North Central states, East South Central states, West South Central states, Mountain states, and Pacific states.
Regions shared between both nations include the Great Lakes region.
Megalopolises have formed between both nations in the case of the Pacific Northwest and the Great Lakes Megaregion.
Countries, dependencies, and other territories
Main article: List of sovereign states and dependent territories in North America
Arms
Flag
Country / Territory
Area
Population(2021)
Population density
Capital
Name(s) in official language(s)
ISO 3166-1
Anguilla(United Kingdom)
The Valley
Anguilla
AIA
Antigua and Barbuda
St.
John's
Antigua and Barbuda
ATG
Aruba(Kingdom of the Netherlands)[c]
Oranjestad
Aruba
ABW
The Bahamas[d]
Nassau
Bahamas
BHS
Barbados
Bridgetown
Barbados
BRB
Belize
Belmopan
Belize
BLZ
Bermuda(United Kingdom)
1,203.7/km2(3,118/sq mi)
Hamilton
Bermuda
BMU
Bonaire(Kingdom of the Netherlands)[c]
Kralendijk
Boneiru
BES
British Virgin Islands(United Kingdom)
Road Town
British Virgin Islands
VGB
Canada
9,984,670 km2(3,855,100 sq mi)
3.7/km2(9.6/sq mi)
Ottawa
Canada
CAN
Cayman Islands(United Kingdom)
George Town
Cayman Islands
CYM
Clipperton Island (France)
6 km2(2.3 sq mi)
0/km2(0/sq mi)
—
Île de Clipperton
CPT
Costa Rica
5,153,957
San José
Costa Rica
CRI
Cuba
Havana
Cuba
CUB
Curaçao(Kingdom of the Netherlands)[c]
Willemstad
Kòrsou
CUW
Dominica
Roseau
Dominica
DMA
Dominican Republic
Santo Domingo
República Dominicana
DOM
El Salvador
6,314,167
San Salvador
El Salvador
SLV
Federal Dependencies of Venezuela(Venezuela)
2,155
6.3/km2(16/sq mi)
Gran Roque
Dependencias Federales de Venezuela
VEN-W
Greenland(Kingdom of Denmark)
2,166,086 km2(836,330 sq mi)
Nuuk
Kalaallit Nunaat/Grønland
GRL
Grenada
St.
George's
Gwinàd
GRD
Guadeloupe(France)
1,628 km2(629 sq mi)
Basse-Terre
Gwadloup
GLP
Guatemala
Guatemala City
Guatemala
GTM
Haiti
Port-au-Prince
Ayiti/Haïti
HTI
Honduras
Tegucigalpa
Honduras
HND
Jamaica
2,827,695
Kingston
Jumieka
JAM
Martinique(France)
1,128 km2(436 sq mi)
Fort-de-France
Martinique/Matinik
MTQ
Mexico
1,964,375 km2(758,449 sq mi)
Mexico City
México
MEX
Montserrat(United Kingdom)
4,417
Plymouth,Brades[e]
Montserrat
MSR
Nicaragua
6,850,540
Managua
Nicaragua
NIC
Nueva Esparta(Venezuela)
1,151 km2(444 sq mi)
La Asunción
Nueva Esparta
VEN-O
Panama[c][f]
4,351,267
Panama City
Panamá
PAN
Puerto Rico(United States)
8,870 km2(3,420 sq mi)
3,256,028
San Juan
Puerto Rico
PRI
Saba(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
1,537
The Bottom
Saba
BES
San Andrés and Providencia(Colombia)
1,468.59/km2(3,803.6/sq mi)
San Andrés
San Andrés
COL-SAP
Saint Barthélemy(France)
7,448
Gustavia
Saint-Barthélemy
BLM
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Basseterre
Saint Kitts and Nevis
KNA
Saint Lucia
Castries
Sainte-Lucie
LCA
Saint Martin(France)
Marigot
Saint-Martin
MAF
Saint Pierre and Miquelon(France)
5,883
Saint-Pierre
Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon
SPM
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Kingstown
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
VCT
Sint Eustatius(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
2,739
Oranjestad
Sint Eustatius
BES
Sint Maarten(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
1,176.7/km2(3,048/sq mi)
Philipsburg
Sint Maarten
SXM
Trinidad and Tobago[c]
5,130 km2(1,980 sq mi)
1,525,663
Port of Spain
Trinidad and Tobago
TTO
Turks and Caicos Islands(United Kingdom)[g]
Grand Turk (Cockburn Town)
Turks and Caicos Islands
TCA
United States[h]
9,629,091 km2(3,717,813 sq mi)
Washington, D.C.
United States of America
USA
United States Virgin Islands(United States)
Charlotte Amalie
US Virgin Islands
VIR
Total
Natural characteristics
Geography
Main article: Geography of North America
Landforms and land cover of North America
North America occupies the northern portion of the landmass generally referred to as the New World, the Western Hemisphere, the Americas, or simply America (which, in many countries is considered as a single continent with North America a subcontinent). North America is the third-largest continent by area, following Asia and Africa.
North America's only land connection to South America is at the Isthmus of Darian/Isthmus of Panama.
The continent is delimited on the southeast by most geographers at the Darién watershed along the Colombia-Panama border, placing almost all of Panama within North America.
Alternatively, some geologists physiographically locate its southern limit at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico, with Central America extending southeastward to South America from this point.
The Caribbean islands, or West Indies, are considered part of North America.
The continental coastline is long and irregular.
The Gulf of Mexico is the largest body of water indenting the continent, followed by Hudson Bay.
Others include the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the Gulf of California.
Sonoran Desert in Arizona
Before the Central American isthmus formed, the region had been underwater.
The islands of the West Indies delineate a submerged former land bridge, which had connected North and South America via what are now Florida and Venezuela.
There are numerous islands off the continent's coasts; principally, the Arctic Archipelago, the Bahamas, Turks & Caicos, the Greater and Lesser Antilles, the Aleutian Islands (some of which are in the Eastern Hemisphere proper), the Alexander Archipelago, the many thousand islands of the British Columbia Coast, and Newfoundland.
Greenland, a self-governing Danish island, and the world's largest, is on the same tectonic plate (the North American Plate) and is part of North America geographically.
In a geologic sense, Bermuda is not part of the Americas, but an oceanic island that was formed on the fissure of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge over 100 million years ago.
The nearest landmass to it is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina.
However, Bermuda is often thought of as part of North America, especially given its historical, political and cultural ties to Virginia and other parts of the continent.
Moraine Lake in Banff National Park
The vast majority of North America is on the North American Plate.
Parts of western Mexico, including Baja California, and of California, including the cities of San Diego, Los Angeles, and Santa Cruz, lie on the eastern edge of the Pacific Plate, with the two plates meeting along the San Andreas fault.
The southernmost portion of the continent and much of the West Indies lie on the Caribbean Plate, whereas the Juan de Fuca and Cocos plates border the North American Plate on its western frontier.
The continent can be divided into four great regions (each of which contains many subregions): the Great Plains stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to the Canadian Arctic; the geologically young, mountainous west, including the Rocky Mountains, the Great Basin, California and Alaska; the raised but relatively flat plateau of the Canadian Shield in the northeast; and the varied eastern region, which includes the Appalachian Mountains, the coastal plain along the Atlantic seaboard, and the Florida peninsula.
Mexico, with its long plateaus and cordilleras, falls largely in the western region, although the eastern coastal plain does extend south along the Gulf.
Nuuk, the capital city of Greenland
The western mountains are split in the middle into the main range of the Rockies and the coast ranges in California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, with the Great Basin—a lower area containing smaller ranges and low-lying deserts—in between.
The highest peak is Denali in Alaska.
The United States Geographical Survey (USGS) states that the geographic center of North America is "6 miles [10 km] west of Balta, Pierce County, North Dakota" at about 48°10′N 100°10′W﻿ / ﻿48.167°N 100.167°W﻿ / 48.167; -100.167, about 24 kilometres (15 mi) from Rugby, North Dakota.
The USGS further states that "No marked or monumented point has been established by any government agency as the geographic center of either the 50 States, the conterminous United States, or the North American continent." Nonetheless, there is a 4.6-metre (15 ft) field stone obelisk in Rugby claiming to mark the center.
The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is located 1,650 km (1,030 mi) from the nearest coastline, between Allen and Kyle, South Dakota at 43°22′N 101°58′W﻿ / ﻿43.36°N 101.97°W﻿ / 43.36; -101.97﻿ (Pole of Inaccessibility North America).
Geology
Main article: Geology of North America
Geologic history
Principal hydrological divides of Canada, the United States and Mexico
Laurentia is an ancient craton which forms the geologic core of North America; it formed between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago during the Proterozoic eon.
The Canadian Shield is the largest exposure of this craton.
From the Late Paleozoic to Early Mesozoic eras, North America was joined with the other modern-day continents as part of the supercontinent Pangaea, with Eurasia to its east.
One of the results of the formation of Pangaea was the Appalachian Mountains, which formed some 480 million years ago, making it among the oldest mountain ranges in the world.
When Pangaea began to rift around 200 million years ago, North America became part of Laurasia, before it separated from Eurasia as its own continent during the mid-Cretaceous period.
The Rockies and other western mountain ranges began forming around this time from a period of mountain building called the Laramide orogeny, between 80 and 55 million years ago.
The formation of the Isthmus of Panama that connected the continent to South America arguably occurred approximately 12 to 15 million years ago, and the Great Lakes (as well as many other northern freshwater lakes and rivers) were carved by receding glaciers about 10,000 years ago.
North America is the source of much of what humanity knows about geologic time periods.
The geographic area that would later become the United States has been the source of more varieties of dinosaurs than any other modern country.
According to paleontologist Peter Dodson, this is primarily due to stratigraphy, climate and geography, human resources, and history.
Much of the Mesozoic Era is represented by exposed outcrops in the many arid regions of the continent.
The most significant Late Jurassic dinosaur-bearing fossil deposit in North America is the Morrison Formation of the western United States.
Canadian geology
Geologic map of North America published by USGS
Geologically, Canada is one of the oldest regions in the world, with more than half of the region consisting of precambrian rocks that have been above sea level since the beginning of the Palaeozoic era.
Canada's mineral resources are diverse and extensive.
Across the Canadian Shield and in the north there are large iron, nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, and uranium reserves.
Large diamond concentrations have been recently developed in the Arctic, making Canada one of the world's largest producers.
Throughout the Shield, there are many mining towns extracting these minerals.
The largest, and best known, is Sudbury, Ontario.
Sudbury is an exception to the normal process of forming minerals in the Shield since there is significant evidence that the Sudbury Basin is an ancient meteorite impact crater.
The nearby, but less known Temagami Magnetic Anomaly has striking similarities to the Sudbury Basin.
Its magnetic anomalies are very similar to the Sudbury Basin, and so it could be a second metal-rich impact crater.
The Shield is also covered by vast boreal forests that support an important logging industry.
United States geology
The lower 48 US states can be divided into roughly five physiographic provinces:
The American cordillera
The Canadian Shield Northern portion of the upper midwestern United States.
The stable platform
The coastal plain
The Appalachian orogenic belt
The geology of Alaska is typical of that of the cordillera, while the major islands of Hawaii consist of Neogene volcanics erupted over a hot spot.
North America bedrock and terrainNorth American cratons and basement rocks
Central American geology
Central America rests in the Caribbean Plate.
Central America is geologically active with volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occurring from time to time.
In 1976 Guatemala was hit by a major earthquake, killing 23,000 people; Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, was devastated by earthquakes in 1931 and 1972, the last one killing about 5,000 people; three earthquakes devastated El Salvador, one in 1986 and two in 2001; one earthquake devastated northern and central Costa Rica in 2009, killing at least 34 people; in Honduras a powerful earthquake killed seven people in 2009.
Volcanic eruptions are common in the region.
In 1968 the Arenal Volcano, in Costa Rica, erupted and killed 87 people.
Fertile soils from weathered volcanic lavas have made it possible to sustain dense populations in agriculturally productive highland areas.
Central America has many mountain ranges; the longest are the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, the Cordillera Isabelia, and the Cordillera de Talamanca.
Between the mountain ranges lie fertile valleys that are suitable for the people; in fact, most of the population of Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala live in valleys.
Valleys are also suitable for the production of coffee, beans, and other crops.
Climate
North America map of Köppen climate classification
North America is a very large continent that extends from north of the Arctic Circle to south of the Tropic of Cancer.
Greenland, along with the Canadian Shield, is tundra with average temperatures ranging from 10 to 20 °C (50 to 68 °F), but central Greenland is composed of a very large ice sheet.
This tundra radiates throughout Canada, but its border ends near the Rocky Mountains (but still contains Alaska) and at the end of the Canadian Shield, near the Great Lakes.
Climate west of the Cascade Range is described as being temperate weather with average precipitation 20 inches (510 mm).
Climate in coastal California is described to be Mediterranean, with average temperatures in cities like San Francisco ranging from 57 to 70 °F (14 to 21 °C) over the course of the year.
Stretching from the East Coast to eastern North Dakota, and stretching down to Kansas, is the humid continental climate featuring intense seasons, with a large amount of annual precipitation, with places like New York City averaging 50 inches (1,300 mm).
Starting at the southern border of the humid continental climate and stretching to the Gulf of Mexico (whilst encompassing the eastern half of Texas) is the humid subtropical climate.
This area has the wettest cities in the contiguous United States, with annual precipitation reaching 67 inches (1,700 mm) in Mobile, Alabama.
Stretching from the borders of the humid continental and subtropical climates, and going west to the Sierra Nevada, south to the southern tip of Durango, north to the border with tundra climate, the steppe/desert climates are the driest in the United States.
Highland climates cut from north to south of the continent, where subtropical or temperate climates occur just below the tropics, as in central Mexico and Guatemala.
Tropical climates appear in the island regions and in the subcontinent's bottleneck.
Precipitation patterns vary across the region, and as such rainforest, monsoon, and savanna types can be found, with rains and high temperatures throughout the year.
Found in countries and states bathed by the Caribbean Sea or to the south of the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean.
Ecology
This section needs expansion.
You can help by adding to it.  (March 2015)
See also: List of endangered plants in North America
Notable North American fauna include the bison, black bear, jaguar, cougar, prairie dog, turkey, pronghorn, raccoon, coyote and monarch butterfly.
Notable plants that were domesticated in North America include tobacco, maize, squash, tomato, sunflower, blueberry, avocado, cotton, chile pepper
and vanilla.
History
Main article: History of North America
Pre-Columbian
Main article: Pre-Columbian era
Simplified map of subsistence methods in the Americas at 1000 BCE   hunter-gatherers   simple farming societies   complex farming societies (tribal chiefdoms or civilizations)
The indigenous peoples of the Americas have many creation myths by which they assert that they have been present on the land since its creation, but there is no evidence that humans evolved there.
The specifics of the initial settlement of the Americas by ancient Asians are subject to ongoing research and discussion.
The traditional theory has been that hunters entered the Bering Land Bridge between eastern Siberia and present-day Alaska from 27,000 to 14,000 years ago.[i] A growing viewpoint is that the first American inhabitants sailed from Beringia some 13,000 years ago, with widespread habitation of the Americas during the end of the Last Glacial Period, in what is known as the Late Glacial Maximum, around 12,500 years ago.
The oldest petroglyphs in North America date from 15,000 to 10,000 years before present.[j] Genetic research and anthropology indicate additional waves of migration from Asia via the Bering Strait during the Early-Middle Holocene.
Before contact with Europeans, the natives of North America were divided into many different polities, from small bands of a few families to large empires.
They lived in several "culture areas", which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones and give a good indication of the main way of life of the people who lived there (e.g., the bison hunters of the Great Plains, or the farmers of Mesoamerica). Native groups can also be classified by their language family (e.g., Athapascan or Uto-Aztecan). Peoples with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, nor were they always allies.
Anthropologists think that the Inuit of the high Arctic came to North America much later than other native groups, as evidenced by the disappearance of Dorset culture artifacts from the archaeological record, and their replacement by the Thule people.
During the thousands of years of native habitation on the continent, cultures changed and shifted.
One of the oldest yet discovered is the Clovis culture (c. 9550–9050 BCE) in modern New Mexico.
Later groups include the Mississippian culture and related Mound building cultures, found in the Mississippi river valley and the Pueblo culture of what is now the Four Corners.
The more southern cultural groups of North America were responsible for the domestication of many common crops now used around the world, such as tomatoes, squash, and maize.
As a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many other cultural advances were made there.
The Mayans developed a writing system, built huge pyramids and temples, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero around 400 CE.
The first recorded European references to North America are in Norse sagas where it is referred to as Vinland.
The earliest verifiable instance of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact by any European culture with the North America mainland has been dated to around 1000 CE. The site, situated at the northernmost extent of the island named Newfoundland, has provided unmistakable evidence of Norse settlement.
Norse explorer Leif Erikson (c. 970–1020 CE) is thought to have visited the area.[k] Erikson was the first European to make landfall on the continent (excluding Greenland).
The Mayan culture was still present in southern Mexico and Guatemala when the Spanish conquistadors arrived, but political dominance in the area had shifted to the Aztec Empire, whose capital city Tenochtitlan was located further north in the Valley of Mexico.
The Aztecs were conquered in 1521 by Hernán Cortés.
Post-contact, 1492–1910
Main article: European colonization of the Americas
Further information: Timeline of the European colonization of North America, British America, French America, New Spain, and Russian colonization of the Americas
Map of North America in 1702 showing forts, towns and (in solid colors) areas occupied by European settlements
During the so-called Age of Discovery, Europeans explored overseas and staked claims to various parts of North America, much of which was already settled by indigenous peoples.
Upon Europeans' arrival in the "New World", indigenous peoples had a variety of reactions, including curiosity, trading, cooperation, resignation, and resistance.
The indigenous population declined substantially following European arrival, primarily due to the introduction of Eurasian diseases, such as smallpox, to which the indigenous peoples lacked immunity, and because of violent conflicts with Europeans.
Indigenous culture changed significantly and their affiliation with political and cultural groups also changed.
Several linguistic groups died out, and others changed quite quickly.
On the southern eastcoast of North America, Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León, who had accompanied Columbus's second voyage, visited and named in 1513 La Florida.
As the colonial period unfolded, Spain, England, and France appropriated and claimed extensive territories in North America eastern and southern coastlines.
Spain established permanent settlements on the Caribbean islands of Hispaniola and Cuba in the 1490s, building cities, putting the resident indigenous populations to work, raising crops for Spanish settlers and panning gold to enrich the Spaniards.
Much of the indigenous population died due to disease and overwork, spurring the Spaniards on the claim new lands and peoples.
An expedition under the command of Spanish settler, Hernán Cortés, sailed westward in 1519 to what turned out to be the mainland in Mexico.
With local indigenous allies, the Spanish conquered the Aztec empire in central Mexico in 1521. Spain then established permanent cities in Mexico, Central America, and Spanish South America in the sixteenth century.
Once Spaniards conquered the high civilization of the Aztecs and Incas, the Caribbean was a backwater of the Spanish empire.
Other European powers began to intrude on areas that Spain had claimed, including the Caribbean islands.
France took the western half of Hispaniola and developed Saint-Domingue as a cane sugar producing colony worked by black slave labor.
Britain took Barbados and Jamaica; the Dutch and Danes also took islands previous claimed by Spain.
Britain did not begin settling on the North American mainland until a hundred years after the first Spanish settlements, since it sought first to control nearby Ireland.
The first permanent English settlement was in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607, and then further settler colonial establishments on the east coast of the continent from is now Georgia up to Massachusetts, forming the Thirteen Colonies.
The English did not establish settlements north, east of the St.
Lawrence Valley in what would become Canada until well after the war of independence.
English early permanent settlements were St.
John's, Newfoundland in 1630 and Halifax, Nova Scotia in 1749. The first permanent French settlement was in Quebec City, Quebec in 1608. In the British victory the Seven Years' War, France ceded to Britain its claims east of the Mississippi River in 1763. Spain gained rights to the territories west of Mississippi now acting as a border.
French so-called "colonists" that had first settled the Illinois Country after several generations of experience on the new continent migrated over the Mississippi in the absence of Spanish occupants while leveraging earlier Louisiana French settlements around the Gulf of Mexico.
These early French settlers partnering with midwest indigenous tribes and their mixed ancestry descendants would precede the westward push and guide through waves of followers all the way to the Pacific.
In the late 18th and early the Thirteen Colonies on the North Atlantic coast declared independence in 1776, fighting a protracted war of independence with the aid of Britain's enemies France and Spain, becoming the United States of America.
The new nation steadily attempted to increase its territory.
By that time, Russians were already well established on the Pacific Northwest northern coastline with Maritime Fur Trade activities supported by active settlements.
As a result, Spanish were showing more interest in controlling the trade on the Pacific coast and mapped most of its coastline.
The first Spanish settlements were attempted in Alta California during that period.
Numerous overland explorations associated with Voyageurs, Fur Trade, and United States led expeditions (e.g.
Lewis and Clark, Fremont and Wilkes) were reaching the Pacific at various latitudes around the turn of the century.
In 1803 Napoleon Bonaparte sold France's remaining claims in North America, west of the Mississippi River, to the United States, in a deal named the Louisiana Purchase.
Spain and the United States settled their western boundary dispute in 1819 in the Adams-Onís Treaty.
Mexico fought a lengthy war for independence from Spain, winning it for Mexico and Central American in 1821. The U.S. sought further westward expansion and fought the Mexican-American War, gaining a vast territory that first Spain and then Mexico claimed but which they did not effectively control.
Much of the area was in fact dominated by indigenous peoples, which did not recognize the claims of Spain, France, or the United States.
Russia sold its North American claims, which included Alaska, to the U.S. in 1867. Also in 1867, settler colonies in eastern North America, were unified as the dominion of Canada.
The U.S. sought to dig a canal across the Isthmus of Panama, a part of Colombia, and aided Panamanians in a war to separate it from Colombia.
The U.S. carved out the Panama Canal Zone, over which it claimed sovereignty.
After decades of work on the Panama Canal was completed, connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans in 1913.
Demographics
Further information: Demographics of the United States, Demographics of Canada, and Demographics of Mexico
Non-native nations' control and claims over North America c. 1750–2008
Economically, Canada and the United States are the wealthiest and most developed nations in the continent, followed by Mexico, a newly industrialized country.
The countries of Central America and the Caribbean are at various levels of economic and human development.
For example, small Caribbean island-nations, such as Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, and Antigua and Barbuda, have a higher GDP (PPP) per capita than Mexico due to their smaller populations.
Panama and Costa Rica have a significantly higher Human Development Index and GDP than the rest of the Central American nations.
Additionally, despite Greenland's vast resources in oil and minerals, much of them remain untapped, and the island is economically dependent on fishing, tourism, and subsidies from Denmark.
Nevertheless, the island is highly developed.
Demographically, North America is ethnically diverse.
Its three main groups are Whites, Mestizos and Blacks.
There is a significant minority of Indigenous Americans and Asians among other less numerous groups.
Languages
Main article: Languages of North America
Native languages of the US, Canada, Greenland, and Northern Mexico
The dominant languages in North America are English, Spanish, and French.
Danish is prevalent in Greenland alongside Greenlandic, and Dutch is spoken side by side local languages in the Dutch Caribbean.
The term Anglo-America is used to refer to the anglophone countries of the Americas: namely Canada (where English and French are co-official) and the United States, but also sometimes Belize and parts of the tropics, especially the Commonwealth Caribbean.
Latin America refers to the other areas of the Americas (generally south of the United States) where the Romance languages, derived from Latin, of Spanish and Portuguese, (but French-speaking countries are not usually included) predominate: the other republics of Central America (but not always Belize), part of the Caribbean (not the Dutch-, English-, or French-speaking areas), Mexico, and most of South America (except Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana (France), and the Falkland Islands (UK)).
The French language has historically played a significant role in North America and now retains a distinctive presence in some regions.
Canada is officially bilingual.
French is the official language of the Province of Quebec, where 95% of the people speak it as either their first or second language, and it is co-official with English in the Province of New Brunswick.
Other French-speaking locales include the Province of Ontario (the official language is English, but there are an estimated 600,000 Franco-Ontarians), the Province of Manitoba (co-official as de jure with English), the French West Indies and Saint-Pierre et Miquelon, as well as the US state of Louisiana, where French is also an official language.
Haiti is included with this group based on historical association but Haitians speak both Creole and French.
Similarly, French and French Antillean Creole is spoken in Saint Lucia and the Commonwealth of Dominica alongside English.
A significant number of Indigenous languages are spoken in North America, with 372,000 people in the United States speaking an indigenous language at home, about 225,000 in Canada and roughly 6 million in Mexico.
In the United States and Canada, there are approximately 150 surviving indigenous languages of the 300 spoken prior to European contact.
Religions
Main article: Religion in North America
See also: Religions of the world
Percentage of people who identify with a religion in North America, according to 2010–2012 data
Christianity is the largest religion in the United States, Canada and Mexico.
According to a 2012 Pew Research Center survey, 77% of the population considered themselves Christians.
Christianity also is the predominant religion in the 23 dependent territories in North America.
The United States has the largest Christian population in the world, with nearly 247 million Christians (70%), although other countries have higher percentages of Christians among their populations.
Mexico has the world's second largest number of Catholics, surpassed only by Brazil.
A 2015 study estimates about 493,000 Christian believers from a Muslim background in North America, most of them belonging to some form of Protestantism.
According to the same study, the religiously unaffiliated (including agnostics and atheists) make up about 17% of the population of Canada and the United States.
Those with no religious affiliation make up about 24% of the United States population, and 24% of Canada's total population.
Canada, the United States and Mexico host communities of Jews (6 million or about 1.8%), Buddhists (3.8 million or 1.1%) and Muslims (3.4 million or 1.0%). The largest number of Jews can be found in the United States (5.4 million), Canada (375,000) and Mexico (67,476). The United States hosts the largest Muslim population in North America with 2.7 million or 0.9%, While Canada host about one million Muslim or 3.2% of the population.
While in Mexico there were 3,700 Muslims in the country.
In 2012, U-T San Diego estimated U.S. practitioners of Buddhism at 1.2 million people, of whom 40% are living in Southern California.
The predominant religion in Mexico and Central America is Christianity (96%). Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Mexico in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism was the only religion permitted by Spanish crown and Catholic church.
A vast campaign of religious conversion, the so-called "spiritual conquest", was launched to bring indigenous into the Christian fold.
The Inquisition was established to assure orthodox belief and practice.
The Catholic Church remained an important institution, so that even after political independence, Roman Catholicism remained the dominant religion.
Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion.
Also Christianity is the predominant religion in the Caribbean (85%). Other religious groups in the region are Hinduism, Islam, Rastafari (in Jamaica), and Afro-American religions such as Santería and Vodou.
Populace
See also: List of North American countries by population, List of North American cities by population, and List of North American metropolitan areas by population
North American citiesMexico CityLos AngelesTorontoChicagoNew York CityGuadalajara
North America is the fourth most populous continent after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
Its most populous country is the United States with 329.7 million persons.
The second largest country is Mexico with a population of 112.3 million.
Canada is the third most populous country with 37.0 million.
The majority of Caribbean island-nations have national populations under a million, though Cuba, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Puerto Rico (a territory of the United States), Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago each have populations higher than a million.
Greenland has a small population of 55,984 for its massive size (2,166,000 km2 or 836,300 mi2), and therefore, it has the world's lowest population density at 0.026 pop./km2 (0.067 pop./mi2).
While the United States, Canada, and Mexico maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations.
There are also large cities in the Caribbean.
The largest cities in North America, by far, are Mexico City and New York.
These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and two of three in the Americas.
Next in size are Los Angeles, Toronto, Chicago, Havana, Santo Domingo, and Montreal.
Cities in the sun belt regions of the United States, such as those in Southern California and Houston, Phoenix, Miami, Atlanta, and Las Vegas, are experiencing rapid growth.
These causes included warm temperatures, retirement of Baby Boomers, large industry, and the influx of immigrants.
Cities near the United States border, particularly in Mexico, are also experiencing large amounts of growth.
Most notable is Tijuana, a city bordering San Diego that receives immigrants from all over Latin America and parts of Europe and Asia.
Yet as cities grow in these warmer regions of North America, they are increasingly forced to deal with the major issue of water shortages.
Eight of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the United States.
These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 5.5 million and include the New York City metropolitan area, Los Angeles metropolitan area, Chicago metropolitan area, and the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex.
Whilst the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within the United States, Mexico is host to the largest metropolitan area by population in North America: Greater Mexico City.
Canada also breaks into the top ten largest metropolitan areas with the Toronto metropolitan area having six million people.
The proximity of cities to each other on the Canada–United States border and Mexico–United States border has led to the rise of international metropolitan areas.
These urban agglomerations are observed at their largest and most productive in Detroit–Windsor and San Diego–Tijuana and experience large commercial, economic, and cultural activity.
The metropolitan areas are responsible for millions of dollars of trade dependent on international freight.
In Detroit-Windsor the Border Transportation Partnership study in 2004 concluded US$13 billion was dependent on the Detroit–Windsor international border crossing while in San Diego-Tijuana freight at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry was valued at US$20 billion.
Further information: Megaregions of the United States
North America has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas.
In the United States exists eleven megaregions that transcend international borders and comprise Canadian and Mexican metropolitan regions.
These are the Arizona Sun Corridor, Cascadia, Florida, Front Range, Great Lakes Megalopolis, Gulf Coast, Northeast, Northern California, Piedmont Atlantic, Southern California, and the Texas Triangle.
Canada and Mexico are also the home of megaregions.
These include the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor, Golden Horseshoe – both of which are considered part of the Great Lakes Megalopolis – and the Central Mexico megalopolis.
Traditionally the largest megaregion has been considered the Boston-Washington, DC Corridor, or the Northeast, as the region is one massive contiguous area.
Yet megaregion criterion have allowed the Great Lakes Megalopolis to maintain status as the most populated region, being home to 53,768,125 people in 2000.
The top ten largest North American metropolitan areas by population as of 2013, based on national census numbers from the United States and census estimates from Canada and Mexico.
Metro Area
Population
Area
Country
Mexico City
7,346 km2 (2,836 sq mi)
Mexico
New York City
United States
Los Angeles
United States
Chicago
9,537,289
United States
Dallas–Fort Worth
6,810,913
United States
Houston
6,313,158
United States
Toronto
6,054,191†
5,906 km2 (2,280 sq mi)
Canada
Philadelphia
6,034,678
United States
Washington, DC
5,949,859
United States
Miami
5,828,191
United States
†2011 Census figures.
Economy
Main article: Economy of North America
See also: List of North American countries by GDP (nominal) and List of North American countries by GDP (PPP)
Rank
Country or Territory
GDP(PPP, peak year)millions of USD
Peak year
United States
Mexico
2,890,685
Canada
2,236,928
Dominican Republic
Cuba
Guatemala
Panama
Puerto Rico
Costa Rica
Honduras
Rank
Country or Territory
GDP (nominal, peak year)millions of USD
Peak year
United States
Canada
2,221,218
Mexico
1,322,740
Puerto Rico
Dominican Republic
Cuba
Guatemala
Panama
Costa Rica
El Salvador
North America's GDP per capita was evaluated in October 2016 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be $41,830, making it the richest continent in the world, followed by Oceania.
Canada, Mexico, and the United States have significant and multifaceted economic systems.
The United States has the largest economy of all three countries and in the world.
In 2016, the U.S. had an estimated per capita gross domestic product (PPP) of $57,466 according to the World Bank, and is the most technologically developed economy of the three.
The United States' services sector comprises 77% of the country's GDP (estimated in 2010), industry comprises 22% and agriculture comprises 1.2%. The U.S. economy is also the fastest growing economy in North America and the Americas as a whole, with the highest GDP per capita in the Americas as well.
Mexican President Peña Nieto, U.S. President Trump, and Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau sign the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement during the G20 summit in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on 30 November 2018
Canada shows significant growth in the sectors of services, mining and manufacturing.
Canada's per capita GDP (PPP) was estimated at $44,656 and it had the 11th largest GDP (nominal) in 2014. Canada's services sector comprises 78% of the country's GDP (estimated in 2010), industry comprises 20% and agriculture comprises 2%. Mexico has a per capita GDP (PPP) of $16,111 and as of 2014 is the 15th largest GDP (nominal) in the world.
Being a newly industrialized country, Mexico maintains both modern and outdated industrial and agricultural facilities and operations.
Its main sources of income are oil, industrial exports, manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction, food, banking and financial services.
The North American economy is well defined and structured in three main economic areas.
These areas are the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), and the Central American Common Market (CACM). Of these trade blocs, the United States takes part in two.
In addition to the larger trade blocs there is the Canada-Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement among numerous other free trade relations, often between the larger, more developed countries and Central American and Caribbean countries.
The North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) forms one of the four largest trade blocs in the world.
Its implementation in 1994 was designed for economic homogenization with hopes of eliminating barriers of trade and foreign investment between Canada, the United States and Mexico.
While Canada and the United States already conducted the largest bilateral trade relationship – and to present day still do – in the world and Canada–United States trade relations already allowed trade without national taxes and tariffs, NAFTA allowed Mexico to experience a similar duty-free trade.
The free trade agreement allowed for the elimination of tariffs that had previously been in place on United States-Mexico trade.
Trade volume has steadily increased annually and in 2010, surface trade between the three NAFTA nations reached an all-time historical increase of 24.3% or US$791 billion.
The NAFTA trade bloc GDP (PPP) is the world's largest with US$17.617 trillion.
This is in part attributed to the fact that the economy of the United States is the world's largest national economy; the country had a nominal GDP of approximately $14.7 trillion in 2010. The countries of NAFTA are also some of each other's largest trade partners.
The United States is the largest trade partner of Canada and Mexico; while Canada and Mexico are each other's third largest trade partners.
Worlds regions by total wealth (in trillions USD), 2018
The Caribbean trade bloc – CARICOM – came into agreement in 1973 when it was signed by 15 Caribbean nations.
As of 2000, CARICOM trade volume was US$96 billion.
CARICOM also allowed for the creation of a common passport for associated nations.
In the past decade the trade bloc focused largely on Free Trade Agreements and under the CARICOM Office of Trade Negotiations (OTN) free trade agreements have been signed into effect.
Integration of Central American economies occurred under the signing of the Central American Common Market agreement in 1961; this was the first attempt to engage the nations of this area into stronger financial cooperation.
The recent implementation of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) has left the future of the CACM unclear.
The Central American Free Trade Agreement was signed by five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic, and the United States.
The focal point of CAFTA is to create a free trade area similar to that of NAFTA. In addition to the United States, Canada also has relations in Central American trade blocs.
Currently under proposal, the Canada – Central American Free Trade Agreement (CA4) would operate much the same as CAFTA with the United States does.
These nations also take part in inter-continental trade blocs.
Mexico takes a part in the G3 Free Trade Agreement with Colombia and Venezuela and has a trade agreement with the EU. The United States has proposed and maintained trade agreements under the Transatlantic Free Trade Area between itself and the European Union; the US-Middle East Free Trade Area between numerous Middle Eastern nations and itself; and the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership between Southeast Asian nations, Australia, and New Zealand.
Transport
Main article: Transportation in North America
The Pan-American Highway route in the Americas is the portion of a network of roads nearly 48,000 km (30,000 mi) in length which travels through the mainland nations.
No definitive length of the Pan-American Highway exists because the US and Canadian governments have never officially defined any specific routes as being part of the Pan-American Highway, and Mexico officially has many branches connecting to the US border.
However, the total length of the portion from Mexico to the northern extremity of the highway is roughly 26,000 km (16,000 mi).
2006 map of the North American Class I railroad network
The First Transcontinental Railroad in the United States was built in the 1860s, linking the railroad network of the eastern US with California on the Pacific coast.
Finished on 10 May 1869 at the famous golden spike event at Promontory Summit, Utah, it created a nationwide mechanized transportation network that revolutionized the population and economy of the American West, catalyzing the transition from the wagon trains of previous decades to a modern transportation system.
Although an accomplishment, it achieved the status of first transcontinental railroad by connecting myriad eastern US railroads to the Pacific and was not the largest single railroad system in the world.
The Canadian Grand Trunk Railway (GTR) had, by 1867, already accumulated more than 2,055 km (1,277 mi) of track by connecting Ontario with the Canadian Atlantic provinces west as far as Port Huron, Michigan, through Sarnia, Ontario.
Communications
A shared telephone system known as the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) is an integrated telephone numbering plan of 24 countries and territories: the United States and its territories, Canada, Bermuda, and 17 Caribbean nations.
Culture
Baseball is traditionally known as America's national pastime, but is also played in Canada, and many Latin American countries as well.
The cultures of North America are diverse.
The United States and English Canada have many cultural similarities, while French Canada has a distinct culture from Anglophone Canada, which is protected by law.
Since United States was formed from portions previously part of the Spanish Empire and then independent Mexico, and there has been considerable and continuing immigration of Spanish speakers from south of the U.S.-Mexico border.
In the southwest of the U.S. there are many Hispanic cultural traditions and considerable bilingualism.
Mexico and Central America are part of Latin America and are culturally distinct from anglophone and francophone North America.
However, they share with the United States the establishment of post-independence governments that are federated representative republics with written constitutions dating from their founding as nations.
Canada is a federated parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy.
Canada's constitution dates to 1867, with confederation, in the British North America Act, but not until 1982 did Canada have the power to amend its own constitution.
Canada's Francophone heritage has been enshrined in law since the British parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774. In contrast to largely Protestant Anglo settlers in North America, French-speaking Canadians were Catholic and with the Quebec Act were guaranteed freedom to practice their religion, restored the right of the Catholic Church to impose tithes for its support, and established French civil law in most circumstances.
The distinctiveness of French language and culture has been codified in Canadian law, so that both English and French are designated official languages.  The U.S. has no official language, but its national language is English.
The Canadian government took action to protect Canadian culture by limiting non-Canadian content in broadcasting, creating the Canadian Radio and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to monitor Canadian content.
In Quebec, the provincial government established the Quebec Office of the French Language, often called the "language police" by Anglophones, which mandates the use of French terminology and signage in French.
Since 1968 the unicameral legislature has been called the Quebec National Assembly.
Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, June 24, is the national holiday of Quebec and celebrated by francophone Canadians throughout Canada.
In Quebec, the school system was divided into Catholic and Protestant, so-called confessional schools.
Anglophone education in Quebec has been increasingly undermined.
Latino culture is strong in the southwest of the U.S., as well as Florida, which draws Latin Americans from many countries in the hemisphere.  Northern Mexico, particularly in the cities of Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and Mexicali, is strongly influenced by the culture and way of life of the United States.  Monterrey, a modern city with a significant industrial group, has been regarded as the most Americanized city in Mexico.
Northern Mexico, the Western United States and Alberta, Canada share a cowboy culture.
The Anglophone Caribbean states have witnessed and participated in the decline of the British Empire and its influence on the region, and its replacement by the economic influence of Northern America in the Anglophone Caribbean.
This is partly due to the relatively small populations of the English-speaking Caribbean countries, and also because many of them now have more people living abroad than those remaining at home.[citation needed]
Greenland has experienced many immigration waves from Northern Canada, e .g. the Thule People.
Therefore, Greenland shares some cultural ties with the indigenous peoples of Canada.
Greenland is also considered Nordic and has strong Danish ties due to centuries of colonization by Denmark.
Popular culture – sports
The U.S. and Canada have major sports teams that compete against each other, including baseball, basketball, hockey, and soccer/football.
Canada, Mexico and the US submitted a joint bid to host the 2026 FIFA World Cup.
The following table shows the most prominent sports leagues in North America, in order of average revenue.
Canada has a separate Canadian Football League from the U.S. teams.
The Native American game of lacrosse is considered a national sport in Canada.
Curling is an important winter sport in Canada, and the Winter Olympics includes it in the roster.
The English sport of cricket is popular in parts of anglophone Canada and very popular in parts of the former British empire, but in Canada is considered a minor sport.
Boxing is also a major sport in some countries, such as Mexico, Panama and Puerto Rico, and it's considered one of the main individual sports in the United States.
League
Sport
Primarycountry
Founded
Teams
RevenueUS$ (bn)
Averageattendance
National Football League (NFL)
American football
United States
$9.0
Major League Baseball (MLB)
Baseball
United StatesCanada
$8.0
National Basketball Association (NBA)
Basketball
United StatesCanada
$5.0
National Hockey League (NHL)
Ice hockey
United StatesCanada
$3.3
Liga MX
Football (soccer)
Mexico
$0.6
Major League Soccer (MLS)
Football (soccer)
United StatesCanada
$0.5
Canadian Football League (CFL)
Canadian football
Canada
$0.3
See also
North American Union
United States of America
Flags of North America
List of cities in North America
Outline of North America
Table manners in North America
References
Footnotes
This North American density figure is based on a total land area of 23,090,542 km2 only, considerably less than the total combined land and water area of 24,709,000 km2.
Some non-English speakers group North and South America as a single unit, although this is not scientifically supported.
a b c d e Depending on the definition, Panama could be considered a transcontinental country while the ABC islands (Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao) and Trinidad and Tobago could be considered either parts of North America or South America.
Since the Lucayan Archipelago is located in the Atlantic Ocean rather than Caribbean Sea, The Bahamas are part of the West Indies but are not technically part of the Caribbean, although the United Nations groups them with the Caribbean.
Because of ongoing activity of the Soufriere Hills volcano beginning in July 1995, much of Plymouth was destroyed and government offices were relocated to Brades.
Plymouth remains the de jure capital.
Panama is generally considered a North American country, though some authorities divide it at the Panama Canal.
Figures listed here are for the entire country.
Since the Lucayan Archipelago is located in the Atlantic Ocean rather than Caribbean Sea, the Turks and Caicos Islands are part of the West Indies but are not technically part of the Caribbean, although the United Nations groups them with the Caribbean.
Includes the states of Hawaii and Alaska which are both separated from the US mainland, with Hawaii distant from the North American landmass in the Pacific Ocean and therefore more commonly associated with the other territories of Oceania while Alaska is located between Asia (Russia) and Canada.
The receding of oceans during successive ice ages may have enabled migrants to cross the land bridge as far back as 40,000 years.
While not conclusive, some South American rock painting has been dated to 25,000 years ago.
Descriptions of sites Erikson explored seem to correspond to Baffin Island, the Labrador coast near Cape Porcupine, as well as Belle Isle, and a site which led him to name the country Vinland ('Wineland').
Citations
"GDP PPP, current prices". International Monetary Fund. 2021. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022.
"GDP Nominal, current prices". International Monetary Fund. 2021. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2022.
"Nominal GDP per capita". International Monetary Fund. 2021. Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2022.
a b c d e f "Religious Composition by Country, 2010-2050". 
"Demographia.com" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 August 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2015.
pp. 30–31, Geography: Realms, Regions, and Concepts, H. J. de Blij and Peter O. Muller, Wiley, 12th ed., 2005 (ISBN 0-471-71786-X.)
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Karen E. (1997). "Chapter One, The Architecture of Continents". The Myth of Continents.
University of California Press. p. 168. ISBN 0-520-20742-4.
Burchfield, R. W., ed. 2004. "America." Fowler's Modern English Usage (ISBN 0-19-861021-1) New York: Oxford University Press, p. 48
McArthur, Tom. 1992."North American." The Oxford Companion to the English Language (ISBN 0-19-214183-X) New York: Oxford University Press, p. 707.
"Common Errors in English Usage". Prof Paul Brians, Washing State University. 16 May 2016. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2022.
"Amerigo Vespucci". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2011.
Herbermann, Charles George, ed. (1907). The Cosmographiæ Introductio of Martin Waldseemüller in Facsimile.
Translated by Edward Burke and Mario E. Cosenza, introduction by Joseph Fischer and Franz von Wieser.
New York: The United States Catholic Historical Society. p. 9. Latin: "Quarta pars per Americum Vesputium (ut in sequentibus audietur) inventa est, quam non video, cur quis jure vetet, ab Americo inventore sagacis ingenii viro Amerigen quasi Americi terram sive Americam dicendam, cum et Europa et Asia a mulieribus sua sortita sint nomina."
Arbuckle, Alex (24 December 2016). "This 509-year-old map contains the first known use of the word 'America' — but not where you may think". Mashable.
Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022.
Apianus, Petrus (1553), English: 1553 world map - Charta Cosmographica, Cum Ventorum Propria Natura et Operatione, retrieved 10 August 2022
University, © Stanford; Stanford; California 94305. "Charta Cosmographica, Cum Ventorum Propria Natura et Operatione". Barry Lawrence Ruderman Map Collection - Spotlight at Stanford.
Retrieved 10 August 2022.
a b Cohen, Jonathan. "The Naming of America: Fragments We've Shored Against Ourselves". Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
Lloyd, John; Mitchinson, John (2006). The Book of General Ignorance.
Harmony Books. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-307-39491-0. New countries or continents were never named after a person's first name, but always after the second ...
Marcou, Jules (1890). "Amerriques, Ameriggo Vespucci, and America". Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution (PDF). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 647. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2021.
Marcou, Jules (March 1875). "Origin of the Name America". The Atlantic Monthly: 291–295. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2021.
"Mercator 1587 | Envisioning the World | The First Printed Maps". lib-dbserver.princeton.edu.
Archived from the original on 12 September 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2020.
Division, United Nations Statistics. "UNSD — Methodology". unstats.un.org.
Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2018.
Division, United Nations Statistics. "UNSD — Methodology". unstats.un.org.
Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2018.
Division, United Nations Statistics. "UNSD — Methodology". unstats.un.org.
Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2018.
"Norteamérica" [North America] (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. In Ibero-America, North America is considered a subcontinent containing Canada, the United States, Mexico, Greenland, Bermuda and Saint-Pierre and Miquelon.
"Six or Seven Continents on Earth". Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "In Europe and other parts of the world, many students are taught of six continents, where North and South America are combined to form a single continent of America.
Thus, these six continents are Africa, America, Antarctica, Asia, Australia, and Europe."
"Continents". Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "six-continent model (used mostly in France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Romania, Greece, and Latin America) groups together North America+South America into the single continent America."
"AMÉRIQUE" (in French). Archived from the original on 5 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016.
"America" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016.
"Acta Solemne de la Declaración de Independencia de la América Septentrional" [Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America]. Archivos de la Independencia (in Spanish). Archivo General de la Nación.
Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 8 July 2011.
Office Québécois de la langue francaise. "Status of the French language". Government of Quebec.
Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2010.
"Central America". Encarta Encyclopedia.
Archived from the original on 3 November 2009. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
"Caribbean". The Free Dictionary.
Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
"The World Factbook – North America". Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011.
"Countries in North America – Country Reports". Country Reports.
Archived from the original on 27 April 2015.
"North America: World of Earth Science". eNotes Inc.
Archived from the original on 20 December 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2011.
"North American Region". The Trilateral Commission.
Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
Parsons, Alan; Schaffer, Jonathan (May 2004). Geopolitics of oil and natural gas.
Economic Perspectives. U.S. Department of State.[full citation needed]
"Definition of major areas and regions". United Nations.
Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
"Composition of macro geographical (continental) regions, geographical sub-regions, and selected economic and other groupings". UN Statistics Division.
Archived from the original on 16 January 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2007. (French Archived 24 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine)
"Chapter 5, Middle America". University of Minnesota. 17 June 2016. Archived from the original on 1 April 2018. Retrieved 3 April 2018.
"Middle America (region, Mesoamerica)". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011.
"SPP Background". CommerceConnect.gov.
Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.
Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2010.
"Ecoregions of North America". United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
"What's the difference between North, Latin, Central, Middle, South, Spanish and Anglo America?". About.com.
Archived from the original on 10 April 2016. Retrieved 25 January 2007.
Unless otherwise noted, land area figures are taken from "Demographic Yearbook—Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF). United Nations Statistics Division. 2008. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2010. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
""World Population Prospects 2022"". population.un.org.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved 17 July 2022.
"World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX). population.un.org ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Retrieved 17 July 2022.
a b c Population estimates are taken from the Central Bureau of Statistics Netherlands Antilles. "Statistical information: Population". Government of the Netherlands Antilles.
Archived from the original on 1 May 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
a b These population estimates are for 2010, and are taken from "The World Factbook: 2010 edition". Government of the United States, Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
a b Land area figures taken from "The World Factbook: 2010 edition". Government of the United States, Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 31 January 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2010.
"The Olympic symbols" (PDF). Lausanne: Olympic Museum and Studies Centre: International Olympic Committee. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2008. The five rings of the Olympic flag represent the five inhabited, participating continents (Africa, America, Asia, Europe, and Oceania Archived 23 February 2002 at the Wayback Machine).
Equipo (1997). "Continente". Océano Uno, Diccionario Enciclopédico y Atlas Mundial. pp. 392, 1730. ISBN 978-84-494-0188-6.[author missing]
Los Cinco Continentes (The Five Continents). Planeta-De Agostini Editions. 1997. ISBN 978-84-395-6054-8.[page needed]
"Encarta, "Norteamérica"" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 January 2009.
a b "North America". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 20 May 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
"Map And Details Of All 7 Continents". worldatlas.com.
Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016. In some parts of the world, students are taught that there are only six continents, as they combine North America and South America into one continent called the Americas.
Rosenberg, Matt (11 April 2020). "Ranking the 7 Continents by Size and Population". ThoughtCo.
Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020.
"North America Land Forms and Statistics". World Atlas.com.
Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013.
"Americas". Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications (M49). United Nations Statistics Division.
Archived from the original on 11 December 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
"North America". Atlas of Canada.
Archived from the original on 21 October 2006.
"North America Atlas". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 25 May 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2011.
"Central America". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2011.
Garcia-Castellanos, D.; Lombardo, U. (2007). "Poles of Inaccessibility: A Calculation Algorithm for the Remotest Places on Earth" (PDF). Scottish Geographical Journal. 123 (3): 227–233. doi:10.1080/14702540801897809. S2CID 55876083. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2014.
Dalziel, I.W.D. (1992). "On the organization of American Plates in the Neoproterozoic and the breakout of Laurentia". GSA Today. 2 (11): 237–241.
Merali, Zeeya; Skinner, Brian J. (9 January 2009). Visualizing Earth Science.
Wiley.
ISBN 978-0-470-41847-5.[page needed]
"Land Bridge Linking Americas Rose Earlier Than Thought". LiveScience.com. 10 April 2015. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2015.
a b c d Dodson, Peter (1997). "American Dinosaurs".  In Currie, Phillip J.; Padian, Kevin (eds.). Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs.
Academic Press. pp. 10–13.
Weishampel, David B. (2004).  Weishampel, David B.; Dodson, Peter; Halszka, Osmólska (eds.). Dinosaur distribution (Late Jurassic, North America). The Dinosauria.
Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 543–545. ISBN 978-0-520-24209-8.
a b c Wallace, Stewart W. (1948). Geology Of Canada.
The Encyclopedia of Canada.
Vol. III. Toronto: University Associates of Canada. pp. 23–26. Archived from the original on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2011 – via Marianopolis College. {{cite book}}: External link in |via= (help)
"Digging for Diamonds 24/7 Under Frozen Snap Lake". Wired.
Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2011.
"3-D Magnetic Imaging using Conjugate Gradients: Temagami anomaly". Archived from the original on 11 July 2009. Retrieved 13 March 2008.
University of Washington. "Cascades weather". University of Washington.
Archived from the original on 10 March 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2015.
SF to do. "Temperature of San Francisco". tourism.
Archived from the original on 19 July 2013.
"Rainfall of NYC". Current Results.
Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015.
Thompson, Andrea (18 May 2007). "Top 10 wettest cities". livescience.
Archived from the original on 15 February 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015.
Haberlin, Rita D. (2015). "Climates Regions of North America". Peralta Colleges, Physical Geography.
Archived from the original on 2 October 2015.
"Facts and Information about the Continent of North America". Natural History on the Net. 7 July 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2018.
Curtin, Jeremiah (2014). Creation Myths of Primitive America.
Jazzybee Verlag. p. 2. ISBN 978-3-8496-4454-3. Archived from the original on 9 February 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2015.
Krensky, Stephen (1987). Who Really Discovered America?. Illustrated by Steve Sullivan.
Scholastic Inc. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-590-40854-7.
White, Phillip M. (2006). American Indian chronology: chronologies of the American mosaic.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-313-33820-5. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014. Retrieved 29 November 2011.
Haviland, William; Prins, Harald; Walrath, Dana; McBride, Bunny (2013). Anthropology: The Human Challenge.
Cengage Learning. pp. 219, 220. ISBN 978-1-285-67758-3. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2015.
Sonneborn, Liz (January 2007). Chronology of American Indian History.
Infobase Publishing. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8160-6770-1. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014. Retrieved 29 November 2011.
Krensky, Stephen (1987). Who Really Discovered America?. Illustrated by Steve Sullivan.
Scholastic Inc. pp. 11, 13. ISBN 978-0-590-40854-7.
Wade, Lizzie (10 August 2017). "Most archaeologists think the first Americans arrived by boat.
Now, they're beginning to prove it". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aan7213. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2018.
Pauketat, Timothy R. (23 February 2012). The Oxford Handbook of North American Archaeology.
OUP US. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-19-538011-8.
Shogren, Elizabeth (16 August 2013). "N. America's Oldest Known Petroglyphs Discovered In Nevada". NPR. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2018.
a b Nash, George (2011). "America's Oldest Art – The Rock Art of Serra da Capivara". Bradshaw Foundation.
Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2018.
Skoglund, P.; Mallick, S.; Bortolini, M.C.; Chennagiri, N.; Hünemeier, T.; Petzl-Erler, M.L.; Salzano, F.M.; Patterson, N.; Reich, D. (21 July 2015). "Genetic evidence for two founding populations of the Americas". Nature. 525 (7567): 104–8. Bibcode:2015Natur.525..104S. doi:10.1038/nature14895. PMC 4982469. PMID 26196601.
Bellwood, Peter; Ness, Immanuel (2014). The Global Prehistory of Human Migration.
John Wiley & Sons. p. 194. ISBN 978-1-118-97059-1. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2015.
Krensky, Stephen (1987). Who Really Discovered America?. Illustrated by Steve Sullivan.
Scholastic Inc. pp. 17–27. ISBN 978-0-590-40854-7.
Kaplan, Robert (16 January 2007). "What is the origin of zero? How did we indicate nothingness before zero?". Scientific American.
Archived from the original on 19 March 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2008.
Groeneveld, Emma. "Vinland". World History Encyclopedia.
Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2020.
Cordell, Linda S.; Lightfoot, Kent; McManamon, Francis; Milner, George (2009). "L'Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site". Archaeology in America: An Encyclopedia.
ABC-CLIO. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-313-02189-3. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2020.
H. Ingstad and A. Stine Ingstad, The Viking Discovery of America (2000), p. 141.
Wernick, Robert (1979). The Vikings.
Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books. pp. 149–151. ISBN 0-8094-2709-5.
Little, Becky (11 October 2015). "Why Do We Celebrate Columbus Day and Not Leif Erikson Day?". National Geographic.
Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2020.
"History – Leif Erikson". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2020.
Bernard Grunberg, "La folle aventure d'Hernan Cortés", in L'Histoire n°322, July–August 2007[incomplete short citation]
Massimo Livi Bacci, Malden (2001). A Concise History of World Population: An Introduction to Population Processes (3rd ed.). Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 42–46. ISBN 978-0-631-22335-1.
Bergreen, Lawrence (2011). Columbus: The Four Voyages, 1493–1504. Penguin Group US. p. 127. ISBN 978-1101544327. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020.
a b Waugh, David (2000). "Manufacturing industries (chapter 19), World development (chapter 22)". Geography, An Integrated Approach (3rd ed.). Nelson Thornes Ltd. pp. 563, 576–579, 633, and 640. ISBN 978-0-17-444706-1.
"2010 Human development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme.
January 2010. pp. 148–151. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 November 2010. Retrieved 6 May 2011.
"Independence on ice". The Economist. 21 January 2015. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
a b N.J. Smelser; P.B. Baltes, eds. (2001). "Population Composition by Race and Ethnicity: North America". International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (PDF). New York University (1 ed.). Elsevier Science. pp. 11745–11749. ISBN 0-08-043076-7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021.
"Census Shows Native Languages Count". Language Magazine.
Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
"Aboriginal Population Profile, 2016". Statistics Canada. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
Cocking, Lauren (23 December 2016). "A Guide To Mexico's Indigenous Languages". Culture Trip.
Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
"North American Indian languages". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
The Global Religious Landscape A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Major Religious Groups as of 2010 Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, p. 18
Global Christianity A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population Archived 5 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, p. 15
"America's Changing Religious Landscape". Pew Research Center: Religion & Public Life. 12 May 2015. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2015.
"The Largest Catholic Communities". Adherents.com.
Archived from the original on 18 August 2000. Retrieved 10 November 2007.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
Johnstone, Patrick; Miller, Duane (2015). "Believers in Christ from a Muslim Background: A Global Census". IJRR. 11: 14. Archived from the original on 13 March 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2015.
"Religiously Unaffiliated". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2015.
"Religions in Canada—Census 2011". Statistics Canada/Statistique Canada. 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2015.
"The Global Religious Landscape: Jews". pewforum. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
"The Global Religious Landscape: Buddhists". pewforum. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 April 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
"The Global Religious Landscape: Muslims". Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
"World Jewish Population, 2012". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 July 2015.
DellaPergola, Sergio (2013).  Dashefsky, Arnold; Sheskin, Ira (eds.). "World Jewish Population, 2013" (PDF). Current Jewish Population Reports.
Storrs, Connecticut: North American Jewish Data Bank.
Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2015.
"Panorama de las religiones en México 2010" (PDF) (in Spanish). INEGI. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015.
"America's Changing Religious Landscape". The Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 12 May 2015. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2015.
"Demographics". Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2013.
"National Household Survey (NHS) Profile, 2011". 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2022.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (2010). "Censo de Población y Vivienda 2010 – Cuestionario básico". INEGI. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2011.
Rowe, Peter (16 April 2012). "Dalai Lama facts and figures". U-T San Diego.
Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
a b "Christianity in its Global Context" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2016.
"North America Fast Facts". World Atlas.com.
Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013.
"INEGI 2010 Census Statistics". inegi.org.mx.
Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 25 November 2010.
"Population estimates, quarterly". www150.statcan.gc.ca.
Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2018.
"Anuario Estadístico de Cuba 2009" (in Spanish) (2010 ed.). Oficina Nacional de Estadísticas, República de Cuba.
Archived from the original on 16 July 2010. Retrieved 6 November 2010. Note: An exchange rate of 1 CUC to US$1.08 was used to convert GDP.  Archived 2 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine
"Presidencia de la República; Generalidades" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 November 2007. Retrieved 14 December 2009.
"The World Factbook: Haiti". Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2011.
"2010 U.S. Census Data". 2010.census.gov.
Archived from the original on 15 February 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2011.
"The World Factbook: Jamaica". Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2011.
"Grønlands Statistik". stat.gl.
Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2020.
"Toronto's population overtakes Chicago". Toronto Star. 5 March 2013. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
Cetron, Marvin J.; O'Toole, Thomas (April 1982). Encounters with the future: a forecast of life into the 21st century.
Mcgraw-Hill. p. 34. ISBN 9780070103474.
"Population and Housing Occupancy Status: 2010 – United States – Metropolitan Statistical Area; and for Puerto Rico more information 2010 Census National Summary File of Redistricting Data". 2010 United States Census.
United States Census Bureau, Population Division. 14 April 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2011.[dead link]
"The World Factbook: Mexico". Central Intelligence Agence.
Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2011.
Statistics Canada (2006). "Toronto, Ontario (Census metropolitan area)". Census 2006. Archived from the original on 14 January 2015. Retrieved 29 January 2010.
"Detroit/Windsor Border Update: Part I – Detroit River International Crossing Study". Detroit Regional Chamber. 2006. Archived from the original on 21 March 2006.
"Chapter IV Planning for the Future: Urban & Regional Planning in the San Diego-Tijuana Region" (PDF). International Community Foundation.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 20 March 2011.
Hagler, Yoav (2009). "Defining U.S. Megaregions." New York: Regional Plan Association.[full citation needed]
Regional Plan Association (2008). America 2050: An Infrastructure Vision for 21st Century America.
New York: Regional Plan Association.[full citation needed]
"World Economic Outlook Database April 2022". 
"GDP (Current US$) – Cuba | Data". 18 March 2022. Archived from the original on 18 March 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2022.
a b c International Monetary Fund (October 2016). "List of North American countries by GDP per capita". World Economic Outlook.
International Monetary Fund.
Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
a b c "United States, Economy". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2011.
"GDP per capita (current US$) – Data". data.worldbank.org.
World Bank.
Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
International Monetary Fund (October 2016). "List of South American countries by GDP per capita". World Economic Outlook.
International Monetary Fund.
Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 25 September 2017.
a b c "Canada, Economy". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 22 September 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2011.
"World Economic Outlook Database, October 2010". International Monetary Fund.
Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2011.
"Mexico, Economy". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2011.
"Stratfor Global Market – Mexico". Stratfor. 30 August 2007. Archived from the original on 7 March 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
a b De la Torre, Miguel; Benavides, Benigno; Saldaña, José; Fernández, Jesús (2008). "Las profesiones en México: condiciones económicas, culturales y sociales". Sociología y Profesión [Sociology and Profession] (in Spanish). Monterrey: Nuevo León Autonomous University (UANL). p. 116. ISBN 978-970-24-0051-6. La economía de América del Norte se encuentra bien definida y estructurada en tres principales áreas económicas: el Tratado de Libre Comercio de América del Norte (TLCAN), el CARICOM y el Mercado Común Centroamericano
"Regional Trade Blocs". University of California, Santa Cruz.
Archived from the original on 1 July 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2011.
"North American Free Trade Agreement". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 4 September 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2011.
Fergusson, Ian. "CRS Report for Congress: United States-Canada Trade and Economic Relationship – Prospects and Challenges" (PDF). Congress Research Service.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 August 2006. Retrieved 9 June 2011.
"NAFTA Trade Volume Increases". Archived from the original on 8 August 2011.
"2010 Report Countries by GDP (PPP)". International Monetary Fund. 14 September 2006. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2011.
"BEA News Release: Gross Domestic Product" (PDF) (Press release). Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2014. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
"United States Foreign Trade Highlights". United States of America Bureau of the Census.
Archived from the original on 14 November 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
"Canadian Manufacturing Association". Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2011.
"Mexico Free Trade Agreements" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2011.
"Central American Community and Market". Pearson Education.
Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
"Ceremony at "Wedding of the Rails", May 10, 1869, at Promontory Point, Utah". World Digital Library. 10 May 1869. Archived from the original on 18 October 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013.
"Yes, the Quebec language police does serve a purpose". Accessed 5 July 2021 Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Quebec's Bill 40 further undermines the province's English language school system". Accessed 5 July 2021 Archived 9 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Emmot, Robert (1 June 2011). "Special report: If Monterrey falls Mexico falls – Reuters". Reuters.
"BAG OM GRØNLAND". Arctic Friend (in Danish). Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020.
"The 'Big Five' in North American Pro Sports" Archived 22 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, FiveThirtyEight, Nate Silver, 4 April 2014.
"MLS vs the major leagues: can soccer compete when it comes to big business?" Archived 19 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Guardian.com, 12 March 2014.
External links
Houghton Mifflin Company, "North America"
Interactive SVG version of Non-Native American Nations Control over N America 1750–2008 animation
North America at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTravel guides from WikivoyagePortals: North America Geography
North America articlesHistory
Settlement of the Americas
Paleo-Indians
Pre-Columbian era
European colonization
New Spain
New France
British North America
Turtle Island
Geography
Cities
Countries and dependent territories
by population
Extreme points
Geology
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Politics
American imperialism
North American Union (NAU)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Pan-Americanism
Transatlantic relations
Economy
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Transportation
Countries by
GDP (per capita)
PPP
per capita
HDI
Internet users
Minimum wages
Society
Languages
endangered
Universities
Culture
Art
painting
sculpture
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Music (indigenous)
Philosophy (indigenous)
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Demographics
Countries by population
density
Ethnic groups
indigenous peoples
classification
Immigration
Life expectancy
Outline
Category
Portal
Maps
Continents of Earth   
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
South America
Afro-Eurasia (Old World)
Americas (New World)
Eurasia
Oceania
Prehistoric supercontinentsColumbia
Gondwana
Kenorland
Laurasia
Nena
Pangaea
Pannotia
Rodinia
Ur
Vaalbara
Other prehistoric continentsAmazonia
Arctica
Asiamerica
Atlantica
Avalonia
Baltica
Chilenia
Cimmeria
Congo Craton
Cuyania
East Antarctica
Euramerica
Kalaharia
Kazakhstania
Laramidia
Laurentia
North China
Pampia
Sahul
Siberia
South China
Submerged continent/land and microcontinentsBeringia
Doggerland
Jan Mayen
Kerguelen Plateau
Madagascar
Mauritia
Sahul
Seychelles
Sunda
Zealandia
Possible future supercontinentsAmasia
Aurica
Novopangaea
Pangaea Proxima
Mythical, lost, and hypothesised continentsAtlantis
Hyperborea
Kumari Kandam
Lemuria
Meropis
Mu
Terra Australis
SubcontinentsAlaska
Arabia
Central America
Greenland
Indian Subcontinent
Southern Cone
See also:  World portalRegions of the worldContinental fragment Category
Countries and dependencies of North AmericaSovereign statesEntire
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
In part
Colombia
San Andrés and Providencia
France
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Caribbean Netherlands
Bonaire
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Venezuela
Nueva Esparta
Federal Dependencies
DependenciesDenmark
Greenland
France
Clipperton Island
St.
Barthélemy
St.
Martin
St.
Pierre and Miquelon
Netherlands
Aruba
Curaçao
Sint Maarten
United Kingdom
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Montserrat
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands
North America portal
Demographics by continent
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America
Earth's primary regions and subregionsRegions of AfricaCentral
Guinea region
Gulf of Guinea
Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland
Mbaise
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Cameroonian Highlands forests
East Sudanian savanna
Congolian rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau
East
African Great Lakes
Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Virunga Mountains
Kavirondo
Zanj
East African montane forests
Eastern Arc Mountains
Serengeti
Horn of Africa
Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbaria
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Dahlak Archipelago
Hanish Islands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura
Red Sea
Indian Ocean islands
Comoro Islands
Lamu Archipelago
Madagascar
Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands
Zanzibar Archipelago
Swahili coast
North
Eastern Desert
Maghreb
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains
Barbary Coast
Gibraltar Arc
Ifriqiya
Nile Valley
Nile Delta
Bashmur
Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt
Tibesti Mountains
Western Sahara
South
Rhodesia
North
South
Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Maputaland
Highveld
Fynbos
Indian Ocean coastal belt
Albany thickets
Cape Floristic Region
Skeleton Coast
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
Cape Peninsula
False Bay
West
Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Upper Guinean forests
Lower Guinean forests
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic
Guinea Highlands
Gulf of Guinea
Dahomey Gap
Niger Basin
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta
West Sudanian savanna
Yorubaland
Macro-regions
Aethiopia
Afromontane
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Greater Middle East
Guineo-Congolian region
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Miombo woodlands
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Southeast Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian savanna
Tropical Africa
Zambezian region
Regions of AsiaCentral(The 'stans)
Roof of the World
Greater  Middle  East
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee
Tartary
Transoxiana
Turan
Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Arachosia
Khwarazm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Kazakh Steppe
Betpak-Dala
Eurasian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Siachen Glacier
Tibetan Plateau
East(Northeast)
Orient
Japanese Archipelago
Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc
Korea
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria
Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian–Manchurian grassland
North China Plain
Yan Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
High-mountain Asia
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau
Karakoram
Kunlun Mountains
Qilian Mountains
Hengduan Mountains
Tarim Basin
Qinling Mountains
Sichuan Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop
Loess Plateau
Shaanbei
Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze
Yangtze Delta
Yellow River
Pearl River Delta
Yenisey Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
North(Siberia)
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Inner Asia
Northeast
Ural
Ural Mountains
Far East
Russian Far East
Okhotsk–Manchurian taiga
Beringia
Chukchi Peninsula
Kamchatka Peninsula
Extreme North
Tartary
Siberia
Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Baraba steppe
Khatanga Gulf
Transbaikal
West
Amur Basin
Yenisey Gulf
Yenisey Basin
Sikhote-Alin
Kolyma
Bering Strait
Ring of Fire
Outer Manchuria
Asia-Pacific
Southeast(East Indies)
Orient
Sundaland
Mainland/Indochina
Northern Triangle temperate forests
Maritime/Malay Archipelago
Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands
Indonesian Archipelago/Nusantara
Wallacea
Timor
Philippine Archipelago
Luzon
Mindanao
Visayas
Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt
Far East
Ring of Fire
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
South(IndianSubcontinent)
Orient
Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Kangchenjunga
Nanda Devi
Hindu Kush
Bactria
Carnatic region
Tamilakam
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Guzgan
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Gedrosia
Makran
Marathwada
Kashmir
Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range
Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern Coastal Plains
Kalinga
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
Lower Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan
Baltistan
Shigar Valley
High-mountain Asia
Karakoram
Saltoro Mountains
Siachen Glacier
Bengal
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Halar
Gulf of Mannar
Palk Strait
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Laccadive Islands
Aminidivi
Paropamisadae
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands
Maldives
Alpide belt
Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Tibetan Plateau
West(Middle East)
Greater Middle East
MENA
Middle East
Red Sea
Hanish Islands
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Elam
Persian Gulf
Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs
Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula
Najd
Al-Yamama
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia
Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert
Al-Sharat
Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia
Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh Plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Eber-Nari
Kurdistan
Levant (Syria region)
Palestine region
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley
Philistia
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Galilee
Canaan
Gilead
Syrian Desert
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Aram
Aram-Naharaim
Negev
Phoenicia
Retjenu
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Bekaa valley
Levantine Sea
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Hauran
Iranian Plateau
Dasht-e Kavir
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus
Caucasus Mountains
Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus
North Caucasus
South Caucasus
Shirvan
Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula
Kartli
Anatolia
Taurus Mountains
Aeolis
Paphlagonia
Phasiane
Isauria
Ionia
Bithynia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Caria
Corduene
Chaldia
Doris
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Galatia
Pisidia
Pontus
Mysia
Arzawa
Speri 
Sophene
Biga Peninsula
Troad
Tuwana
Alpide belt
Regions of EuropeNorth
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Jutland
Gotland
Sápmi
Ingria
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Livonia
Curonian Spit
Nemunas Delta
Cap of the North
East
Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Wallachia
Transylvania
Moldavia
Bukovina
Bessarabia
Livonia
Ruthenia
Carpathian Ruthenia
Donbas
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula
Amber Coast
Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia
East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus
Lokhaniemi
Southeastern
Balkans
Crimea
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia
Arctic
Arctic Circle
Taman Peninsula
Southern Russia
Kola Peninsula
East European Plain
Ryn Desert
Cap of the North
Central
North European Plain
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Rhineland
Eastphalia
Westphalia
Prussia
Lusatia
Bohemia
Moravia
Silesia
Czech Silesia
Pomerania
Pomerelia
Kashubia
Bukovina
Istria
Transdanubia
Polesia
Germania
Germania Slavica
West
Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Doggerland
Upper Rhine Plain
Upper Rhine
Gaul
Gascony
Normandy
Brittany
Septimania
Batavia
Gulf of Lion
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Pyrenees
Alpide belt
South
Italy
Po Valley (Padania)
Italian Peninsula
Tuscan Archipelago
Insular Italy
Aegadian Islands
Occitania
Iberia
Al-Andalus
Baetic System
Meseta Central
Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Epirus
Rumelia
Balkans
Aegean Sea
Aegean Islands
Attica
Boeotia
Opuntian Locris
Phocis
Megaris
Peloponnese
Chalkidiki
Aetolia
Gulf of Chania
Istria
Mediterranean
Alpide belt
Germanic
Romance
Celtic
Slavic countries
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin
Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland
Regions of North AmericaUpper Northern(i.e.
Canada and Alaska (US))Eastern
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
Central Canada
Great Lakes
Northern (Canada and Alaska)
North American Arctic
Arctic Circle
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Alaska
Aleutian Arc
Aleutian Islands
Aleutian Range
Alaska Peninsula
Bering Strait
Gulf of Alaska
Greenland
Western
Pacific Northwest
Cascadia
Prairie Pothole Region
Acadia
Acadian Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula
Bay de Verde Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Brodeur Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Canadian Prairies
Canadian Shield
Cook Peninsula
Cypress Hills
English Canada
French Canada
Gaspé Peninsula
Georgian Bay
Gulf Islands
Gulf of Boothia
Hudson Bay
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
James Bay
Kodiak Island
Labrador Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Newfoundland Island
Palliser's Triangle
Peace River Country
Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Strait of Georgia
The Maritimes
Vancouver Island
Lower Northern(i.e.
United States)Central
Midwest
Upper Midwest
Old Southwest
Tallgrass prairie
Eastern
Appalachia
East Coast
Northeast
Atlantic Northeast
Mid-Atlantic
New England
Southeast
Thirteen Colonies
Northern
East North Central states
Great Lakes
Southern
Deep South
Old South
South Central
Gulf Coast
Upland South
Southwestern
Four Corners
Great Basin
Llano Estacado
West Texas
Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Southern Rocky Mountains
Western
Basin and Range Province
Northwest
Cascadia
Inland Northwest
Pacific Northwest
West Coast
Pacific Coast Ranges
Oregon Trail
Mormon corridor
Calumet Region
Llano Estacado
Third Coast
Backcountry
Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Basin
Great Basin Desert
Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mountain states
Intermountain West
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area
San Francisco Bay
North Bay
East Bay
Silicon Valley
Interior Alaska–Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
"Belt" regions
Bible Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt
MexicoCentral
Bajío
Huasteca
Islas Marías
La Mixteca
Mezquital Valley
Revillagigedo Islands
Sierra Gorda
Tierra Caliente
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine–oak forests
Valley of Mexico
Northern
Baja California peninsula
Basin and Range Province
Comarca Lagunera
Gulf of California
Colorado River Delta
Isla Llave
Lerdo Landing
Pimería Alta
Salton Trough
Sierra de San Francisco
Southern
Chiapas Highlands
Isthmus of Tehuantepec
Ku-Maloob-Zaap
Petén Basin
Puuc
Sierra Madre de Chiapas
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Sierra Madre del Sur
Soconusco
Triangle of the Sun
Yucatán Peninsula
Gulf of Mexico
Sierra Madre Occidental
Sierra Madre Oriental
Central
Darién Gap
Isthmus of Panama
Lake Nicaragua
Panama Canal
Western Caribbean zone
West Indies
Caribbean
Antilles
Greater Antilles
Hispaniola
Lesser Antilles
Leeward Islands
Saint Martin Island
Virgin Islands
Southern Caribbean
Leeward Antilles
ABC islands
Windward Islands
Bajo Nuevo Bank
San Andrés and Providencia
Serranilla Bank
Lucayan Archipelago
American Cordillera
Anglo
Aridoamerica
Latin America
French
Hispanic
Latin America and the Caribbean
Mesoamerica
Middle America
Oasisamerica
Ring of Fire
North America portal
Regions of Oceania
Australia-New Guinea
Near Oceania
Pacific Islands
Pacific Plate
Remote Oceania
Zealandia
AustralasiaAustraliaAustralian Capital Territory
Canberra
Jervis Bay Territory
Jervis Bay Village
Wreck Bay Village
New South Wales
Central Coast
Central Tablelands
Central West
Far West
Greater Blue Mountains Area
Hunter
Illawarra
Mid North Coast
Monaro
New England
North West Slopes
Northern Rivers
Northern Tablelands
Orana
Riverina
South Coast
South West Slopes
Southern Highlands
Southern Tablelands
Northern Territory
Arnhem Land
Barkly Tableland
Central Australia
Darwin
Katherine
Top End
Queensland
Central West
Central
Darling Downs
Far North
Gulf Country
North
South East
South West
Wide Bay–Burnett
South Australia
Adelaide Hills
Barossa Light and Lower North
Eastern Adelaide
Eyre Western
Far North
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island
Limestone Coast
Murray and Mallee
Northern Adelaide
Southern Adelaide
Western Adelaide
Yorke and Mid North
Tasmania
Central Highlands
East Coast
Midlands
North East
North West
Northern
South West
Southern
West Coast
Victoria
Barwon South West
Gippsland
Grampians
Greater Melbourne
Hume
Loddon Mallee
Western Australia
Gascoyne
Goldfields–Esperance
Great Southern
Greater Perth
Perth Metropolitan Area
Kimberley
Mid West
Peel
Pilbara
South West
Wheatbelt
Australian External Territories
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Norfolk Island
Australian Indian Ocean Territories
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
New ZealandNorth Island
Northland
Auckland
Waikato
Bay of Plenty
Gisborne
Hawke's Bay
Taranaki
Manawatū-Whanganui
Wellington
South Island
Tasman
Nelson
Marlborough
West Coast
Canterbury
Otago
Southland
Stewart Island
NZ Outlying Islands
Chatham Islands
Kermadec Islands
Solander Islands
Three Kings Islands
NZ Subantarctic Islands
Antipodes Islands
Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Campbell Islands
Snares Islands
MelanesiaIsland Melanesia
Fiji
New Caledonia
East Melanesian Islands
Bismarck Archipelago
Gazelle Peninsula
Santa Cruz Islands
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands Archipelago
Bougainville
Bonis Peninsula
Solomon Islands
New Guinea
Aru Islands
Papua New Guinea
Highlands Region
Momase Region
Huon Gulf
Huon Peninsula
Southern Region
Western New Guinea
Papua
West Papua
Bird's Head Peninsula
Micronesia
Caroline Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Palau
Kiribati
Banaba
Gilbert Islands
Mariana Islands
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Wake Island
PolynesiaPolynesian Triangle
Easter Island
Salas and Gómez Island
Cook Islands
French Polynesia
Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Mangareva Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu Islands
Johnston Atoll
Line Islands
Jarvis Island
Kingman Reef
Kiritimati
Palmyra Atoll
Tabuaeran
Teraina
Niue
Pitcairn Islands
Pitcairn Island
Henderson Island
Ducie Island
Oeno Island
Samoan Islands
American Samoa
Independent State of Samoa
Southeastern Hawaiian Islands
Tokelau Islands
Atafu
Fakaofo
Nukunonu
Swains Island
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna
Hoorn Islands
Wallis Islands
Phoenix Islands
Canton Island
Howland and Baker Islands
Baker Island
Howland Island
Polynesian Outliers
Clipperton Island
Desventuradas Islands
Galápagos Islands
Juan Fernández Islands
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
Midway Atoll
Asia-Pacific
Indo-Australian Plate
Indo-Pacific
Islands Region
Papuan Peninsula
Ring of Fire
Regions of South AmericaEast
Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado
North
Caribbean South America
West Indies
Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin
Amazon rainforest
Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta
South
Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula
Triple Frontier
Río de la Plata
Río de la Plata Basin
West
Andes
Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range
Altiplano
Atacama Desert
Middle
Latin
Hispanic
Bolivarian
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC
Earth's polar regionsAntarctic
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands
Arctic
Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic
Earth's oceans and seasArctic Ocean
Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean
Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean
Arafura Sea
Bali Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Java Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seram Sea
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea
Southern Ocean
Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea
Endorheic basins
Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea
Others
Ocean
Sea
Superocean
Oceans portal
Category
Hemispheres of Earth
Northern
Southern
Eastern
Western
Land
Water
Portal:Geography
Commons:Maps of Earth's hemispheres
World portal
Authority control General
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Croatia
Poland
Other
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikinewsWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 09:54 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
