Physical chemistry - Wikipedia
Physical chemistry
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Physics applied to chemical systems
Not to be confused with Physiological chemistry or Chemical physics.
Between the flame and the flower is aerogel, whose synthesis has been aided greatly by physical chemistry
Part of a series onChemistryScience of matter
Index
Outline
Glossary
History (timeline)
Key components
Matter
Phase
Bond
Chemical reaction
Ion
Acid–base reaction
Redox
Chemical equilibrium
Chemical law
Branches
Analytical chemistry
Biochemistry
Organic chemistry
Inorganic chemistry
Physical chemistry
Research
Chemist (list)
List of chemistry awards
List of journals
List of unsolved problems
Chemistry portal
Category
Physical chemistry is the study of macroscopic and microscopic phenomena in chemical systems in terms of the principles, practices, and concepts of physics such as motion, energy, force, time, thermodynamics, quantum chemistry, statistical mechanics, analytical dynamics and chemical equilibria.
Physical chemistry, in contrast to chemical physics, is predominantly (but not always) a supra-molecular science, as the majority of the principles on which it was founded relate to the bulk rather than the molecular or atomic structure alone (for example, chemical equilibrium and colloids).
Some of the relationships that physical chemistry strives to resolve include the effects of:
Intermolecular forces that act upon the physical properties of materials (plasticity, tensile strength, surface tension in liquids).
Reaction kinetics on the rate of a reaction.
The identity of ions and the electrical conductivity of materials.
Surface science and electrochemistry of cell membranes.
Interaction of one body with another in terms of quantities of heat and work called thermodynamics.
Transfer of heat between a chemical system and its surroundings during change of phase or chemical reaction taking place called thermochemistry
Study of colligative properties of number of species present in solution.
Number of phases, number of components and degree of freedom (or variance) can be correlated with one another with help of phase rule.
Reactions of electrochemical cells.
Behaviour of microscopic systems using quantum mechanics and macroscopic systems using statistical thermodynamics.
Contents
Key concepts
The key concepts of physical chemistry are the ways in which pure physics is applied to chemical problems.
One of the key concepts in classical chemistry is that all chemical compounds can be described as groups of atoms bonded together and chemical reactions can be described as the making and breaking of those bonds.
Predicting the properties of chemical compounds from a description of atoms and how they bond is one of the major goals of physical chemistry.
To describe the atoms and bonds precisely, it is necessary to know both where the nuclei of the atoms are, and how electrons are distributed around them.
Disciplines
Quantum chemistry, a subfield of physical chemistry especially concerned with the application of quantum mechanics to chemical problems, provides tools to determine how strong and what shape bonds are, how nuclei move, and how light can be absorbed or emitted by a chemical compound.
Spectroscopy is the related sub-discipline of physical chemistry which is specifically concerned with the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter.
Another set of important questions in chemistry concerns what kind of reactions can happen spontaneously and which properties are possible for a given chemical mixture.
This is studied in chemical thermodynamics, which sets limits on quantities like how far a reaction can proceed, or how much energy can be converted into work in an internal combustion engine, and which provides links between properties like the thermal expansion coefficient and rate of change of entropy with pressure for a gas or a liquid.
It can frequently be used to assess whether a reactor or engine design is feasible, or to check the validity of experimental data.
To a limited extent, quasi-equilibrium and non-equilibrium thermodynamics can describe irreversible changes.
However, classical thermodynamics is mostly concerned with systems in equilibrium and reversible changes and not what actually does happen, or how fast, away from equilibrium.
Which reactions do occur and how fast is the subject of chemical kinetics, another branch of physical chemistry.
A key idea in chemical kinetics is that for reactants to react and form products, most chemical species must go through transition states which are higher in energy than either the reactants or the products and serve as a barrier to reaction.
In general, the higher the barrier, the slower the reaction.
A second is that most chemical reactions occur as a sequence of elementary reactions, each with its own transition state.
Key questions in kinetics include how the rate of reaction depends on temperature and on the concentrations of reactants and catalysts in the reaction mixture, as well as how catalysts and reaction conditions can be engineered to optimize the reaction rate.
The fact that how fast reactions occur can often be specified with just a few concentrations and a temperature, instead of needing to know all the positions and speeds of every molecule in a mixture, is a special case of another key concept in physical chemistry, which is that to the extent an engineer needs to know, everything going on in a mixture of very large numbers (perhaps of the order of the Avogadro constant, 6 x 1023) of particles can often be described by just a few variables like pressure, temperature, and concentration.
The precise reasons for this are described in statistical mechanics, a specialty within physical chemistry which is also shared with physics.
Statistical mechanics also provides ways to predict the properties we see in everyday life from molecular properties without relying on empirical correlations based on chemical similarities.
History
See also: History of chemistry
Fragment of M. Lomonosov's manuscript 'Physical Chemistry' (1752)
The term "physical chemistry" was coined by Mikhail Lomonosov in 1752, when he presented a lecture course entitled "A Course in True Physical Chemistry" (Russian: «Курс истинной физической химии») before the students of Petersburg University.
In the preamble to these lectures he gives the definition: "Physical chemistry is the science that must explain under provisions of physical experiments the reason for what is happening in complex bodies through chemical operations".
Modern physical chemistry originated in the 1860s to 1880s with work on chemical thermodynamics, electrolytes in solutions, chemical kinetics and other subjects.
One milestone was the publication in 1876 by Josiah Willard Gibbs of his paper, On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances.  This paper introduced several of the cornerstones of physical chemistry, such as Gibbs energy, chemical potentials, and Gibbs' phase rule.
The first scientific journal specifically in the field of physical chemistry was the German journal, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie, founded in 1887 by Wilhelm Ostwald and Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff.
Together with Svante August Arrhenius,  these were the leading figures in physical chemistry in the late 19th century and early 20th century.
All three were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry between 1901 and 1909.
Developments in the following decades include the application of statistical mechanics to chemical systems and work on colloids and surface chemistry, where Irving Langmuir made many contributions.
Another important step was the development of quantum mechanics into quantum chemistry from the 1930s, where Linus Pauling was one of the leading names.
Theoretical developments have gone hand in hand with developments in experimental methods, where the use of different forms of spectroscopy, such as infrared spectroscopy, microwave spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, is probably the most important 20th century development.
Further development in physical chemistry may be attributed to discoveries in nuclear chemistry, especially in isotope separation (before and during World War II), more recent discoveries in astrochemistry, as well as the development of calculation algorithms in the field of "additive physicochemical properties" (practically all physicochemical properties, such as boiling point, critical point, surface tension, vapor pressure, etc.—more than 20 in all—can be precisely calculated from chemical structure alone, even if the chemical molecule remains unsynthesized),[citation needed] and herein lies the practical importance of contemporary physical chemistry.
See Group contribution method, Lydersen method, Joback method, Benson group increment theory, quantitative structure–activity relationship
Journals
Main category: Physical chemistry journals
Some journals that deal with physical chemistry include Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie (1887); Journal of Physical Chemistry A (from 1896 as Journal of Physical Chemistry, renamed in 1997); Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (from 1999, formerly Faraday Transactions with a history dating back to 1905); Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics (1947); Annual Review of Physical Chemistry (1950); Molecular Physics (1957); Journal of Physical Organic Chemistry (1988); Journal of Physical Chemistry B (1997); ChemPhysChem (2000); Journal of Physical Chemistry C (2007); and Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters (from 2010, combined letters previously published in the separate journals)
Historical journals that covered both chemistry and physics include Annales de chimie et de physique (started in 1789, published under the name given here from 1815 to 1914).
Branches and related topics
Thermochemistry
Chemical kinetics
Quantum chemistry
Electrochemistry
Photochemistry
Surface chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Spectroscopy
Biophysical chemistry
Materials science
Physical organic chemistry
Micromeritics
See also
List of important publications in chemistry#Physical chemistry
List of unsolved problems in chemistry#Physical chemistry problems
Physical biochemistry
Category:Physical chemists
References
Torben Smith Sørensen (1999). Surface chemistry and electrochemistry of membranes.
CRC Press. p. 134. ISBN 0-8247-1922-0.
a b Atkins, Peter and Friedman, Ronald (2005). Molecular Quantum Mechanics, p. 249. Oxford University Press, New York.
ISBN 0-19-927498-3.
Atkins, Peter and Friedman, Ronald (2005). Molecular Quantum Mechanics, p. 342. Oxford University Press, New York.
ISBN 0-19-927498-3.
Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M. (1980). Statistical Physics, 3rd Ed. p. 52. Elsevier Butterworth Heinemann, New York.
ISBN 0-7506-3372-7.
a b Hill, Terrell L. (1986). Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics, p. 1. Dover Publications, New York.
ISBN 0-486-65242-4.
Schmidt, Lanny D. (2005). The Engineering of Chemical Reactions, 2nd Ed. p. 30. Oxford University Press, New York.
ISBN 0-19-516925-5.
Schmidt, Lanny D. (2005). The Engineering of Chemical Reactions, 2nd Ed. pp. 25, 32. Oxford University Press, New York.
ISBN 0-19-516925-5.
Chandler, David (1987). Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, p. 54. Oxford University Press, New York.
ISBN 978-0-19-504277-1.
Vucinich, Alexander (1963). Science in Russian culture.
Stanford University Press. p. 388. ISBN 0-8047-0738-3.
Josiah Willard Gibbs, 1876, "On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances", Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Sciences
Laidler, Keith (1993). The World of Physical Chemistry.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 48. ISBN 0-19-855919-4.
Herbst, Eric (May 12, 2005). "Chemistry of Star-Forming Regions". Journal of Physical Chemistry A. 109 (18): 4017–4029. Bibcode:2005JPCA..109.4017H. doi:10.1021/jp050461c.
PMID 16833724.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Physical chemistry.
Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Physical chemistry
At Wikiversity, you can learn more and teach others about Physical chemistry at the Department of Physical chemistry
The World of Physical Chemistry (Keith J. Laidler, 1993)
Physical Chemistry from Ostwald to Pauling (John W. Servos, 1996)
Physical Chemistry: neither Fish nor Fowl? (Joachim Schummer, The Autonomy of Chemistry, Würzburg, Königshausen & Neumann, 1998, pp. 135–148)
Cathedrals of Science (Patrick Coffey, 2008)
The Cambridge History of Science: The modern physical and mathematical sciences (Mary Jo Nye, 2003)
Branches of chemistry
Glossary of chemical formulae
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table
Analytical
Instrumental chemistry
Electroanalytical methods
Spectroscopy
IR
Raman
UV-Vis
NMR
Mass spectrometry
EI
ICP
MALDI
Separation process
Chromatography
GC
HPLC
Crystallography
Characterization
Titration
Wet chemistry
Calorimetry
Elemental analysis
Theoretical
Quantum chemistry
Computational chemistry
Mathematical chemistry
Molecular modelling
Molecular mechanics
Molecular dynamics
Physical
Electrochemistry
Spectroelectrochemistry
Photoelectrochemistry
Thermochemistry
Chemical thermodynamics
Surface science
Interface and colloid science
Micromeritics
Cryochemistry
Sonochemistry
Structural chemistry
Chemical physics
Femtochemistry
Chemical kinetics
Spectroscopy
Photochemistry
Spin chemistry
Microwave chemistry
Equilibrium chemistry
Inorganic
Coordination chemistry
Magnetochemistry
Organometallic chemistry
Organolanthanide chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Ceramic chemistry
Organic
Stereochemistry
Alkane stereochemistry
Physical organic chemistry
Organic reactions
Organic synthesis
Retrosynthetic analysis
Enantioselective synthesis
Total synthesis / Semisynthesis
Fullerene chemistry
Polymer chemistry
Petrochemistry
Dynamic covalent chemistry
Biological
Biochemistry
Molecular biology
Cell biology
Chemical biology
Bioorthogonal chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Pharmacology
Clinical chemistry
Neurochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Bioorganometallic chemistry
Bioinorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Interdisciplinarity
Nuclear chemistry
Radiochemistry
Radiation chemistry
Actinide chemistry
Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry
Geochemistry
Biogeochemistry
Photogeochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Atmospheric chemistry
Ocean chemistry
Clay chemistry
Carbochemistry
Food chemistry
Carbohydrate chemistry
Food physical chemistry
Agricultural chemistry
Soil chemistry
Chemistry education
Amateur chemistry
General chemistry
Clandestine chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Forensic toxicology
Post-mortem chemistry
Nanochemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Chemical synthesis
Green chemistry
Click chemistry
Combinatorial chemistry
Biosynthesis
Chemical engineering
Materials science
Metallurgy
Ceramic engineering
Polymer science
See also
History of chemistry
Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Timeline of chemistry
of element discoveries
"The central science"
Chemical reaction
Catalysis
Chemical element
Chemical compound
Atom
Molecule
Ion
Chemical substance
Chemical bond
Alchemy
Quantum mechanics
Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject
Branches of physicsDivisions
Pure
Applied
Engineering
Approaches
Experimental
Theoretical
Computational
Classical
Classical mechanics
Newtonian
Analytical
Celestial
Continuum
Acoustics
Classical electromagnetism
Classical optics
Ray
Wave
Thermodynamics
Statistical
Non-equilibrium
Modern
Relativistic mechanics
Special
General
Nuclear physics
Quantum mechanics
Particle physics
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
Atomic
Molecular
Modern optics
Condensed matter physics
Interdisciplinary
Astrophysics
Atmospheric physics
Biophysics
Chemical physics
Geophysics
Materials science
Mathematical physics
Medical physics
Ocean physics
Quantum information science
Related
History of physics
Nobel Prize in Physics
Physics education
Timeline of physics discoveries
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiversity
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 2 September 2022, at 18:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
