Taiwan - Wikipedia
Taiwan
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Country in East Asia
"Republic of China" redirects here.
For the People's Republic of China, see China.
For other uses, see Republic of China (disambiguation).
For other uses, see Taiwan (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 24°N 121°E﻿ / ﻿24°N 121°E﻿ / 24; 121
Republic of China中華民國 (Chinese)[I]Zhōnghuá Mínguó (Pinyin)
Flag
Emblem
Anthem: 中華民國國歌Zhōnghuá Mínguó Guógē"National Anthem of the Republic of China"Flag anthem: 中華民國國旗歌Zhōnghuá Míngúo Gúoqígē"National Flag Anthem of the Republic of China"National seal:中華民國之璽Seal of the Republic of ChinaNational flower:梅花Plum blossomShow globe (island of Taiwan highlighted)Show map of territories administered by the ROC (Free Area)Show map of Taiwan (dark green) with historical ROC territorial claims (light green)CapitalTaipei[a]25°04′N 121°31′E﻿ / ﻿25.067°N 121.517°E﻿ / 25.067; 121.517Largest cityNew Taipei CityOfficial languagesStandard Chinese[b]Official scriptTraditional ChineseNational languages[d]
Mandarin[c]
Hokkien[c]
Hakka
Formosan
Matsu[c]
Wuqiu[c]
Taiwan Sign Language
Ethnic groups  (2016)95–97% Han Taiwanese2.3% Indigenous[e]0.7–2.7% OthersReligion  (2020)35.1% Buddhism33.0% Taoism26.7% No religion3.9% Christianity1.3% OthersDemonym(s)TaiwaneseGovernmentUnitary semi-presidential republic• President Tsai Ing-wen• Vice President Lai Ching-te• Premier Su Tseng-chang• Legislative Yuan President You Si-kun• Control Yuan President Chen Chu• Judicial Yuan President Hsu Tzong-li• Examination Yuan President Huang Jong-tsun
LegislatureLegislative YuanEstablishment• First European polity established c.
August 1624 • First Han Chinese polity established 14 June 1661• Annexed by the Qing dynasty 5 September 1683• Ceded to the Empire of Japan 17 April 1895[f]• Republic of China established 10 October 1911[g]• Taiwan and Penghu restored to ROC rule[h] 25 October 1945• Current constitution adopted 25 December 1947• Current ROC government established 20 May 1948• ROC government moved to Taipei 7 December 1949• Loss of UN representation[i] 25 October 1971• Cross-Strait relations legally defined 31 July 1992
Area • Total36,197 km2 (13,976 sq mi)Population• July  1, 2022 estimate 23,894,394 (56th)• 2010 census23,123,866• Density650/km2 (1,683.5/sq mi) (10th)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate• Total $1.605 trillion (19th)• Per capita $68,730 (12th)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate• Total $841.209 billion (21st)• Per capita $36,051 (31st)Gini (2017) 34.1mediumHDI (2019) 0.916very high · 23rdCurrencyNew Taiwan dollar (NT$) (TWD)Time zoneUTC+8 (National Standard Time)Date formatYYYY-MM-DDYYY-MM-DD (Minguo calendar)Driving siderightCalling code+886ISO 3166 codeTWInternet TLD.tw.台灣.台湾
Taiwan,[II][j] officially the Republic of China (ROC),[I][k] is a country in East Asia, at the junction of the East and South China Seas in the northwestern Pacific Ocean, with the People's Republic of China (PRC) to the northwest, Japan to the northeast, and the Philippines to the south.
The territories controlled by the ROC consist of 168 islands,[l] with a combined area of 36,193 square kilometres (13,974 sq mi). The main island of Taiwan, also known as Formosa, has an area of 35,808 square kilometres (13,826 sq mi), with mountain ranges dominating the eastern two-thirds and plains in the western third, where its highly urbanised population is concentrated.
The capital, Taipei, forms along with New Taipei City and Keelung the largest metropolitan area of Taiwan.
Other major cities include Taoyuan, Taichung, Tainan, and Kaohsiung.
With around 23.9 million inhabitants, Taiwan is among the most densely populated countries in the world.
Taiwan has been settled for at least 25,000 years.
Ancestors of Taiwanese indigenous peoples settled the island around 6,000 years ago.
In the 17th century, large-scale Han Chinese (specifically the Hakkas and Hoklos) immigration to western Taiwan began under a Dutch colony and annexed by the Kingdom of Tungning but was later taken control of by the Qing of China, and ceded to the Empire of Japan in 1895. The Republic of China, which had overthrown the Qing in 1911, took control of Taiwan on behalf of the Allies of World War II following the surrender of Japan in 1945. The defeat of the ROC by Communist forces on the mainland forced the consequent retreat to Taiwan in 1949. Its effective jurisdiction has since been limited to Taiwan and smaller islands.
In the early 1960s, Taiwan entered a period of rapid economic growth and industrialisation called the "Taiwan Miracle". In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the ROC transitioned from a one-party military dictatorship to a multi-party democracy with a semi-presidential system.
Taiwan's export-oriented industrial economy is the 21st-largest in the world by nominal GDP and 19th-largest by PPP measures, with a focus on steel, machinery, electronics and chemicals manufacturing.
Taiwan is a developed country, ranking 20th on GDP per capita.
It is ranked highly in terms of civil liberties, healthcare, and human development.[m]
The political status of Taiwan is contentious.
The ROC no longer represents China as a member of the United Nations, after UN members voted in 1971 to recognize the PRC instead.
The ROC maintained its claim of being the sole legitimate representative of China and its territory, although this has been downplayed since its democratization in the 1990s.
Taiwan is claimed by the PRC, which refuses diplomatic relations with countries that recognise the ROC. Taiwan maintains official diplomatic relations with 13 out of 193 UN member states and the Holy See, though many others maintain unofficial diplomatic ties through representative offices and institutions that function as de facto embassies and consulates.
International organisations in which the PRC participates either refuse to grant membership to Taiwan or allow it to participate only on a non-state basis under various names.
Domestically, the major political contention is between parties favouring eventual Chinese unification and promoting a pan-Chinese identity, contrasted with those aspiring to formal international recognition and promoting a Taiwanese identity; into the 21st century, both sides have moderated their positions to broaden their appeal.
Contents
Etymology
See also: Chinese Taipei, Names of China, and China and the United Nations
Name of the island
Various names for the island of Taiwan remain in use, each derived from explorers or rulers during a particular historical period.
The name Formosa (福爾摩沙) dates from 1542, when Portuguese sailors sighted an uncharted island and noted it on their maps as Ilha Formosa ("beautiful island"). The name Formosa eventually "replaced all others in European literature" and remained in common use among English speakers into the 20th century.
In the early 17th century, the Dutch East India Company established a commercial post at Fort Zeelandia (modern-day Anping, Tainan) on a coastal sandbar called "Tayouan", after their ethnonym for a nearby Taiwanese aboriginal tribe, possibly Taivoan people, written by the Dutch and Portuguese variously as Taiouwang, Tayowan, Teijoan, etc.
This name was also adopted into the Chinese vernacular (in particular, Hokkien, as Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Tāi-oân/Tâi-oân) as the name of the sandbar and nearby area (Tainan). The modern word "Taiwan" is derived from this usage, which is written in different transliterations (大員, 大圓, 大灣, 臺員, 臺圓 and 臺窩灣) in Chinese historical records.
The area occupied by modern-day Tainan was the first permanent settlement by both European colonists and Chinese immigrants.
The settlement grew to be the island's most important trading centre and served as its capital until 1887.
Use of the current Chinese name (臺灣/台灣) became official as early as 1684 with the establishment of Taiwan Prefecture which centred in modern-day Tainan.
Through its rapid development the entire Formosan mainland eventually became known as "Taiwan".
In his Daoyi Zhilüe (1349), Wang Dayuan used "Liuqiu" as a name for the island of Taiwan, or the part of it closest to Penghu.
Elsewhere, the name was used for the Ryukyu Islands in general or Okinawa, the largest of them; indeed the name Ryūkyū is the Japanese form of Liúqiú. The name also appears in the Book of Sui (636) and other early works, but scholars cannot agree on whether these references are to the Ryukyus, Taiwan or even Luzon.
Name of the country
The official name of the country in English is the "Republic of China"; it has also been known under various names throughout its existence.
Shortly after the ROC's establishment in 1912, while it was still located on the Chinese mainland, the government used the short form "China" (Zhōngguó (中國)) to refer to itself, which derives from zhōng ("central" or "middle") and guó ("state, nation-state"),[n] a term which also developed under the Zhou dynasty in reference to its royal demesne,[o] and the name was then applied to the area around Luoyi (present-day Luoyang) during the Eastern Zhou and then to China's Central Plain before being used as an occasional synonym for the state during the Qing era.
The name of the Republic had stemmed from the party manifesto of Tongmenghui in 1905, which says the four goals of the Chinese revolution was "to expel the Manchu rulers, to revive Chunghwa, to establish a Republic, and to distribute land equally among the people.(Chinese: 驅除韃虜, 恢復中華, 創立民國, 平均地權; pinyin: Qūchú dálǔ, huīfù Zhōnghuá, chuànglì mínguó, píngjūn dì quán)." The convener of Tongmenghui and Chinese revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen proposed the name Chunghwa Minkuo as the assumed name of the new country when the revolution succeeded.
During the 1950s and 1960s, after the ROC government had withdrawn to Taiwan upon losing the Chinese Civil War, it was commonly referred to as "Nationalist China" (or "Free China") to differentiate it from "Communist China" (or "Red China"). It was a member of the United Nations representing China until 1971, when the ROC lost its seat to the People's Republic of China.
Over subsequent decades, the Republic of China has become commonly known as "Taiwan", after the main island.
In some contexts, including ROC government publications, the name is written as "Republic of China (Taiwan)", "Republic of China/Taiwan", or sometimes "Taiwan (ROC)".
The Republic of China participates in most international forums and organizations under the name "Chinese Taipei" as a compromise with the People's Republic of China (PRC). For instance, it is the name under which it has participated in the Olympic Games as well as the World Trade Organization.
In 2009, after reaching an agreement with Beijing, the ROC participated in the World Health Organization for the first time in 38 years, under the name "Chinese Taipei". "Taiwan authorities" is sometimes used by the PRC to refer to the current government in Taiwan.
History
Main article: History of Taiwan
Early settlement (to 1683)
Main articles: Prehistory of Taiwan, Dutch Formosa, Spanish Formosa, Kingdom of Middag, and Kingdom of Tungning
The Anthropomorphic Jar, unearthed at Shihsanhang, is around 500 to 1800 years old
Taiwan was joined to the Asian mainland in the Late Pleistocene, until sea levels rose about 10,000 years ago.
Fragmentary human remains dated 20,000 to 30,000 years ago have been found on the island, as well as later artifacts of a Paleolithic culture.
These people were similar to the negritos of the Philippines.
Around 6,000 years ago, Taiwan was settled by farmers, most likely from what is now southeast China. 
They are believed to be the ancestors of today's Taiwanese indigenous peoples, whose languages belong to the Austronesian language family, but show much greater diversity than the rest of the family, which spans a huge area from Maritime Southeast Asia west to Madagascar and east as far as New Zealand, Hawaii and Easter Island.
This has led linguists to propose Taiwan as the urheimat of the family, from which seafaring peoples dispersed across Southeast Asia and the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Trade links with the Philippines subsisted from the early 2nd millennium BC, including the use of jade from eastern Taiwan in the Philippine jade culture.
The raw jade from Taiwan which was further processed in the Philippines was the basis for Taiwanese-Philippine commerce with ancient Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, and Cambodia.
Han Chinese fishermen began settling in the Penghu islands in the 13th century.
In November 1281, the Yuan dynasty under Emperor Shizu officially established the Penghu Patrol and Inspection Agency under the jurisdiction of Tong'an County, incorporating Penghu into China's sovereign domain, 403 years earlier than Taiwan island.
Hostile tribes, and a lack of valuable trade products, meant that few outsiders visited the main island until the 16th century.
During the 16th century, visits to the coast by fishermen and traders from Fujian, as well as Chinese and Japanese pirates, became more frequent.
In the 15th century, the Ming ordered the evacuation of the Penghu Islands as part of their maritime ban.
When these restrictions were removed in the late 16th century, legal fishing communities, most of which hailing from Tong'an County, were re-established on the Penghu Islands.
The Dutch East India Company attempted to establish a trading outpost on the Penghu Islands (Pescadores) in 1622, but was driven off by Ming forces.
In 1624, the company established a stronghold called Fort Zeelandia on the coastal islet of Tayouan, which is now part of the main island at Anping, Tainan.
When the Dutch arrived, they found southwestern Taiwan already frequented by a mostly transient Chinese population numbering close to 1,500. David Wright, a Scottish agent of the company who lived on the island in the 1650s, described the lowland areas of the island as being divided among 11 chiefdoms ranging in size from two settlements to 72. Some of these fell under Dutch control, including the Kingdom of Middag in the central western plains, while others remained independent.
The Company encouraged farmers to immigrate from Fujian and work the lands under Dutch control.
By the 1660s, some 30,000 to 50,000 Chinese were living on the island.
Fort Zeelandia, the Governor's residence in Dutch Formosa
In 1626, the Spanish Empire landed on and occupied northern Taiwan as a trading base, first at Keelung and in 1628 building Fort San Domingo at Tamsui.
This colony lasted 16 years until 1642, when the last Spanish fortress fell to Dutch forces.
The Dutch then marched south, subduing hundreds of villages in the western plains between their new possessions in the north and their base at Tayouan.
Following the fall of the Ming dynasty in Beijing in 1644, Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong) pledged allegiance to the Yongli Emperor of Southern Ming and attacked the Qing dynasty along the southeastern coast of China.
In 1661, under increasing Qing pressure, he moved his forces from his base in Xiamen to Taiwan, expelling the Dutch in the following year.
Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and some analysts consider his regime to be loyal to the Ming, while others argue that he acted as an independent ruler and his intentions were unclear.
After being ousted from Taiwan, the Dutch allied with the new Qing dynasty in China against the Zheng regime in Taiwan.
Following some skirmishes the Dutch retook the northern fortress at Keelung in 1664. Zheng Jing sent troops to dislodge the Dutch, but they were unsuccessful.
The Dutch held out at Keelung until 1668, when aborigine resistance, and the lack of progress in retaking any other parts of the island persuaded the colonial authorities to abandon this final stronghold and withdraw from Taiwan altogether.
Qing rule (1683–1895)
Main article: Taiwan under Qing rule
Chihkan Tower, originally built as Fort Provintia by the Dutch, was rebuilt under Qing rule
In 1683, following the defeat of Koxinga's grandson by an armada led by Admiral Shi Lang, the Qing dynasty formally annexed Taiwan, making it a prefecture of Fujian province while retaining its administrative seat (now Tainan) under Koxinga as the capital.
The Qing imperial government tried to reduce piracy and vagrancy in the area, issuing a series of edicts to manage immigration and respect aboriginal land rights.
Immigrants mostly from southern Fujian continued to enter Taiwan.
The border between taxpaying lands and what was considered "savage" lands shifted eastward, with some aborigines becoming sinicized while others retreated into the mountains.
During this time, there were a number of conflicts between different ethnic groups of Han Chinese, Quanzhou Minnanese feuding with Zhangzhou and Hakka peasants, and major clan fights between Minnans (Hoklos), Hakkas and aborigines too.
There were more than a hundred rebellions, riots, and instances of civil strife during the Qing administration, including the Lin Shuangwen rebellion (1786–1788). Their frequency was evoked by the common saying "every three years an uprising, every five years a rebellion" (三年一反、五年一亂), primarily in reference to the period between 1820 and 1850. These conditions notwithstanding, the production of sugar became profitable on the island and, together with rice, provided surpluses for export to the mainland.
Meanwhile, a rapidly increasing population settled the western coastal areas.
Northern Taiwan and the Penghu Islands were the scene of subsidiary campaigns in the Sino-French War (August 1884 to April 1885). The French occupied Keelung on 1 October 1884, but were repulsed from Tamsui a few days later.
The French won some tactical victories but were unable to exploit them, and the Keelung Campaign ended in stalemate.
The Pescadores Campaign, beginning on 31 March 1885, was a French victory, but had no long-term consequences.
The French evacuated both Keelung and the Penghu archipelago after the end of the war.
In 1887, the Qing upgraded the island's administration from being the Taiwan Prefecture of Fujian Province to Fujian-Taiwan-Province, the twentieth in the empire, with its capital at Taipei.
This was accompanied by a modernization drive that included a telegraph line between Tainan and Taipei and the building of China's first railway.
Japanese rule (1895–1945)
Main article: Taiwan under Japanese rule
Following the Qing defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), Taiwan, its associated islands, and the Penghu archipelago were ceded to the Empire of Japan by the Treaty of Shimonoseki, along with other concessions.
Inhabitants on Taiwan and Penghu wishing to remain Qing subjects were given a two-year grace period to sell their property and move to mainland China.
Very few Formosans saw this as feasible.
On 25 May 1895, a group of pro-Qing high officials proclaimed the Republic of Formosa to resist impending Japanese rule.
Japanese forces entered the capital at Tainan and quelled this resistance on 21 October 1895. Guerrilla fighting continued periodically until about 1902 and ultimately took the lives of 14,000 Taiwanese, or 0.5 per cent of the population.
Several subsequent rebellions against the Japanese (the Beipu uprising of 1907, the Tapani incident of 1915, and the Musha incident of 1930) were all unsuccessful but demonstrated opposition to Japanese colonial rule.
A sugarcane mill and its railways in Tainan in 1930s
The colonial period was instrumental to the industrialization of the island, with its expansion of railways and other transport networks, the building of an extensive sanitation system, the establishment of a formal education system, and an end to the practice of headhunting.
During this period, the human and natural resources of Taiwan were used to aid the development of Japan.
The production of cash crops such as sugar greatly increased, especially since sugar cane was salable only to a few Japanese sugar mills, and large areas were therefore diverted from the production of rice, which the Formosans could market or consume themselves.
By 1939, Taiwan was the seventh-greatest sugar producer in the world.
Still, the Hans and the aborigines were classified as second- and third-class citizens.
Many prestigious government and business positions were closed to them, leaving few natives capable of taking on leadership and management roles decades later when Japan relinquished the island.
After suppressing Chinese guerrillas in the first decade of their rule, Japanese authorities engaged in a series of bloody campaigns against the mountain aborigines, culminating in the Musha Incident of 1930. Intellectuals and labourers who participated in left-wing movements within Taiwan were also arrested and massacred (e.g.
Chiang Wei-shui and Masanosuke Watanabe). Around 1935, the Japanese began an island-wide assimilation project to bind the island more firmly to the Japanese Empire.
People were taught to see themselves as Japanese under the Kominka Movement, during which Taiwanese culture and religion were outlawed, and the citizens were encouraged to adopt Japanese surnames.
By 1938, 309,000 Japanese settlers were residing in Taiwan.
Burdened by Japan's upcoming war effort, the island was developed into a naval and air base while its agriculture, industry, and commerce suffered.
Initial air attacks and the subsequent invasion of the Philippines were launched from Taiwan.
The Imperial Japanese Navy operated heavily from Taiwanese ports, and its think tank "South Strike Group" was based at the Taihoku Imperial University in Taipei.
Military bases and industrial centres, such as Kaohsiung and Keelung, became targets of heavy Allied bombings, which also destroyed many of the factories, dams, and transport facilities built by the Japanese.
In October 1944, the Formosa Air Battle was fought between American carriers and Japanese forces in Taiwan.
During the course of World War II, tens of thousands of Taiwanese served in the Japanese military.
In 1944, Lee Teng-hui, who would become Taiwan's president later in life, volunteered for service in the Imperial Japanese Army and became a second lieutenant.
His elder brother, Lee Teng-chin (李登欽), also volunteered for the Imperial Japanese Navy and died in Manila.
In addition, over 2,000 women, euphemistically called "comfort women", were forced into sexual slavery for Imperial Japanese troops.
After Japan's surrender in WWII, most of Taiwan's approximately 300,000 Japanese residents were expelled and sent to Japan.
Republic of China (1945–present)
Main articles: Republic of China (1912–1949) and History of Taiwan (1945–present)
See also: History of the Republic of China and Chinese Civil War
General Chen Yi (right) accepting the receipt of General Order No. 1 from Rikichi Andō (left), the last Japanese Governor-General of Taiwan, in Taipei City Hall
While Taiwan was still under Japanese rule, the Republic of China was founded on the mainland on 1 January 1912, following the Xinhai Revolution, which began with the Wuchang uprising on 10 October 1911, replacing the Qing dynasty and ending over two thousand years of imperial rule in China.
From its founding until 1949 it was based in mainland China.
Central authority waxed and waned in response to warlordism (1915–28), Japanese invasion (1937–45), and the Chinese Civil War (1927–50), with central authority strongest during the Nanjing decade (1927–37), when most of China came under the control of the Kuomintang (KMT) under an authoritarian one-party state.
In September 1945 following Japan's surrender in WWII, ROC forces, assisted by small American teams, prepared an amphibious lift into Taiwan to accept the surrender of the Japanese military forces there, under General Order No. 1, and take over the administration of Taiwan.
On 25 October, General Rikichi Andō, governor-general of Taiwan and commander-in-chief of all Japanese forces on the island, signed the receipt and handed it over to ROC General Chen Yi to complete the official turnover.
Chen proclaimed that day to be "Taiwan Retrocession Day", but the Allies, having entrusted Taiwan and the Penghu Islands to Chinese administration and military occupation, nonetheless considered them to be under Japanese sovereignty until 1952 when the Treaty of San Francisco took effect.
In the 1943 Cairo Declaration, US, UK, and ROC representatives specified territories such as Formosa and the Pescadores to be restored by Japan to the Republic of China.
Its terms were later referred to in the 1945 Potsdam Declaration, whose provisions Japan agreed to carry out in its instrument of surrender.
Due to disagreements over which government (PRC or ROC) to invite, China did not attend the eventual signing of the Treaty of San Francisco, whereby Japan renounced all titles and claims to Formosa and the Pescadores without specifying to whom they were surrendered.
In 1952, Japan and the ROC signed the Treaty of Taipei, recognizing that all treaties concluded before 9 December 1941 between China and Japan have become null and void.
Interpretations of these documents and their legal implications give rise to the debate over the sovereignty status of Taiwan.
While initially enthusiastic about the return of Chinese administration and the Three Principles of the People, Formosans grew increasingly dissatisfied about being excluded from higher positions, the postponement of local elections even after the enactment of a constitution on the mainland, the smuggling of valuables off the island, the expropriation of businesses into government operated monopolies, and the hyperinflation of 1945–1949. The shooting of a civilian on 28 February 1947 triggered island-wide unrest, which was suppressed by Chen with military force in what is now called the February 28 Incident.
Mainstream estimates of the number killed range from 18,000 to 30,000. Many native leaders were killed, as well as students and some mainlanders.
Chen was later relieved and replaced by Wei Tao-ming, who made an effort to undo previous mismanagement by re-appointing a good proportion of islanders and re-privatizing businesses.
The Nationalists' retreat to Taipei
After the end of World War II, the Chinese Civil War resumed between the Chinese Nationalists (Kuomintang), led by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), led by CCP Chairman Mao Zedong.
Throughout the months of 1949, a series of Chinese Communist offensives led to the capture of its capital Nanjing on 23 April and the subsequent defeat of the Nationalist army on the mainland, and the Communists founded the People's Republic of China on 1 October.
On 7 December 1949, after the loss of four capitals, Chiang evacuated his Nationalist government to Taiwan and made Taipei the temporary capital of the ROC (also called the "wartime capital" by Chiang Kai-shek). Some 2 million people, consisting mainly of soldiers, members of the ruling Kuomintang and intellectual and business elites, were evacuated from mainland China to Taiwan at that time, adding to the earlier population of approximately six million.
These people came to be known in Taiwan as "waisheng ren" (外省人), residents who came to the island in the 1940s and 50s after Japan's surrender, as well as their descendants.
In addition, the ROC government took to Taipei many national treasures and much of China's gold and foreign currency reserves.
After losing control of mainland China in 1949, the ROC retained control of Taiwan and Penghu (Taiwan, ROC), parts of Fujian (Fujian, ROC)—specifically Kinmen, Wuqiu (now part of Kinmen) and the Matsu Islands and two major islands in the South China Sea (within the Dongsha/Pratas and Nansha/Spratly island groups). These territories have remained under ROC governance until the present day.
The ROC also briefly retained control of the entirety of Hainan (an island province), parts of Zhejiang (Chekiang)—specifically the Dachen Islands and Yijiangshan Islands—and portions of Tibet, Qinghai, Sinkiang and Yunnan.
The Communists captured Hainan in 1950, captured the Dachen Islands and Yijiangshan Islands during the First Taiwan Strait Crisis in 1955 and defeated the ROC revolts in Northwest China in 1958. ROC forces in Yunnan province entered Burma and Thailand in the 1950s and were defeated by Communists in 1961. Ever since losing control of mainland China, the Kuomintang continued to claim sovereignty over 'all of China', which it defined to include mainland China (including Tibet), Taiwan (including Penghu), Outer Mongolia, and other minor territories.
Martial law era (1949–1987)
See also: Martial law in Taiwan and Taiwan Miracle
Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Kuomintang from 1925 until his death in 1975
Martial law, declared on Taiwan in May 1949, continued to be in effect after the central government relocated to Taiwan.
It was also used as a way to suppress the political opposition and was not repealed until 38 years later in 1987. During the White Terror, as the period is known, 140,000 people were imprisoned or executed for being perceived as anti-KMT or pro-Communist.
Many citizens were arrested, tortured, imprisoned and executed for their real or perceived link to the Chinese Communist Party.
Since these people were mainly from the intellectual and social elite, an entire generation of political and social leaders was decimated.
In 1998, a law was passed to create the "Compensation Foundation for Improper Verdicts" which oversaw compensation to White Terror victims and families.
President Ma Ying-jeou made an official apology in 2008, expressing hope that there would never be a tragedy similar to White Terror.
Due to the eruption of Korean war, and in the context of the Cold War, US President Harry S. Truman decided to intervene again and dispatched the United States Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent hostilities between Taiwan and mainland China.
Continuing fierce combat between both sides of the Chinese Civil War through the 1950s, and intervention by the United States notably resulted in legislation such as the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty and the Formosa Resolution of 1955. By virtue of aforementioned pacts, the KMT regime received substantial foreign aid from the US between 1951 and 1965.  In the Treaty of San Francisco and the Treaty of Taipei, which came into force respectively on 28 April 1952 and 5 August 1952, Japan formally renounced all right, claim and title to Taiwan and Penghu, and renounced all treaties signed with China before 1942. Neither treaty specified to whom sovereignty over the islands should be transferred, because the United States and the United Kingdom disagreed on whether the ROC or the PRC was the legitimate government of China.
With Chiang Kai-shek, US president Dwight D. Eisenhower waved to crowds during his visit to Taipei in June 1960.
As the Chinese Civil War continued without truce, the government built up military fortifications throughout Taiwan.
Within this effort, KMT veterans built the now famous Central Cross-Island Highway through the Taroko Gorge in the 1950s.
The two sides would continue to engage in sporadic military clashes with seldom publicized details well into the 1960s on the China coastal islands with an unknown number of night raids.
During the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis in September 1958, Taiwan's landscape saw Nike-Hercules missile batteries added, with the formation of the 1st Missile Battalion Chinese Army that would not be deactivated until 1997. Newer generations of missile batteries have since replaced the Nike Hercules systems throughout the island.
During the 1960s and 1970s, the ROC maintained an authoritarian, single-party government while its economy became industrialized and technology-oriented.
This rapid economic growth, known as the Taiwan Miracle, occurred following a strategy of prioritizing agriculture, light industries, and heavy industries in that order.
Infrastructure projects such as the Sun Yat-sen Freeway, Taoyuan International Airport, Taichung Harbor, and Jinshan Nuclear Power Plant were launched, while the rise of steel, petrochemical, and shipbuilding industries in southern Taiwan saw the transformation of Kaohsiung into a special municipality on par with Taipei.
In the 1970s, Taiwan became the second fastest growing economy in Asia after Japan.
In 1978, the combination of tax incentives and a cheap, well-trained labor force attracted investments of over $1.9 billion from overseas Chinese, the United States, and Japan, especially in the manufacturing of electrical and electronic products.
By 1980, foreign trade reached $39 billion per year and generated a surplus of $46.5 million, while the income ratio of the highest to the lowest 20 percent of wage earners dropped from 15:1 to 4:1 between 1952 and 1978, less than even that of the United States.
Along with Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea, Taiwan became known as one of the Four Asian Tigers.
Because of the Cold War, most Western nations and the United Nations regarded the ROC as the sole legitimate government of China until the 1970s.
Eventually, especially after the termination of the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty, most nations switched diplomatic recognition to the PRC (see United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758). Until the 1970s, the ROC government was regarded by Western critics as undemocratic for upholding martial law, severely repressing any political opposition, and controlling the media.
The KMT did not allow the creation of new parties and those that existed did not seriously compete with the KMT. Thus, competitive democratic elections did not exist.
From the late 1970s to the 1990s, however, Taiwan went through reforms and social changes that transformed it from an authoritarian state to a democracy.
In 1979, a pro-democracy protest known as the Kaohsiung Incident took place in Kaohsiung to celebrate Human Rights Day.
Although the protest was rapidly crushed by the authorities, it is today considered as the main event that united Taiwan's opposition.
Chiang Ching-kuo, Chiang Kai-shek's son and successor as the ROC president and chairman of the KMT, began reforms to the political system in the mid-1980s.
He sought to move more authority to "bensheng ren" (residents of Taiwan before Japan's surrender in World War II and their descendants) instead of continuing to promote "waisheng ren" (residents who came to the island in the 1940s and 50s after Japan's surrender and their descendants) as his father had.
In 1984, the younger Chiang selected Lee Teng-hui, a Taiwan-born, US-educated technocrat, to be his vice-president.
In 1986, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) was formed and inaugurated as the first opposition party in the ROC to counter the KMT. A year later, Chiang Ching-kuo lifted martial law on the main island of Taiwan (martial law was lifted on Penghu in 1979, Matsu island in 1992 and Kinmen island in 1993). With the KMT lifting martial law, moving toward democracy, and choosing the native Taiwanese Lee Teng-hui to lead the country, the opposition DPP groped for a message; it would go on to lose the first direct presidential election in 1996.
Transition to democracy (1987–present)
See also: Politics of the Republic of China
In 1988, Lee Teng-hui became the first president of the Republic of China born in Taiwan and was the first to be directly elected in 1996.
After the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in January 1988, Lee Teng-hui succeeded him and became the first president born in Taiwan.
Lee continued the democratic reforms to the government and replaced many "waisheng ren" in government positions with "bensheng ren". Under Lee, Taiwan underwent a process of localization in which Taiwanese culture and history were promoted over a pan-China viewpoint in contrast to earlier KMT policies.
Lee's reforms included printing banknotes from the Central Bank rather than the Provincial Bank of Taiwan, and streamlining the Taiwan Provincial Government with most of its functions transferred to the Executive Yuan.
Under Lee, the original members of the Legislative Yuan and National Assembly (a former supreme legislative body defunct in 2005), elected in 1947 to represent mainland Chinese constituencies and having held the seats without re-election for more than four decades, were forced to resign in 1991. The previously nominal representation in the Legislative Yuan was brought to an end, reflecting the reality that the ROC had no jurisdiction over mainland China, and vice versa.
Restrictions on the use of Taiwanese Hokkien in the broadcast media and in schools were also lifted.
Reforms continued in the 1990s.
The Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China and the Act Governing Relations between the People of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area defined the status of the ROC, making Taiwan its de facto territory.
Lee Teng-hui was re-elected as the KMT candidate in 1996, in the first direct presidential election in the history of the ROC, defeating DDP candidate Peng Ming-min.
With democratization, the issue of the political status of Taiwan gradually resurfaced as a controversial issue where, previously, the discussion of anything other than unification under the ROC was taboo.
During the later years of Lee's administration, he was involved in corruption controversies relating to government release of land and weapons purchase, although no legal proceedings commenced.
In 1997, "To meet the requisites of the nation prior to national unification", the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China was passed and then the former "constitution of five powers" turns to be more tripartite.
In 2000, Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressive Party was elected as the first non-Kuomintang (KMT) President and was re-elected to serve his second and last term since 2004, even after he backtracked on the need to declare Taiwan's independence.
Meanwhile, polarized politics emerged in Taiwan with the formation of the Pan-Blue Coalition, led by the KMT, and the Pan-Green Coalition, led by the DPP. The former prefers eventual Chinese unification, while the latter prefers Taiwanese independence.
In 2004, the Chen administration pushed for a referendum on cross-Strait relations.
In early 2006, Chen Shui-bian remarked: "The National Unification Council will cease to function.
No budget will be ear-marked for it and its personnel must return to their original posts ... The National Unification Guidelines will cease to apply." On 30 September 2007, the ruling DPP approved a resolution asserting a separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a "normal country". It also called for general use of "Taiwan" as the country's name, without abolishing its formal name, the Republic of China.
However, Chen alienated moderate constituents who supported the status quo and those with cross-strait economic ties, as well as creating tension with the mainland and disagreements with the United States.
In 2008, referendums were held on the same day as the presidential election asking whether Taiwan should join the UN under "Taiwan" (DPP's motion) or "Republic of China"/any other suitable name (KMT's motion). Both failed because only 35 percent of the electorate, below the required threshold of 50 percent, voted.
The Chen administration was also dogged by public concerns over reduced economic growth, legislative gridlock due to a pan-blue, opposition-controlled Legislative Yuan, and corruption investigations involving the First Family as well as government officials, lowering the President's ratings to the 20s near the end of his second term.
In the January 2008 legislative elections, the KMT's majority in the Legislative Yuan increased.
Its nominee Ma Ying-jeou went on to win the presidency in March of the same year, campaigning on a platform of increased economic growth and better ties with the PRC under a policy of "mutual non-denial". Under Ma, Taiwan and China opened up direct flights and cargo shipments, with the latter country even making it possible for Taiwan to participate in the annual World Health Assembly.
Threats from China faded from the public's mind, although U.S. analysts Richard Fisher and Richard Bush argued that military tensions with the PRC had not been reduced.
Student protest in Taipei against a controversial trade agreement with China in March 2014
In 2014, a group of university students successfully occupied the Legislative Yuan and prevented the ratification of the Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement in what became known as the Sunflower Student Movement.
The movement gave rise to youth-based third parties such as the New Power Party, and is viewed to have contributed to Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) victories the 2016 presidential and legislative elections.
This marked the first time in Taiwanese history that the KMT lost its legislative majority.
In 2016, Tsai Ing-wen of the DPP became the president of Taiwan.
In 2020, she called on the international community to defend the self-ruled island's democracy in the face of renewed threats from China and called on the latter to democratize and renounce the use of military force against Taiwan.
Chinese leader Xi Jinping had earlier expressed that Taiwan was part of China, who reserves the right to use force but will strive to achieve peaceful reunification.
Xi also offered to discuss unification with parties or individuals under the precondition of "one China", but both Tsai and the KMT rejected Xi's proposal.
In January 2020, Tsai was re-elected and in the simultaneous legislative election President Tsai's Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won a majority with 61 out of 113 seats.
The Kuomintang (KMT) got 38 seats.
The 2020 Democracy Index published by London-based Economist Intelligence Unit upgraded Taiwan from a "flawed democracy" to a "full democracy", raising it from the 31st place previously to the 11th, a greater improvement than any other country.
It ranked below Canada but above Germany, Japan, and the United States.
Currently, as of 2022, Taiwan ranks 8th place in the Democracy Index, with a score of 8.99 out of 10, now above Canada.
Geography
Main article: Geography of Taiwan
A satellite image of Taiwan, showing it is mostly mountainous in the east, with gently sloping plains in the west.
The Penghu Islands are west of the main island.
The land controlled by the ROC consists of 168 islands[l] with a combined area of 36,193 square kilometres (13,974 sq mi).[j] The main island, known historically as Formosa, makes up 99 percent of this area, measuring 35,808 square kilometres (13,826 sq mi) and lying some 180 kilometres (112 mi) across the Taiwan Strait from the southeastern coast of mainland China.
The East China Sea lies to its north, the Philippine Sea to its east, the Luzon Strait directly to its south and the South China Sea to its southwest.
Smaller islands include the Penghu Islands in the Taiwan Strait, the Kinmen, Matsu and Wuqiu islands near the Chinese coast, and some of the South China Sea islands.
The main island is a tilted fault block, characterized by the contrast between the eastern two-thirds, consisting mostly of five rugged mountain ranges parallel to the east coast, and the flat to gently rolling plains of the western third, where the majority of Taiwan's population reside.
There are several peaks over 3,500 metres, the highest being Yu Shan at 3,952 m (12,966 ft), making Taiwan the world's fourth-highest island.
The tectonic boundary that formed these ranges is still active, and the island experiences many earthquakes, a few of them highly destructive.
There are also many active submarine volcanoes in the Taiwan Strait.
Taiwan contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Jian Nan subtropical evergreen forests, South China Sea Islands, South Taiwan monsoon rain forests, and Taiwan subtropical evergreen forests.
The eastern mountains are heavily forested and home to a diverse range of wildlife, while land use in the western and northern lowlands is intensive.
The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.38/10, ranking it 76th globally out of 172 countries.
Climate
See also: Climate change in Taiwan
Köppen climate classification of Taiwan
Taiwan lies on the Tropic of Cancer, and its general climate is marine tropical.
The northern and central regions are subtropical, whereas the south is tropical and the mountainous regions are temperate.
The average rainfall is 2,600 millimetres (100 inches) per year for the island proper; the rainy season is concurrent with the onset of the summer East Asian Monsoon in May and June.
The entire island experiences hot, humid weather from June through September.
Typhoons are most common in July, August and September.
During the winter (November to March), the northeast experiences steady rain, while the central and southern parts of the island are mostly sunny.
Due to climate change, the average temperature in Taiwan has risen 1.4 °C (2.5 °F) in the last 100 years, which is twice of the worldwide temperature rise.
The goal of the Taiwanese government is to cut carbon emissions by 20 per cent in 2030 compared to 2005 levels, and by 50 per cent in 2050 compared to 2005 levels.
Carbon emissions increased by 0.92 per cent between 2005 and 2016.
Geology
Main article: Geology of Taiwan
Mount Dabajian was selected as one of the 100 Peaks of Taiwan
The island of Taiwan lies in a complex tectonic area between the Yangtze Plate to the west and north, the Okinawa Plate on the north-east, and the Philippine Mobile Belt on the east and south.
The upper part of the crust on the island is primarily made up of a series of terranes, mostly old island arcs which have been forced together by the collision of the forerunners of the Eurasian Plate and the Philippine Sea Plate.
These have been further uplifted as a result of the detachment of a portion of the Eurasian Plate as it was subducted beneath remnants of the Philippine Sea Plate, a process which left the crust under Taiwan more buoyant.
The east and south of Taiwan are a complex system of belts formed by, and part of the zone of, active collision between the North Luzon Trough portion of the Luzon Volcanic Arc and South China, where accreted portions of the Luzon Arc and Luzon forearc form the eastern Coastal Range and parallel inland Longitudinal Valley of Taiwan, respectively.
The major seismic faults in Taiwan correspond to the various suture zones between the various terranes.
These have produced major quakes throughout the history of the island.
On 21 September 1999, a 7.3 quake known as the "921 earthquake" killed more than 2,400 people.
The seismic hazard map for Taiwan by the USGS shows 9/10 of the island at the highest rating (most hazardous).
Political and legal status
Main article: Political status of Taiwan
See also: List of states with limited recognition; Foreign relations of China § International territorial disputes; and Taiwan, China
The political and legal statuses of Taiwan are contentious issues.
The People's Republic of China (PRC) claims that Taiwan is Chinese territory and that itself has replaced the ROC government in 1949, becoming the sole legal government of China.
The ROC, however, has its own currency, widely accepted passport, postage stamps, internet TLD, armed forces and constitution with an independently elected president.
It has not formally renounced its claim to the mainland, but ROC government publications have increasingly downplayed this historical claim.
Though it was a founding member of United Nations, the ROC now has neither official membership nor observer status in the organization.
Relations with the PRC
See also: Cross-Strait relations
The Mainland Affairs Council (MAC) of Taiwan is responsible for relations with the PRC, while the Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) of the PRC is responsible for relations with Taiwan.
Exchanges are conducted through private organizations both founded in 1991: the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) of Taiwan and the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) of the PRC.
The political environment is complicated by the potential for military conflict should events outlined in the PRC's anti-secession law occur, such as Taiwan declaring de jure independence.
While it aims for peaceful reunification, the PRC does not rule out the use of force.
There is a substantial military presence on the Fujian coast as well as PRC sorties into Taiwan's ADIZ. The PRC's One-China principle states that Taiwan and mainland China are both part of China, and that the PRC is the only legitimate government of China.
It seeks to prevent or reduce any formal recognition of the ROC as an independent sovereign state, meaning that Taiwan participates in many international forums as a non-state member under names such as "Chinese Taipei".
For almost 60 years, there were no direct transportation links, including direct flights, between Taiwan and the PRC. This was a problem for many Taiwanese businesses that had opened factories or branches in mainland China.
In the 2006 Lunar New Year Speech, President Chen Shui-bian called for managed opening of links.
Direct weekend charter flights between Taiwan and mainland China began in July 2008 under the KMT government, and the first direct daily charter flights took off in December 2008.
In November 1992, the ARATS and SEF held a meeting which would later become known as the 1992 Consensus.
The SEF announced that both sides agreed that there was only one China, but disagreed on the definition of China (i.e. the ROC vs.
PRC), while the ARATS announced that the two agreed on the One China Principle, but did not mention differences regarding its definition made in the SEF statement.
This discrepancy between the two statements was criticized by the DPP and former president Lee Teng-hui.
The PRC has since viewed it as a prerequisite for dialogue between the ROC and PRC. In February 2000, the PRC suggested the "one country, two systems" employed in Hong Kong as a model for peaceful unification with Taiwan.
President Chen Shui-bian of the DPP, elected in March 2000, initially indicated a willingness to accept the 1992 Consensus, but later backed down due to pressure within his party and sought a middle ground by attempting dialogue with the PRC on the basis of the 1992 Consensus without explicitly accepting the One China Principle; this was not well received by the PRC and official dialogue was suspended.
On 29 April 2005, Kuomintang Chairman Lien Chan travelled to Beijing and met with Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Hu Jintao, the first meeting between the leaders of the two parties since the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1949. According to US sources, Hu said in 2008 that talks between Taiwan and the mainland should be restored on the basis of the 1992 Consensus.
Ma–Xi meeting was the first meeting between the leaders from both sides of the Taiwan Strait since 1949
Ma Ying-jeou of the KMT fully endorsed the 1992 Consensus, though he stated that there would be neither unification nor declaration of independence during his presidency.
After becoming elected president in 2008, talks between the ROC and PRC resumed.
On 11 February 2014, Mainland Affairs Council head Wang Yu-chi travelled to Nanjing and met with Taiwan Affairs Office head Zhang Zhijun, the first meeting between high-ranking officials from either side.
Zhang paid a reciprocal visit to Taiwan and met Wang on 25 June 2014, making Zhang the first minister-level PRC official to ever visit Taiwan.
On 7 November 2015, Ma Ying-jeou and Xi Jinping had a face-to-face meeting in Singapore, the first time two ROC and PRC leaders had met since 1949.
During the 2016 Taiwanese presidential election, Tsai Ing-wen of the DPP initially pursued a similar strategy as Chen Shui-bian, but after winning the election she received a similarly frosty reception from the PRC. In 2019, Tsai, who supported the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests, pledged that as long as she is Taiwan's president, she will never accept "one country, two systems", and that since the PRC equated the 1992 Consensus with "one country, two systems", she could not accept the 1992 Consensus as well.
Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Taiwan
Republic of China (Taiwan)   Countries that have formal relations with Taiwan   Countries that have formal relations with the PRC and informal relations with Taiwan
Before 1928, the foreign policy of Republican China was complicated by a lack of internal unity—competing centres of power all claimed legitimacy.
This situation changed after the defeat of the Peiyang Government by the Kuomintang (KMT), which led to widespread diplomatic recognition of the Republic of China.
After the KMT's retreat to Taiwan, most countries, notably the countries in the Western Bloc, continued to maintain relations with the ROC, but recognition gradually eroded and many countries switched recognition to the People's Republic of China in the 1970s.
On 25 October 1971, UN Resolution 2758 was adopted by 76 votes to 35 with 17 abstensions, recognizing the PRC, founded in 1949 on the mainland, as China's sole representative in the United Nations; countries in support included France, India, the UK, and the USSR, and countries in opposition included Japan and the United States.
ROC embassy in Eswatini
The PRC refuses to have diplomatic relations with any nation that has diplomatic relations with the ROC, and requires all nations with which it has diplomatic relations to make a statement recognizing its claims to Taiwan.
As a result, only 13 UN member states and the Holy See maintain official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China.
The ROC maintains unofficial relations with most countries via de facto embassies and consulates called Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices (TECRO), with branch offices called "Taipei Economic and Cultural Offices" (TECO). Both TECRO and TECO are "unofficial commercial entities" of the ROC in charge of maintaining diplomatic relations, providing consular services (i.e. visa applications), and serving the national interests of the ROC in other countries.
From 1954 to 1979, the United States was a partner with Taiwan in a mutual defense treaty.
The United States remains one of the main supporters of Taiwan and, through the Taiwan Relations Act passed in 1979, has continued selling arms and providing military training to the Armed Forces.
This situation continues to be an issue for the People's Republic of China, which considers US involvement disruptive to the stability of the region.
In January 2010, the US announced its intention to sell $6.4 billion worth of military hardware to Taiwan.
As a consequence, the PRC warned that its co-operation with the US on international and regional issues could suffer and that the companies involved, namely Raytheon, Lockheed Martin, Boeing, and United Technologies, could face Chinese sanctions.
The official position of the United States is that the PRC is expected to "use no force or threat[en] to use force against Taiwan" and the ROC is to "exercise prudence in managing all aspects of Cross-Strait relations." Both are to refrain from performing actions or espousing statements "that would unilaterally alter Taiwan's status". On 16 December 2015, the Obama administration announced a deal to sell $1.83 billion worth of arms to the armed forces of the ROC. The foreign ministry of the PRC had expressed its disapproval for the sales and issued the US a "stern warning", saying it would hurt PRC–US relations.
In response to US support for Taiwan, the PRC defense minister Wei Fenghe said in 2019, "If anyone dares to split Taiwan from China, the Chinese military has no choice but to fight at all costs". President Donald Trump in March 2020 signed the TAIPEI ACT and, in December of the same year, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, which incorporated the Taiwan Assurance Act of 2019.
Participation in international events and organizations
See also: Foreign relations of Taiwan § Relation with International organizations, and Chinese Taipei
The ROC was a founding member of the United Nations, and held the seat of China on the Security Council and other UN bodies until 1971, when it was expelled by Resolution 2758 and replaced in all UN organs with the PRC. Each year since 1992, the ROC has petitioned the UN for entry, but its applications have not made it past committee stage.
The flag used by Taiwan at the Olympic Games, where it competes as "Chinese Taipei" (中華台北)
Due to its limited international recognition, the Republic of China has been a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO) since the foundation of the organization in 1991, represented by a government-funded organization, the Taiwan Foundation for Democracy (TFD), under the name "Taiwan".
Also due to its One China policy, the PRC only participates in international organizations where the ROC does not participate as a sovereign country.
Most member states, including the United States, do not wish to discuss the issue of the ROC's political status for fear of souring diplomatic ties with the PRC. However, both the US and Japan publicly support the ROC's bid for membership in the World Health Organization (WHO) as an observer.
However, though the ROC sought to participate in the WHO since 1997, their efforts were rejected until 2009, when they participated under the name "Chinese Taipei" after reaching an agreement with Beijing.
In 2017, Taiwan again began to be excluded from the WHO even in an observer capacity.
This exclusion caused a number of scandals during the COVID-19 outbreak.
The Nagoya Resolution in 1979 between Taiwan (ROC), China (PRC), and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) provided a compromise for the ROC to use the name "Chinese Taipei" in international events where the PRC is also a party, such as the Olympic Games.
Under the IOC charter, ROC flags cannot be flown at any official Olympic venue or gathering; this caused some concern in 2002 when residents of a downtown condominium in Salt Lake City hung two flags from Taiwan.
The ROC also participates in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (since 1991) and the World Trade Organization (since 2002) under the names "Chinese Taipei" and "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", respectively.
It was a founding member of the Asian Development Bank, but since China's ascension in 1986 has participated under the name "Taipei,China". The ROC is able to participate as "China" in organizations in which the PRC does not participate, such as the World Organization of the Scout Movement.
A referendum question in 2018 asked if Taiwan's athletes should compete under "Taiwan" in the 2020 Summer Olympics but did not pass; the New York Times attributed the failure to a campaign cautioning that a name change might lead to Taiwan being banned "under Chinese pressure".
Domestic opinion
See also: Taiwan independence movement and Chinese unification
Broadly speaking, domestic public opinion has preferred maintaining the status quo, though pro-independence sentiment has steadily risen since 1994. In June 2021, an annual poll run by the National Chengchi University found that 28.2 percent of respondents supported the status quo and postponing a decision, 27.5 percent supported maintaining the status quo indefinitely, 25.8 percent supported the status quo with a move toward independence, 5.9 percent supported the status quo with a move toward unification, 5.7 percent gave no response, 5.6 percent supported independence as soon as possible, and 1.5 percent supported unification as soon as possible.
The KMT, the largest Pan-Blue party, supports the status quo for the indefinite future with a stated ultimate goal of unification.
However, it does not support unification in the short term with the PRC as such a prospect would be unacceptable to most of its members and the public.
Ma Ying-jeou, chairman of the KMT and former president of the ROC, has set out democracy, economic development to a level near that of Taiwan, and equitable wealth distribution as the conditions that the PRC must fulfill for reunification to occur.
The Democratic Progressive Party, the largest Pan-Green party, officially seeks independence, but in practice also supports the status quo because neither independence nor re-unification seems likely in the short or even medium term.
On 2 September 2008, the Mexican newspaper El Sol de México asked President Ma of the KMT about his views on the subject of "two Chinas" and if there was a solution for the sovereignty issues between the two.
The president replied that the relations are neither between two Chinas nor two states.
It is a special relationship.
Further, he stated that the sovereignty issues between the two cannot be resolved at present, but he quoted the "1992 Consensus", accepted by both the KMT and the Chinese Communist Party, as a temporary measure until a solution becomes available.
However, the consensus was rejected by former president Lee Teng-hui, as well as President Tsai Ing-wen and most of the Pan-Green Coalition.
On 27 September 2017, Taiwanese premier William Lai of the Democratic Progressive Party said that he was a "political worker who advocates Taiwan independence", but that as Taiwan was already an independent country called the Republic of China, it had no need to declare independence.
Government and politics
Main articles: Government of the Republic of China and Politics of the Republic of China
See also: Elections in Taiwan, Human rights in Taiwan, and North–South divide in Taiwan
Government
Taiwan's popularly elected president resides in the Presidential Office Building, Taipei, originally built in the Japanese era for colonial governors
The government of the Republic of China was founded on the 1947 Constitution of the ROC and its Three Principles of the People, which states that the ROC "shall be a democratic republic of the people, to be governed by the people and for the people". It underwent significant revisions in the 1990s, known collectively as the Additional Articles.
The government is divided into five branches (Yuan): the Executive Yuan (cabinet), the Legislative Yuan (Congress or Parliament), the Judicial Yuan, the Control Yuan (audit agency), and the Examination Yuan (civil service examination agency).
Tsai Ing-wen, President of the Republic of China
The head of state and commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president, who is elected by popular vote for a maximum of 2 four-year terms on the same ticket as the vice-president.
The president appoints the members of the Executive Yuan as their cabinet, including a premier, who is officially the President of the Executive Yuan; members are responsible for policy and administration.
The main legislative body is the unicameral Legislative Yuan with 113 seats.
Seventy-three are elected by popular vote from single-member constituencies; thirty-four are elected based on the proportion of nationwide votes received by participating political parties in a separate party list ballot; and six are elected from two three-member aboriginal constituencies.
Members serve four-year terms.
Originally the unicameral National Assembly, as a standing constitutional convention and electoral college, held some parliamentary functions, but the National Assembly was abolished in 2005 with the power of constitutional amendments handed over to the Legislative Yuan and all eligible voters of the Republic via referendums.
Su Tseng-chang, Premier of the Republic of China
The premier is selected by the president without the need for approval from the legislature, but the legislature can pass laws without regard for the president, as neither he nor the Premier wields veto power.
Thus, there is little incentive for the president and the legislature to negotiate on legislation if they are of opposing parties.
After the election of the pan-Green's Chen Shui-bian as president in 2000, legislation repeatedly stalled because of deadlock with the Legislative Yuan, which was controlled by a pan-Blue majority.
Historically, the ROC has been dominated by strongman single party politics.
This legacy has resulted in executive powers currently being concentrated in the office of the president rather than the premier, even though the constitution does not explicitly state the extent of the president's executive power.
The Judicial Yuan is the highest judicial organ.
It interprets the constitution and other laws and decrees, judges administrative suits, and disciplines public functionaries.
The president and vice-president of the Judicial Yuan and additional thirteen justices form the Council of Grand Justices.
They are nominated and appointed by the president, with the consent of the Legislative Yuan.
The highest court, the Supreme Court, consists of a number of civil and criminal divisions, each of which is formed by a presiding judge and four associate judges, all appointed for life.
In 1993, a separate constitutional court was established to resolve constitutional disputes, regulate the activities of political parties and accelerate the democratization process.
There is no trial by jury but the right to a fair public trial is protected by law and respected in practice; many cases are presided over by multiple judges.
The Control Yuan is a watchdog agency that monitors (controls) the actions of the executive.
It can be considered a standing commission for administrative inquiry and can be compared to the Court of Auditors of the European Union or the Government Accountability Office of the United States.
It is also responsible for the National Human Rights Commission.
The Examination Yuan is in charge of validating the qualification of civil servants.
It is based on the old imperial examination system used in dynastic China.
It can be compared to the European Personnel Selection Office of the European Union or the Office of Personnel Management of the United States.
It was downsized in 2019, and there have been calls for its abolition.
Constitution
The constitution was drafted in by the KMT while the ROC still governed the Chinese mainland, went into effect on 25 December 1947. The ROC remained under martial law from 1948 until 1987 and much of the constitution was not in effect.
Political reforms beginning in the late 1970s resulted in the end of martial law in 1987, and Taiwan transformed into a multiparty democracy in the early 1990s.
The constitutional basis for this transition to democracy was gradually laid in the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China.
In addition, these articles localized the Constitution by suspending portions of the Constitution designed for the governance of mainland China and replacing them with articles adapted for the governance of and guaranteeing the political rights of residents of the Taiwan Area, as defined in the Act Governing Relations between the People of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area.
National boundaries were not explicitly prescribed by the 1947 Constitution, and the Constitutional Court declined to define these boundaries in a 1993 interpretation, viewing the question as a political question to be resolved by the Executive and Legislative Yuans.
The 1947 Constitution included articles regarding representatives from former Qing dynasty territories including Tibet and Mongolia (though it did not specify whether this excluded Outer Mongolia). The ROC recognized Mongolia as an independent country in 1946 after signing the 1945 Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance, but after retreating to Taiwan in 1949 it reneged on its agreement in order to preserve its claim over mainland China.
The Additional Articles of the 1990s did not alter national boundaries, but suspended articles regarding Mongolian and Tibetan representatives.
The ROC began to accept the Mongolian passport and removed clauses referring to Outer Mongolia from the Act Governing Relations between the People of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area in 2002. In 2012 the Mainland Affairs Council issued a statement clarifying that Outer Mongolia was not part of the ROC's national territory in 1947, and that the termination of the Sino-Soviet Treaty had not altered national territory according to the Constitution.
The Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission in the Executive Yuan was abolished in 2017.
Major camps
The Democratic Progressive Party, the main Pan-Green Coalition partyEmblem of the Kuomintang, the main Pan-Blue Coalition party
Taiwan's political scene is divided into two major camps in terms of cross-Strait relations, i.e. how Taiwan should relate to China or the PRC. The Pan-Green Coalition (e.g. the Democratic Progressive Party) leans pro-independence, and the Pan-Blue Coalition (e.g. the Kuomintang) leans pro-unification.
Moderates in both camps regard the Republic of China as a sovereign independent state, but the Pan-Green Coalition regard the ROC as synonymous with Taiwan, while moderates in the Pan-Blue Coalition view it as synonymous with China.
These positions formed against the backdrop of the PRC's Anti-Secession Law, which threatens invasion in the event of formal independence.
Taiwanese-born Tangwai ("independent") politician Wu San-lien (second left) celebrates with supporters his victory in Taipei's first mayoral election in 1951.
The Pan-Green Coalition is mainly led by the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party and Taiwan Statebuilding Party (TSP). They oppose the idea that Taiwan is part of China, and seek wide diplomatic recognition and an eventual declaration of formal Taiwan independence.
In September 2007, the then ruling Democratic Progressive Party approved a resolution asserting separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a "normal country". It called also for general use of "Taiwan" as the country's name, without abolishing its formal name, the "Republic of China". The name "Taiwan" has been used increasingly often after the emergence of the Taiwanese independence movement.
Some members of the coalition, such as former President Chen Shui-bian, argue that it is unnecessary to proclaim independence because "Taiwan is already an independent, sovereign country" and the Republic of China is the same as Taiwan.
Despite being a member of KMT prior to and during his presidency, Lee Teng-hui also held a similar view and was a supporter of the Taiwanization movement.
The Pan-Blue Coalition, composed of the pro-unification Kuomintang, People First Party (PFP) and New Party generally support the spirit of the 1992 Consensus, where the KMT claimed that there is one China, but that the ROC and PRC have different interpretations of what "China" means.
They favour eventual re-unification of China.
Regarding independence, the mainstream Pan-Blue position is to maintain the status quo, while refusing immediate reunification.
President Ma Ying-jeou stated that there will be no unification nor declaration of independence during his presidency.
As of 2009[update], Pan-Blue members usually seek to improve relationships with PRC, with a current focus on improving economic ties.
National identity
Main article: Taiwanese people § The current state of Taiwanese identity See also: Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity
Results from an identity survey conducted each year from 1992 to 2020 by the Election Study Center, National Chengchi University.
Responses are Taiwanese (green), Chinese (red) or Both Taiwanese and Chinese (hatched). No response is shown as grey.
Roughly 84 per cent of Taiwan's population are descendants of Han Chinese immigrants from Qing China between 1683 and 1895. Another significant fraction descends from Han Chinese who immigrated from mainland China in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
The shared cultural origin combined with several hundred years of geographical separation, some hundred years of political separation and foreign influences, as well as hostility between the rival ROC and PRC have resulted in national identity being a contentious issue with political overtones.
Since democratic reforms and the lifting of martial law, a distinct Taiwanese identity (as opposed to Taiwanese identity as a subset of a Chinese identity) is often at the heart of political debates.
Its acceptance makes the island distinct from mainland China, and therefore may be seen as a step towards forming a consensus for de jure Taiwan independence.
The Pan-Green camp supports a predominantly Taiwanese identity (although "Chinese" may be viewed as cultural heritage), while the Pan-Blue camp supports a predominantly Chinese identity (with "Taiwanese" as a regional/diasporic Chinese identity). The KMT has downplayed this stance in the recent years and now supports a Taiwanese identity as part of a Chinese identity.
In annual polls conducted by National Chengchi University, Taiwanese identification has increased substantially since the early 1990s, while Chinese identification has fallen to a low level, and identification as both has also seen a reduction.
In 1992, 17.6 percent of respondents identified as Taiwanese, 25.5 percent as Chinese, 46.4 percent as both, and 10.5 percent non-response.
In June 2021, 63.3 percent identified as Taiwanese, 2.6 percent as Chinese, 31.4 percent as both, and 2.7 percent non-response.
A survey conducted in Taiwan by Global Views Survey Research Center in July 2009 showed that 82.8 percent of respondents consider the ROC and the PRC as two separate countries with each developing on its own but 80.2 percent think they are members of the Chinese.
Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Taiwan
See also: History of the administrative divisions of China (1912–1949)
A map showing the official divisions and territories historically claimed by the Republic of China, along with their status as of 2005.
Map comparing political divisions as drawn by the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China.
According to the 1947 constitution, the territory of the ROC is according to its "existing national boundaries". The ROC is, de jure constitutionally, divided into provinces [zh], special municipalities (which are further divided into districts for local administration), and the province-level Tibet Area.
Each province is subdivided into cities and counties, which are further divided into townships and county-administered cities, each having elected mayors and city councillors who share duties with the county.
Some divisions are indigenous divisions which have different degrees of autonomy to standard ones.
In addition, districts, cities and townships are further divided into villages and neighbourhoods.
The provinces have been "streamlined" and are no longer functional.
Similarly, banners in both Mongolia and mainland China (Inner Mongolia) also existed, but they were abolished in 2006 and the ROC reaffirmed its recognition of Mongolia in 2002, as stipulated in the 1946 constitution.
With provinces non-functional, Taiwan is, in practice, divided into 22 subnational divisions, each with a self-governing body led by an elected leader and a legislative body with elected members.
Duties of local governments include social services, education, urban planning, public construction, water management, environmental protection, transport, public safety, and more. 
When the ROC retreated to Taiwan in 1949, its claimed territory consisted of 35 provinces, 12 special municipalities, 1 special administrative region and 2 autonomous regions.
However, since its retreat, the ROC has controlled only Taiwan Province and some islands of Fujian Province.
The ROC also controls the Pratas Islands and Taiping Island in the Spratly Islands, which are part of the disputed South China Sea Islands.
They were placed under Kaohsiung administration after the retreat to Taiwan.
Overview of administrative divisions of the Republic of China
Republic of China
Taipei
New Taipei
Keelung
Taoyuan
Hsinchu County
Hsinchu
Miaoli
Taichung
Changhua
Penghu
Nantou
Yunlin
Chiayi County
Chiayi
Tainan
Kaohsiung
Pingtung
Yilan
Hualien
Taitung
Taiwan Province
Kinmen
Lienchiang (Matsu)
Fuchien Province
Taiwan  Strait
South China Sea
East China Sea
Pescadores Channel
Bashi  Channel
Philippine Sea(Pacific  Ocean)
Free area[i]
Mainland area[ii]
Special municipalities[α][iii]
Provinces[iv]
Not administered[v]
Counties[α]
Autonomous municipalities[α][vi]
Districts[β]
Mountainindigenousdistricts[α]
County-administeredcities[α]
Townships[α][β][vii]
Districts[β]
Villages[γ][viii]
Neighborhoods
Notes
a b c d e f Has an elected executive and an elected legislative council.
a b c Has an appointed district administrator for managing local affairs and carrying out tasks commissioned by superior agency.
Has an elected village administrator for managing local affairs and carrying out tasks commissioned by superior agency.
Military
Main article: Republic of China Armed Forces
See also: Republic of China Military Academy
Han Kuang Exercise is the annual exercise of the ROC Armed Forces for a possible attack from the PRC
Republic of China Air Force indigenously produced fighter airplane in Ching Chuan Kang Air Base
The Republic of China Army takes its roots in the National Revolutionary Army, which was established by Sun Yat-sen in 1925 in Guangdong with a goal of reunifying China under the Kuomintang.
When the People's Liberation Army won the Chinese Civil War, much of the National Revolutionary Army retreated to Taiwan along with the government.
It was later reformed into the Republic of China Army.
Units which surrendered and remained in mainland China were either disbanded or incorporated into the People's Liberation Army.
From 1949 to the 1970s, the primary mission of the Taiwanese military was to "retake mainland China" through Project National Glory.
As this mission has transitioned away from attack because the relative strength of the PRC has massively increased, the ROC military has begun to shift emphasis from the traditionally dominant Army to the air force and navy.
Control of the armed forces has also passed into the hands of the civilian government.
The ROC began a series of force reduction plans since 1990s, Jingshi An (translated to streamlining program) was one of the programs to scale down its military from a level of 450,000 in 1997 to 380,000 in 2001. As of 2021[update], the total strength of the Armed Forces is capped at 215,000 with 90% manning ratio for volunteer military.
Conscription remains universal for qualified males reaching age eighteen, but as a part of the reduction effort many are given the opportunity to fulfill their draft requirement through alternative service and are redirected to government agencies or arms related industries.
Taiwan cut compulsory military service to four months in 2013 but a proposal to extend military service is under consideration.
The military's reservists is around 2.5 million including first-wave reservists numbered at 300,000 as of 2022[update]. Taiwan's defense spending as a percentage of its GDP has been trending downwards over the first two decades of the twenty-first century.
The ROC government spent approximately two percent of GDP on defense and failed to raise the spending as high as proposed three percent of GDP. In 2022, Taiwan proposed 2.4 percent of projected GDP in defense spending for the following year, continued to remain below three percent.
The ROC and the United States signed the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty in 1954, and established the United States Taiwan Defense Command.
About 30,000 US troops were stationed in Taiwan, until the United States established diplomatic relations with the PRC in 1979. A significant amount of military hardware has been bought from the United States, and continues to be legally guaranteed by the Taiwan Relations Act.
In the past, France and the Netherlands have also sold military weapons and hardware to the ROC, but they almost entirely stopped in the 1990s under pressure of the PRC.
There is no guarantee in the Taiwan Relations Act or any other treaty that the United States will defend Taiwan, even in the event of invasion.
The joint declaration on security between the US and Japan signed in 1996 may imply that Japan would be involved in any response.
However, Japan has refused to stipulate whether the "area surrounding Japan" mentioned in the pact includes Taiwan, and the precise purpose of the pact is unclear.
The Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty (ANZUS Treaty) may mean that other US allies, such as Australia, could theoretically be involved.
While this would risk damaging economic ties with China, a conflict over Taiwan could lead to an economic blockade of China by a greater coalition.
President Joe Biden stated that the United States will intervene if the PRC attempts to invade Taiwan on several occasions in 2021 and 2022. However, when asked about the answer, the White House officials insisted that US policy on Taiwan has not changed.
Economy
Main articles: Economy of Taiwan and Economic history of Taiwan
Economic history
The quick industrialization and rapid growth of Taiwan during the latter half of the 20th century has been called the "Taiwan Miracle". Taiwan is one of the "Four Asian Tigers" alongside Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore.
Port of Kaohsiung is operated as the largest harbor in Taiwan
Japanese rule prior to and during World War II brought changes in the public and private sectors, most notably in the area of public works, which enabled rapid communications and facilitated transport throughout much of the island.
The Japanese also improved public education and made it compulsory for all residents of Taiwan.
By 1945, hyperinflation was in progress in mainland China and Taiwan as a result of the war with Japan.
To isolate Taiwan from it, the Nationalist government created a new currency area for the island, and began a price stabilization program which helped to significantly slow inflation.
When the KMT government fled to Taiwan it brought millions of taels (where 1 tael = 37.5 g or ~1.2 ozt) of gold and the foreign currency reserve of mainland China, which, according to the KMT, stabilized prices and reduced hyperinflation.
Perhaps more importantly, as part of its retreat to Taiwan, the KMT brought the intellectual and business elites from mainland China.
The KMT government instituted many laws and land reforms that it had never effectively enacted on mainland China.
The government also implemented a policy of import-substitution, attempting to produce imported goods domestically.
In 1950, with the outbreak of the Korean War, the United States began an aid programme which resulted in fully stabilized prices by 1952. Economic development was encouraged by American economic aid and programmes such as the Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, which turned the agricultural sector into the basis for later growth.
Under the combined stimulus of the land reform and the agricultural development programmes, agricultural production increased at an average annual rate of 4 per cent from 1952 to 1959, which was greater than the population growth, 3.6 per cent.
In 1962, Taiwan had a (nominal) per-capita gross national product (GNP) of $170, placing its economy on a par with those of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis, its GDP per capita in the early 1960s was $1,353 (in 1990 prices). By 2011 per-capita GNP, adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP), had risen to $37,000, contributing to a Human Development Index (HDI) equivalent to that of other developed countries.
In 2019, the HDI calculated by Taiwan's government was the seventh-highest in the Asia-Pacific region.
In 1974, Chiang Ching-Kuo implemented the Ten Major Construction Projects, the transportation, energy, and basic industry infrastructure that helped Taiwan transform into its current export driven economy.
Since the 1990s, a number of Taiwan-based technology firms have expanded their reach around the world.
Well-known international technology companies headquartered in Taiwan include personal computer manufacturers Acer Inc. and Asus, mobile phone maker HTC, as well as electronics manufacturing giant Foxconn, which makes products for Apple, Amazon, and Microsoft.
Computex is a major computer convention, held annually in Taipei since 1981, and is attended by major tech companies like AMD and Nvidia.
Taipei 101 held the world record for the highest skyscraper from 2004 to 2010.
In 2001, agriculture constituted only 2 per cent of GDP, down from 35 per cent in 1952. Traditional labour-intensive industries are steadily being moved offshore and with more capital and technology-intensive industries replacing them.
High-technology industrial parks have sprung up in every region in Taiwan.
The ROC has become a major foreign investor in the PRC, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam.
It is estimated that some 50,000 Taiwanese businesses and 1,000,000 businesspeople and their dependents are established in the PRC.
Since the beginning of the 1990s, the economic ties between Taiwan and the People's Republic of China have been extensive.
As of 2008[update], more than US$150 billion have been invested in the PRC by Taiwanese companies.
Although the economy of Taiwan benefits from this situation, some have expressed the view that the island has become increasingly dependent on the mainland Chinese economy.
A 2008 white paper by the Department of Industrial Technology states that "Taiwan should seek to maintain stable relation with China while continuing to protect national security, and avoiding excessive 'Sinicization' of Taiwanese economy." Others argue that close economic ties between Taiwan and mainland China would make any military intervention by the PLA against Taiwan very costly, and therefore less probable.
Today Taiwan has a dynamic, capitalist, export-driven economy with gradually decreasing state involvement in investment and foreign trade.
In keeping with this trend, some large government-owned banks and industrial firms are being privatized.
Real growth in GDP has averaged about 8 per cent during the past three decades.
Exports have provided the primary impetus for industrialization.
The trade surplus is substantial, and foreign reserves are the world's fifth largest.
The official currency of Taiwan by the ROC is the New Taiwan dollar.
Taiwan's total trade in 2010 reached an all-time high of US$526.04 billion, according to Taiwan's Ministry of Finance.
Both exports and imports for the year reached record levels, totaling US$274.64 billion and US$251.4 billion, respectively.
Because of its conservative financial approach and its entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan suffered little compared with many of its neighbours in the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
Unlike its neighbours, South Korea and Japan, the Taiwanese economy is dominated by small and medium-sized businesses, rather than the large business groups.
The global economic downturn, however, combined with poor policy co-ordination by the new administration and increasing bad debts in the banking system, pushed Taiwan into recession in 2001, the first whole year of negative growth since 1947. Due to the relocation of many manufacturing and labour-intensive industries to the PRC, unemployment also reached a level not seen since the 1970s oil crisis.
This became a major issue in the 2004 presidential election.
Growth averaged more than 4 per cent in the 2002–2006 period and the unemployment rate fell below 4 per cent.
High-tech manufacturing
TSMC fab 5 located in Hsinchu Science Park
Taiwan's rise in the key semiconductor industry was largely attributed to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC) and United Microelectronic Corporation (UMC). TSMC was founded 21 February 1987 and as of December 2021 its market capitalization equated to roughly 90% of Taiwan's GDP. The company is the 9th largest in the world by market capitalization as well as the world's biggest semiconductor manufacturing company, surpassing Intel and Samsung.  Its major customers include Qualcomm, Nvidia, Broadcom, Intel, AMD, Apple Inc., Ampere, Microsoft, MediaTek and Sony.
In 2018, the company's N7+ node became the first commercial node to be made with EUV lithography, as well its N7 node being the first sub-10 nm node to enter volume production.
TSMC was the first Taiwanese company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, under the trade name NYSE: TSM, in October 1997.
UMC, another major company in Taiwan's high-tech exports and global semiconductors, does not however, compete with TSMC on advance semiconductor processes.
Instead it competes with the American GlobalFoundries, and others, for less advanced semiconductor processes and for silicon wafers.
Its major customers include, MediaTek, Texas Instruments, and Realtek.
Foxconn, a major smart-device manufacturer, is headquartered in New Taipei City.
It is also listed in the Taiwan Stock Exchange under the trade name Hon Hai Precision Industry.
Most of its factories are located in East Asia, with a majority of 12 factories located in China.
Its major customers include Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, Google, and Huawei.
International participation
The ROC often joins international organizations (especially ones that also include the People's Republic of China) under a politically neutral name.
The ROC has been a member of governmental trade organizations such as the World Trade Organization under the name Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu (Chinese Taipei) since 2002. Taiwan has unofficial diplomatic offices for tourism and other economically related duties, mostly under a politically neutral name.
Transport
Main article: Transportation in Taiwan
China Airlines aircraft line-up at Taoyuan International Airport
The Ministry of Transportation and Communications of the Republic of China is the cabinet-level governing body of the transport network in Taiwan.
Civilian transport in Taiwan is characterised by extensive use of scooters.
In March 2019, 13.86 million were registered, twice that of cars.
Both highways and railways are concentrated near the coasts, where the majority of the population resides, with 1,619 km (1,006 mi) of motorway.
Railways in Taiwan are primarily used for passenger services, with Taiwan Railway Administration (TRA) operating a circular route and Taiwan High Speed Rail (THSR) running high speed services on the west coast.
Urban transit systems include Taipei Metro, Kaohsiung Metro, Taoyuan Metro, New Taipei Metro, and Taichung Metro.
Major airports include Taiwan Taoyuan, Kaohsiung, Taipei Songshan and Taichung.
There are currently seven airlines in Taiwan, with the largest two being China Airlines and EVA Air.
There are seven international seaports: Keelung, Taipei, Suao, Taichung, Kaohsiung, Anping, and Hualien.
The Port of Kaohsiung handled the largest volume of cargo in Taiwan, with about 440 million shipping tonnes, which accounted for 58.6% of Taiwan's total throughput in 2021. The shipping tonnage followed by Taichung (18.6%), Taipei (12%) and Keelung (8.7%).
Education
Main articles: Education in Taiwan, Academia Sinica, and History of education in Taiwan
See also: Scholarships in Taiwan and Economy of Taiwan § Science
Gate of National Taiwan University, the university was founded in 1928 during Japanese rule
Taiwan's higher education system was established by Japan during the colonial period.
However, after the Republic of China took over in 1945, the system was promptly replaced by the same system as in mainland China which mixed features of the Chinese and American educational systems.
Taiwan is well known for adhering to the Confucian paradigm of valuing education as a means to improve one's socioeconomic position in society.
Heavy investment and a cultural valuing of education has catapulted the resource-poor nation consistently to the top of global education rankings.
Taiwan is one of the top-performing countries in reading literacy, mathematics and sciences.
In 2015, Taiwanese students achieved one of the world's best results in mathematics, science and literacy, as tested by the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), with the average student scoring 519, compared with the OECD average of 493, placing it seventh in the world.
The Taiwanese education system has been praised for various reasons, including its comparatively high test results and its major role in promoting Taiwan's economic development while creating one of the world's most highly educated workforces.
Taiwan has also been praised for its high university entrance rate where the university acceptance rate has increased from around 20 per cent before the 1980s to 49 per cent in 1996 and over 95 per cent since 2008, among the highest in Asia.
The nation's high university entrance rate has created a highly skilled workforce making Taiwan one of the most highly educated countries in the world with 68.5 per cent of Taiwanese high school students going on to attend university.
Taiwan has a high percentage of its citizens holding a tertiary education degree where 45 per cent of Taiwanese aged 25–64 hold a bachelor's degree or higher compared with the average of 33 per cent among member countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
On the other hand, the system has been criticised for placing excessive pressure on students while eschewing creativity and producing an excess supply of over-educated university graduates and a high graduate unemployment rate.
With a large number of university graduates seeking a limited number of prestigious white collar jobs in an economic environment that is increasingly losing its competitive edge, this has led many graduates to be employed in lower-end jobs with salaries far beneath their expectations.
Taiwan's universities have also been under criticism for not being able to fully meet the requirements and demands of Taiwan's 21st-century fast-moving labour market, citing a skills mismatch among a large number of self-assessed, overeducated university graduates who do not fit the demands of the modern Taiwanese labour market.
The Taiwanese government has also received criticism for undermining the economy as it has been unable to produce enough jobs to meet the demands of numerous underemployed university graduates.
As the Taiwanese economy is largely science and technology based, the labour market demands people who have achieved some form of higher education, particularly related to science and engineering to gain a competitive edge when searching for employment.
Although current Taiwanese law mandates only nine years of schooling, 95 per cent of junior high graduates go on to attend a senior vocational high school, university, junior college, trade school, or other higher education institution.
Since Made in China 2025 was announced in 2015, aggressive campaigns to recruit Taiwanese chip industry talent to support its mandates resulted in the loss of more than 3,000 chip engineers to mainland China, and raised concerns of a "brain drain" in Taiwan.
Many Taiwanese students attend cram schools, or buxiban, to improve skills and knowledge on problem solving against exams of subjects like mathematics, nature science, history and many others.
Courses are available for most popular subjects and include lectures, reviews, private tutorial sessions, and recitations.
As of 2020[update], the literacy rate in Taiwan was 99.03 percent.
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Taiwan
Population density map of Taiwan (residents per square kilometre)
Taiwan has a population of about 23.4 million, most of whom are on the island of Taiwan.
The remainder live on the outlying islands of Penghu (101,758), Kinmen (127,723), and Matsu (12,506).
Largest cities and counties
Main article: List of cities in Taiwan
The figures below are the March 2019 estimates for the twenty most populous administrative divisions; a different ranking exists when considering the total metropolitan area populations (in such rankings the Taipei-Keelung metro area is by far the largest agglomeration). The figures reflect the number of household registrations in each city, which may differ from the number of actual residents.
Largest cities and special municipalities in Taiwansource
Rank
Name
Division
Pop.
New TaipeiTaichung
New Taipei
New Taipei City
4,000,164
KaohsiungTaipei
Taichung
Taichung City
2,809,004
Kaohsiung
Kaohsiung City
2,773,229
Taipei
Taipei City
2,661,317
Taoyuan
Taoyuan City
2,230,653
Tainan
Tainan City
1,883,078
Hsinchu
Hsinchu City
Keelung
Keelung City
Chiayi
Chiayi City
Changhua
Changhua County
Ethnic groups
Main articles: Taiwanese people, Han Taiwanese, Taiwanese indigenous peoples, and Plains indigenous peoples
Original geographic distributions of Taiwanese indigenous peoples
The ROC government reports that over 95 per cent of the population is Han.
The overwhelming majority of them (85 per cent) are descendants of Hoklo and Hakka who arrived in large numbers in the 17th to 18th century.
A minority (10 to 15 per cent) are waishengren, descendants of Chinese nationalists who fled to Taiwan the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1949. There are also 2 per cent indigenous Malayo-Polynesian peoples and 2 per cent new immigrants primarily from China and Southeast Asia.
The Hoklo people are the largest ethnic group (70 per cent of the total population), whose ancestors migrated from the coastal southern Fujian region across the Taiwan Strait starting in the 17th century.
The Hakka comprise about 15 per cent of the total population, and descend from Han migrants from eastern Guangdong.
The indigenous Taiwanese aborigines number about 533,600, and the government recognises 16 groups.
The Ami, Atayal, Bunun, Kanakanavu, Kavalan, Paiwan, Puyuma, Rukai, Saisiyat, Saaroa, Sakizaya, Sediq, Thao, Truku and Tsou live mostly in the eastern half of the island, while the Yami inhabit Orchid Island.
Languages
Most commonly used home language in each area, darker in proportion to the lead over the next most common  Mandarin Chinese  Hokkien or Min Nan  Hakka Chinese  Austronesian languages
Main article: Languages of Taiwan
Mandarin is the primary language used in business and education, and is spoken by the vast majority of the population.
Traditional Chinese is used as the writing system.
The Republic of China does not have any legally designated official language, but Mandarin plays the role of the de facto official language.
Around 70% of Taiwan's population belong to the Hoklo ethnic group and are speakers of Taiwanese Hokkien as native language.
The Hakka group, comprising some 14–18 per cent of the population, speak Hakka.
Although Mandarin is the language of instruction in schools and dominates television and radio, non-Mandarin Chinese varieties have undergone a revival in public life in Taiwan, particularly since restrictions on their use were lifted in the 1990s.
Formosan languages are spoken primarily by the indigenous peoples of Taiwan.
They do not belong to the Chinese or Sino-Tibetan language family, but to the Austronesian language family, and are written in Latin alphabet.
Their use among aboriginal minority groups has been in decline as usage of Mandarin has risen.
Of the 14 extant languages, five are considered moribund.
Classical Chinese
Since the May Fourth Movement, written vernacular Chinese had replaced Classical Chinese and emerged as the mainstream written Chinese in the Republic of China.
But Classical Chinese continued to be widely used in the Government of the Republic of China.
Most government documents in the Republic of China were written in Classical Chinese until reforms in the 1970s, in a reform movement spearheaded by President Yen Chia-kan to shift the written style to a more integrated vernacular Chinese and Classical Chinese style (文白合一行文). After 1 January 2005, the Executive Yuan also changed the long-standing official document writing habit from vertical writing style to horizontal writing style.
Today, pure Classical Chinese is occasionally used in formal or ceremonial occasions, religious or cultural rites in Taiwan.
The National Anthem of the Republic of China (中華民國國歌), for example, is in Classical Chinese.
Taoist texts are still preserved in Classical Chinese from the time they were composed.
Buddhist texts, or sutras, are still preserved in Classical Chinese from the time they were composed or translated from Sanskrit sources.
In practice there is a socially accepted continuum between vernacular Chinese and Classical Chinese.
Most official government documents, legal, courts rulings and judiciary documents use a combined vernacular Chinese and Classical Chinese style (文白合一行文). For example, most official notices and formal letters are written with a number of stock Classical Chinese expressions (e.g. salutation, closing). Personal letters, on the other hand, are mostly written in vernacular, but with some Classical phrases, depending on the subject matter, the writer's level of education, etc.
As many legal documents are still written in Classical Chinese, which is not easily understood by the general public, a group of Taiwanese had launched the Legal Vernacular Movement hoping to bring more Vernacular Chinese into the legal writings of the Republic of China.
Taiwan is officially multilingual.
A national language in Taiwan is legally defined as "a natural language used by an original people group of Taiwan and the Taiwan Sign Language". As of 2019, policies on national languages are in early stages of implementation, with Hakka and indigenous languages designated as such.
Religion
Main article: Religion in Taiwan
Estimated religious composition in 2020
Chinese folk religion (including Confucianism) (43.8%)  Buddhists (21.2%)  Others (including Taoists) (15.5%)  Unaffiliated (13.7%)  Christians (5.8%)  Muslims (1%)
Wanhe Temple is one of the temples dedicated to the sea goddess Mazu
The Constitution of the Republic of China protects people's freedom of religion and the practices of belief.
Freedom of religion in Taiwan is strong and ranks high at 9.2 in 2018 according to World Bank.
In 2005, the census reported that the five largest religions were: Buddhism, Taoism, Yiguandao, Protestantism, and Roman Catholicism.
According to Pew Research, the religious composition of Taiwan in 2020 is estimated to be 43.8 per cent Folk religions, 21.2 per cent Buddhist, 15.5 Others (including Taoism), 13.7 per cent Unaffiliated, 5.8 per cent Christian and 1% Muslim.
Taiwanese aborigines comprise a notable subgroup among professing Christians: "... over 64 per cent identify as Christian ... Church buildings are the most obvious markers of Aboriginal villages, distinguishing them from Taiwanese or Hakka villages". There has been a small Muslim community of Hui people in Taiwan since the 17th century.
Confucianism is a philosophy that deals with secular moral ethics, and serves as the foundation of both Chinese and Taiwanese culture.
The majority of Taiwanese people usually combine the secular moral teachings of Confucianism with whatever religions they are affiliated with.
As of 2019[update], there were 15,175 religious buildings in Taiwan, approximately one place of worship per 1,572 residents. 12,279 temples were dedicated to Taoism and Buddhism.
There were 9,684 Taoist Temples and 2,317 Buddhist Temples.
In Taiwan's 36,000 square kilometers of land, there are more than 33,000 places for religious (believers) to worship and gather.
On average, there is one temple or church (church) or religious building for every square kilometer.
The high density of place of worship is rare in the world, and it is the area with the highest density of religious buildings in the Chinese-speaking world.
Taiwan is also the most religious region in the Chinese-speaking world.
Even for Christianity, there are 2,845 Churches.
A significant percentage of the population of Taiwan is non-religious.
Taiwan's strong human rights protections, lack of state-sanctioned discrimination, and generally high regard for freedom of religion or belief earned it a joint #1 ranking in the 2018 Freedom of Thought Report, alongside the Netherlands and Belgium.
Taiwan is clearly an outlier in the top 3, all-clear countries.
It is non-European, and demographically much more religious.
But in its relatively open, democratic and tolerant society we have recorded no evidence of laws or social discrimination against members of the non-religious minority.
LGBT rights
Main articles: LGBT rights in Taiwan and Same-sex marriage in Taiwan
On 24 May 2017, the Constitutional Court ruled that then-current marriage laws had been violating the Constitution by denying Taiwanese same-sex couples the right to marry.
The Court ruled that if the Legislative Yuan did not pass adequate amendments to Taiwanese marriage laws within two years, same-sex marriages would automatically become lawful in Taiwan.
In a referendum question in 2018, however, voters expressed overwhelming opposition to same-sex marriage and supported the removal of content about homosexuality from primary school textbooks.
According to the New York Times, the aforementioned referendum questions were subject to a "well-funded and highly organized campaign led by conservative Christians and other groups" involving the use of "misinformation, the bulk of which was spread online." Nevertheless, the vote against same-sex marriage does not affect the court ruling, and on 17 May 2019, Taiwan's parliament approved a bill legalising same-sex marriage, making it the first country in Asia to do so.
Taiwan has an annual pride event, Taiwan Pride.
It currently holds the record for the largest LGBT gathering in East-Asia, rivaling Tel Aviv Pride in Israel.
The event draws more than 200,000 people to demonstrate for equal rights for LGBT people.
The event is organized by the Taiwan LGBT Pride Community, and is held on the last Sunday of October.
Health
Main article: Healthcare in Taiwan
National Taiwan University Hospital
The current healthcare system in Taiwan, known as National Health Insurance (NHI, Chinese: 全民健康保險), was instituted in 1995. NHI is a single-payer compulsory social insurance plan that centralizes the disbursement of healthcare funds.
The system promises equal access to healthcare for all citizens, and the population coverage had reached 99 per cent by the end of 2004. NHI is mainly financed through premiums, which are based on the payroll tax, and is supplemented with out-of-pocket co-payments and direct government funding.
Low-income families, veterans, centenarians, children under three years old, and catastrophic diseases are exempt from co-payments.
Co-pays are reduced for disabled and low income households maintain 100 percent premium coverage by the NHI.
Early in the program, the payment system was predominantly fee-for-service.
Most health providers operate in the private sector and form a competitive market on the health delivery side.
However, many healthcare providers took advantage of the system by offering unnecessary services to a larger number of patients and then billing the government.
In the face of increasing loss and the need for cost containment, NHI changed the payment system from fee-for-service to a global budget, a kind of prospective payment system, in 2002.
The implementation of universal healthcare created fewer health disparities for lower-income citizens in Taiwan.
According to a recently published survey, out of 3,360 patients surveyed at a randomly chosen hospital, 75.1 per cent of the patients said they are "very satisfied" with the hospital service; 20.5 per cent said they are "okay" with the service.
Only 4.4 per cent of the patients said they are either "not satisfied" or "very not satisfied" with the service or care provided.
The Taiwanese disease control authority is the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC), and during the SARS outbreak in March 2003 there were 347 confirmed cases.
During the outbreak the CDC and local governments set up monitoring stations throughout public transportation, recreational sites and other public areas.
With full containment in July 2003, there has not been a case of SARS since.
Owing to the lessons from SARS, a National Health Command Center [fr] was established in 2004, which includes the Central Epidemic Command Center (CECC). The CECC has since played a central role in Taiwan's approach to epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2019, the infant mortality rate was 4.2 deaths per 1,000 live births, with 20 physicians and 71 hospital beds per 10,000 people.
Life expectancy at birth in 2020 is 77.5 years and 83.9 years for males and females, respectively.
Culture
Main articles: Culture of Taiwan, Cultural history of Taiwan, and Chinese Cultural Renaissance
See also: Taiwanese wave
Amis people of Taiwan performing a traditional dance
The National Palace Museum is an institute dedicated to the organization, care, and display of ancient Chinese artifacts and works of art
The cultures of Taiwan are a hybrid blend from various sources, incorporating elements of the majority traditional Chinese culture, aboriginal cultures, Japanese cultural influence, traditional Confucianist beliefs, and increasingly, Western values.
During the martial law period in which the Republic of China was officially anti-communist, the Kuomintang promoted an official traditional Chinese culture over Taiwan in order to emphasize that the Republic of China represents the true orthodoxy to Chinese Culture (and therefore the "real and legitimate China") as opposed to Communist China.
The government launched what's known as the Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement in Taiwan in opposition to the cultural destructions caused by the Chinese Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution.
The General Assembly of Chinese Culture (中華文化總會) was established as a movement promotion council to help promote Chinese Culture in Taiwan and overseas.
It was Kuomintang's first structured plan for cultural development on Taiwan.
Chiang himself was the head of the General Assembly of Chinese Culture.
Subsequent President of the Republic of China also became the head of this General Assembly.
The Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement in Taiwan coupled with Chinese Cultural education in Taiwan had helped to elevate the cultural refinement, mannerism and politeness of many Taiwanese, in contrast to the cultural destruction (uncultured behaviour) of many mainland Chinese due to the Cultural Revolution.
This has also led to Chinese Culture (especially its soft culture) being better preserved in Taiwan than in mainland China.
An example of this preservation is the continued use of Traditional Chinese.
The influence of Confucianism can be found in the behaviour of Taiwanese people, known for their friendliness and politeness.
The lifting of martial law ushered a period of democratization whereby Freedom of Speech and Expression led to a flourishing Taiwanese literature and Mass media in Taiwan.   
Reflecting the continuing controversy surrounding the political status of Taiwan, politics continues to play a role in the conception and development of a Taiwanese cultural identity, especially in its relationship to Chinese culture.
In recent years, the concept of Taiwanese multiculturalism has been proposed as a relatively apolitical alternative view, which has allowed for the inclusion of mainlanders and other minority groups into the continuing re-definition of Taiwanese culture as collectively held systems of meaning and customary patterns of thought and behaviour shared by the people of Taiwan.
Identity politics, along with the over one hundred years of political separation from mainland China, has led to distinct traditions in many areas, including cuisine and music.
Arts
Main articles: Music of Taiwan and Taiwanese art
This section appears to be slanted towards recent events.
Please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Acclaimed classical musicians include violinist Cho-Liang Lin, pianist Ching-Yun Hu, and the Lincoln Center Chamber Music Society artist director Wu Han.
Other musicians include Teresa Teng, Jay Chou and groups such as Mayday and heavy metal band Chthonic, led by singer Freddy Lim, which has been referred to as the "Black Sabbath of Asia".
Taiwanese films have won various international awards at film festivals around the world.
Ang Lee, a Taiwanese director, has directed critically acclaimed films such as: Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon; Eat Drink Man Woman; Sense and Sensibility; Brokeback Mountain; Life of Pi; and Lust, Caution.
Other famous Taiwanese directors include Tsai Ming-liang, Edward Yang, and Hou Hsiao-hsien.
Taiwan has hosted the Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards since 1962.
Taiwan hosts the National Palace Museum, which houses more than 650,000 pieces of Chinese bronze, jade, calligraphy, painting, and porcelain and is considered one of the greatest collections of Chinese art and objects in the world.
Cuisine
Main article: Taiwanese cuisine
Taiwanese culinary history is murky and is intricately tied to patterns of migration and colonization.
Local and international Taiwanese cuisine, including its history, is a politically contentious topic.
Famous Taiwanese dishes include Taiwanese beef noodle soup, Gua bao, Zongzi, Khong bah png, Taiwanese fried chicken, oyster vermicelli, Sanbeiji, and Aiyu jelly.
The Michelin Guide began reviewing restaurants in Taipei in 2018 and Taichung in 2020. In 2014 The Guardian called Taiwanese night markets the "best street food markets in the world".
Bubble tea, created in Taiwan in the 1980s, has now become a global phenomenon with its popularity spreading across the globe.
Popular culture
Karaoke, drawn from contemporary Japanese culture, is extremely popular in Taiwan, where it is known as KTV. KTV businesses operate in a hotel-like style, renting out small rooms and ballrooms according to the number of guests in a group.
Many KTV establishments partner with restaurants and buffets to form all-encompassing and elaborate evening affairs for families, friends, or businessmen.
Tour busses that travel around Taiwan have several TVs, primarily for singing karaoke.
Taiwan has a high density of 24-hour convenience stores, which, in addition to the usual services, provide services on behalf of financial institutions or government agencies, such as collection of parking fees, utility bills, traffic violation fines, and credit card payments.
They also provide a service for mailing packages.
Chains such as FamilyMart provide clothing laundry services, and it is possible to purchase or receive tickets for TRA and THSR tickets at convenience stores, specifically 7-Eleven, FamilyMart, Hi-Life and OK.
Sports
Main article: Sport in Taiwan
The Chinese Professional Baseball League (CPBL) is the top-tier professional baseball league in Taiwan
Tai Tzu-ying spent most weeks as world No. 1 women's singles player in BWF World Ranking
Baseball is commonly considered as Taiwan's national sport and is a popular spectator sport.
The Taiwanese men's baseball team and women's baseball team are world No.2 in the WBSC Rankings as of June 2021. The Chinese Professional Baseball League (CPBL) in Taiwan was established in 1989 and eventually absorbed the competing Taiwan Major League in 2003. As of 2021, the CPBL has five teams, with average attendance around 4,000 per game.
Some elite players signed with overseas professional teams in the Major League Baseball (MLB) or the Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB). There have been sixteen Taiwanese MLB players in the United States as of the 2022 MLB Season, including former pitchers Chien-Ming Wang and Wei-Yin Chen.
Besides baseball, basketball is Taiwan's other major sport.
The P. League+ and T1 League are two Taiwan's professional basketball leagues.
A semi-professional Super Basketball League (SBL) has also been in play since 2003. Two other teams from Taiwan compete in the ASEAN Basketball League, a professional men's basketball league in East and Southeast Asia.
Other team sports including football and volleyball are practiced and sports leagues are run by Taiwanese sports governing bodies.
Taiwan is also a major competitor in korfball.
Taiwan participates in international sporting organizations and events under the name of "Chinese Taipei" due to its political status.
In 2009, Taiwan hosted two multi-sport events on the island.
The 2009 World Games were held in Kaohsiung and the Summer Deaflympics were held in Taipei.
Furthermore, Taipei hosted the Summer Universiade in 2017. In terms of annual international competitions held in Taiwan, the William Jones Cup for basketball and the Taipei Open for badminton are the events with more than forty years of history.
Taekwondo was introduced to Taiwan in 1966 for military training and has become a mature and successful combat sport in Taiwan.
The first two Olympic gold medals won by Taiwanese athletes belong to the sport.
In the 2004 Olympics, Chen Shih-hsin and Chu Mu-yen won gold medals in the women's flyweight event and the men's flyweight event, respectively.
Subsequent taekwondo competitors have strengthened Taiwan's taekwondo culture.
In individual ball sports, Taiwanese athletes are often seen in international tournaments.
Yani Tseng is the youngest golf player ever, male or female, to win five major championships and was ranked number 1 in the Women's World Golf Rankings for 109 consecutive weeks from 2011 to 2013. In tennis, Hsieh Su-wei is the country's most successful player.
She reached a career-high singles ranking of world No. 23 in 2013 and world No. 1 in the doubles rankings in 2014. Taiwan's strength in badminton is demonstrated by Tai Tzu-ying, who spent most weeks as world No. 1 women's singles player in BWF World Ranking, and her compatriots in the BWF World Tour.
Taiwan also has a long history of strong international presence in table tennis.
Five-time Olympian Chuang Chih-yuan made the most appearances at the Olympic Games among Taiwanese athletes.
Calendar
Main article: Republic of China calendar
See also: Chinese calendar and Public holidays in Taiwan
The standard Gregorian calendar is used for most purposes in Taiwan.
The year is often denoted by the Minguo era system which starts in 1912, the year the ROC was founded. 2021 is year 110 Minguo (民國110年). The East Asian date format is used in Chinese.
Prior to standardisation in 1929, the Chinese calendar was officially used.
It is a Lunisolar calendar system which remains in use today for traditional festivals such as the Lunar New Year, the Lantern Festival, and the Dragon Boat Festival.
See also
Taiwan portal
Islands portal
Index of Taiwan-related articles
Outline of Taiwan
Notes
Taipei is the official seat of government of the Republic of China although the Constitution of the Republic of China does not specify the de jure capital.
Mandarin as the standard variety of ChineseVernacular Chinese (used in most occasions) Classical Chinese (used in formal or ceremonial occasions, religious or cultural rites, official documents, legal and court rulings and judiciary documents) 
a b c d Not designated but meets legal definition
A national language in Taiwan is legally defined as "a natural language used by an original people group of Taiwan and the Taiwan Sign Language".
Mixed indigenous-Han ancestry is included in the figure for Han Taiwanese.
The Republic of Formosa was declared on 23 May 1895 and was conquered by Japan on 21 October 1895.
The Republic of China was officially established on 1 January 1912.
Interpretations on whether this entails a complete transfer of the territory's sovereignty to the Republic of China vary.
Japan renounced its claims to Taiwan and the Pescadores in the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952; see Retrocession Day, Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan and political status of Taiwan.
The Republic of China was the founding member of the United Nations and joined on 24 October 1945. Recognition was shifted to the People's Republic of China by the Soviet Union (2 October 1949), the United Kingdom (6 January 1950), France (27 January 1964), and the United States (1 January 1979); see the Timeline of diplomatic relations of the Republic of China, Foreign relations of Taiwan and One-China policy.
a b There are three contemporary geographic definitions of "Taiwan" (see List of islands of Taiwan and Regions of Taiwan), which may refer to: Common name of the state officially named the Republic of China, this contains all 168 islands administered by the ROC, collectively known as the Taiwan Area;Taiwan proper region (本島地區), the geographical unit encompass the island of Taiwan and its offshore islands including the Penghu Islands, excluding the outlying island groups of Kinmen, Matsu, Wuqiu, lie just off the coast of southeastern China, and the South China Sea islands;The island of Taiwan, this indicates only the main island within the geographical unit and the state.
See etymology below.
a b According to official data from Executive Yuan and local governments of Taiwan, Taiwan Area consists of total 168 naturally occurring islands. 
Taiwan (Formosa) and its offshore islands (22)Penghu Islands (90)Kinmen, including Wuqiu (17)Matsu Islands (36)Pratas Island (1) Spratly Islands (2, Taiping and Zhongzhou)
The UN does not consider the Republic of China as a sovereign state.
The HDI report does not include Taiwan as part of the People's Republic of China when calculating mainland China's figures.
Taiwan's government calculated its HDI to be 0.907 based on UNDP's 2010 methodology, which would rank it 21st, between Austria and Luxembourg in the UN list dated 14 September 2018. 
Although this is the present meaning of guó, in Old Chinese (when its pronunciation was something like /*qʷˤək/) it meant the walled city of the Chinese and the areas they could control from them.
Its use is attested from the sixth-century Classic of History, which states "Huangtian bestowed the lands and the peoples of the central state to the ancestors" (皇天既付中國民越厥疆土于先王).
Also known as the Taiwan area or Tai–Min area (Chinese: 臺閩地區; lit. 'Taiwan–Fujian area')
The mainland area consists of Mainland China, Tibet and (previously) Outer Mongolia
Special municipalities, cities, and county-administered cities are all called shi (Chinese: 市; lit. 'city')
Nominal; provincial governments have been abolished
Constitutionally having the same structure as the free area, these are currently under the Chinese Communist Party control with a different structure
Sometimes called cities (Chinese: 市) or provincial cities (Chinese: 省轄市) to distinguish them from special municipalities and county-administered cities
There are two types of townships: rural townships or xīang (Chinese: 鄉) and urban townships or zhèn (Chinese: 鎮)
Villages in rural townships are known as tsūn (Chinese: 村), those in other jurisdictions are known as lǐ (Chinese: 里)
Words in native languages
a b Traditional Chinese script: 中華民國Mandarin Pinyin: Zhōnghuá MínguóHokkien: Tiong-hûa Bîn-kokSixian Hakka: Chûng-fà Mìn-koet
Traditional Chinese script: 臺灣 or 台灣Mandarin Pinyin: TáiwānHokkien: Tâi-uânSixian Hakka: Tǒi-vǎnAmis: TaywanPaiwan: Taiwan
References
Citations
"Since the implementation of the Act Governing Principles for Editing Geographical Educational Texts (地理敎科書編審原則) in 1997, the guiding principle for all maps in geographical textbooks was that Taipei was to be marked as the capital with a label stating: "Location of the Central Government"". 4 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 November 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019.
"Interior minister reaffirms Taipei is ROC's capital". Taipei Times. 5 December 2013. Retrieved 7 December 2013.
a b "推動雙語國家政策問題研析". (in Chinese). 23 July 2013. Retrieved 25 May 2021.
"法律統一用語表-常見公文用語說明" (PDF) (in Chinese). Retrieved 2 June 2021.
Executive Yuan, R.O.C. (Taiwan) (2012). "Chapter 2: People and Language". The Republic of China Yearbook 2012. p. 24. ISBN 9789860345902. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
Government Information Office (2010). "Chapter 2: People and Language" (PDF). The Republic of China Yearbook 2010. p. 42. ISBN 9789860252781. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 August 2011.
Liao, Silvie (2008). "A Perceptual Dialect Study of Taiwan Mandarin: Language Attitudes in the Era of Political Battle".  In Chan, Marjorie K. M.; Kang, Hana (eds.). Proceedings of the 20th North American Conference on Chinese Linguistics (NACCL-20) (PDF). Vol. 1. Columbus, Ohio: The Ohio State University. p. 393. ISBN 9780982471500. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2013.
"行政院第3251次院會決議". (in Chinese). Retrieved 25 May 2021.
"Hakka Basic Act". law.moj.gov.tw.
Retrieved 22 May 2019.
"Indigenous Languages Development Act". law.moj.gov.tw.
Retrieved 22 May 2019.
a b 國家語言發展法. law.moj.gov.tw (in Chinese). Retrieved 22 May 2019.
The Republic of China Yearbook 2016. Executive Yuan, R.O.C. 2016. p. 10. ISBN 9789860499490. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Ethnicity: 70 percent Hoklo; 15 percent Hakka 10–15 percent mainlanders; 2 percent indigenous Austronesian peoples
a b Washington, Suite 800; Inquiries, DC 20036 USA202-419-4300 (2 April 2015). "Religious Composition by Country, 2010–2050". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project.
Retrieved 23 February 2019.
a b c d "Taiwan". The World Factbook.
United States Central Intelligence Agency.
Retrieved 6 May 2019.
Gerrit van der Wees (13 February 2019). "How European explorers discovered Ilha Formosa". taipeitimes.com.
Taipei Times.
Retrieved 8 September 2022.
a b c "TAIWAN SNAPSHOT". Retrieved 15 March 2020.
"Population of Taiwan as of July 2022".
"General Statistical analysis report, Population and Housing Census" (PDF). National Statistics, ROC (Taiwan). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016.
a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2022". IMF.org.
International Monetary Fund.
Retrieved 5 May 2022.
"Percentage share of disposable income by quintile groups of income recipients and measures of income distribution". stat.gov.tw.
Retrieved 26 June 2019.
a b c "國情統計通報（第 014 號）" (PDF). Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Executive Yuan, Taiwan (ROC). 21 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021.
"ICANN Board Meeting Minutes". ICANN. 25 June 2010.
Multiple sources:
Michael Kort (2005). The Handbook Of East Asia.
Lerner Publishing Group. p. 7. ISBN 978-0761326724. Retrieved 26 June 2022. South Korea is another emerging economic powerhouse, as is the Republic of China (ROC), a small country that occupies the island of Taiwan in the shadow of its enormous and hostile mainland neighbor, the PRC.
Fell, Dafydd (2018). Government and Politics in Taiwan.
London: Routledge. p. 305. ISBN 978-1317285069. Moreover, its status as a vibrant democratic state has earned it huge international sympathy and a generally positive image.
Campbell, Matthew (7 January 2020). "China's Next Crisis Brews in Taiwan's Upcoming Election". Bloomberg Businessweek.
No. 4642. pp. 34–39. ISSN 0007-7135. Retrieved 24 September 2020. Much has changed in Taiwan since Chiang's day, but this liminal quality has never really gone away.
By almost any functional standard, it's a sovereign country
Carolan, Christopher (May 2000). "The "Republic of Taiwan": Legal-Historical Justification for a Taiwanese Declaration of Independence" (PDF). New York University Law Review. 75 (2): 429–468. Retrieved 17 March 2022. These six criteria demonstrate that under international law Taiwan merits recognition as an independent state and as such is already a de facto state.
Donald S. Zagoria (30 October 2003). Breaking the China-Taiwan Impasse.
ABC-CLIO. pp. 68–. ISBN 978-0-313-05755-7. OCLC 1058389524. Retrieved 20 March 2022. Taiwan possesses all of the elements of a sovereign state: a legitimate government, population, and a well-defined territory.
The fact is that the People's Republic of China (PRC), while claiming sovereignty over Taiwan, has never ruled Taiwan since the PRC's establishment in 1949. Thus, Taiwan is in fact a sovereign country from our perspective.
"國情簡介-土地" [Country profile-Territories] (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Executive Yuan. 2022. Archived from the original on 4 March 2022. 臺灣本島及其21個附屬島嶼面積共3萬5886.8623平方公里。 [The main island of Taiwan and its 21 associated islands have a total area of 35,886.8623 square kilometers.]
"Measure of the area". Penghu County Government. 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
"澎湖縣各行政區域島嶼簡介" (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Kun Shan University. 2022. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. 澎湖群島原為64個島嶼組成，經2005年澎湖縣政府重新進行澎湖群島島嶼數量清查，係由90座大小島嶼所組成。 [The Penghu Archipelago was conventionally considered to comprise 64 islands.
In 2005, the Penghu County Government re-scrutinized the total number of islands in the archipelago, which consists of 90 islands of varying sizes.]
"自然環境" [Natural Environment] (PDF). 金門縣第四期（104–107年）離島綜合建設實施方案 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). National Development Council, Executive Yuan: 44. 23 December 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2022. 金門縣總面積151平方公里，除大金門本島外，尚包括小金門、大膽、二膽、東碇、北碇等17個島嶼。西距廈門外港約10海浬，東距臺灣約150海浬，為一典型大陸型島嶼。 [The total area of Kinmen County is 151 square kilometers.
In addition to the main island of Kinmen, the county also includes Xiaokinmen, Dadan, Erdan, Dongding and Beiding for a total of 17 islands.
It is about 10 nautical miles away from the Port of Xiamen to the west and 150 nautical miles away from Taiwan to the east.
It is a typical continental island.]
"About Kinmen". Kinmen County Government. 8 December 2017. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
"金門的地理與歷史概說" [The overview of geography and history of Kinmen] (PDF). 第四章 金門的地理、歷史與總體經濟分析 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). National Taiwan Normal University: 131–134. 20 February 2006. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
Guy Plopsky (22 February 2017). "Taiwan's Cold War Fortresses". The Diplomat.
Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
"連江縣志 地理志" (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 馬祖資訊網. 12 May 2011. 馬祖列島所涵括的36座島嶼分屬四鄉，各鄉除了包括有聚落發展的較大島嶼外，還轄有數座無人島礁。 [Matsu islands encompass 36 Islands which are divided into four townships.
In addition to the larger islands with inhabitants, each township also has numerous uninhabited islands and reefs]
Lung Tsun-Ni 龍村倪 (1998). 東沙群島-東沙島紀事集錦 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 臺灣綜合研究院. p. 13. ISBN 957-98189-0-8. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. 東沙島為東沙群島唯一島嶼 [Pratas Island is the only island in the Pratas Islands]
"Limits in the Seas – No. 127 Taiwan's Maritime Claims" (PDF). United States Department of State. 15 November 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2022. The Pratas Reef lies 230 miles to the southwest of the southern tip of Taiwan.
It consists of an island in the mouth of a semicircular shoal open to the west.
a b Economic Development R.O.C (Taiwan) (Report). National Development Council (Taiwan). p. 4. Retrieved 6 November 2021.
Gold (1985).
World Bank Country and Lending Groups Archived 11 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine, World Bank.
Retrieved 10 July 2018.
"IMF Advanced Economies List.
World Economic Outlook, April 2016, p. 148" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 April 2016.
"Democracy in Retreat". Freedom House. 3 January 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2019.
Yao, Grace; Cheng, Yen-Pi; Cheng, Chiao-Pi (5 November 2008). "The Quality of Life in Taiwan". Social Indicators Research. 92 (2): 377–404. doi:10.1007/s11205-008-9353-1. S2CID 144780750. a second place ranking in the 2000 Economist's world healthcare ranking
"- Human Development Reports" (PDF). hdr.undp.org.
2018中華民國人類發展指數(HDI) (in Traditional Chinese). Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Executive Yuan, R.O.C. 2018. Archived from the original (Excel) on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2018.
"Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 14 September 2018. OCLC 1061292121. Retrieved 9 December 2018.
Horton, Chris (9 November 2021). "The World Is Fed Up With China's Belligerence". The Atlantic.
Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021.
a b c d Wood, Richard (27 November 2021). "What is behind the China-Taiwan dispute?". 9News.
Nine Entertainment Company.
Retrieved 27 November 2021. Experts agree a direct conflict is unlikely, but as the future of self-ruled Taiwan increasingly becomes a powder keg, a mishap or miscalculation could lead to confrontation while Chinese and American ambitions are at odds.
a b Dou, Eva (16 September 2019). "Solomon Islands Ends Diplomatic Ties with Taiwan, Stands by China". The Wall Street Journal.
Retrieved 16 September 2019.
Clarke, Melissa (20 September 2019). "Kiribati cuts ties with Taiwan in diplomatic switch to China days after Solomon Islands pivot". ABC News.
Retrieved 20 September 2019.
Fell, Dafydd (2006). Party Politics in Taiwan.
Routledge. p. 85. ISBN 978-1-134-24021-0.
Achen, Christopher H.; Wang, T. Y. (2017). "The Taiwan Voter: An Introduction".  In Achen, Christopher H.; Wang, T. Y. (eds.). The Taiwan Voter.
University of Michigan Press. pp. 1–25. doi:10.3998/mpub.9375036. ISBN 978-0-472-07353-5. pp. 1–2.
"Chapter 3: History" (PDF). The Republic of China Yearbook 2011. Government Information Office, Republic of China (Taiwan). 2011. p. 46. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2012.
"Ilha Formosa: the Emergence of Taiwan on the World Scene in the 17th Century". National Palace Museum.
Archived from the original on 14 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018.
Davidson (1903), p. 10: "A Dutch navigating officer named Linschotten [sic], employed by the Portuguese, so recorded the island in his charts, and eventually the name of Formosa, so euphonious and yet appropriate, replaced all others in European literature."
see for example:
Campbell, William (1915). Sketches from Formosa.
London: Marshall Brothers.
OL 7051071M.
Campbell (1903)
Davidson (1903)
Valentijn (1903), p. 52.
Mair, Victor H. (2003). "How to Forget Your Mother Tongue and Remember Your National Language". Pīnyīn.info.
The true derivation of the name "Taiwan" is actually from the ethnonym of a tribe in the southwest part of the island in the area around Ping'an.
As early as 1636, a Dutch missionary referred to this group as Taiouwang.
From the name of the tribe, the Portuguese called the area around Ping'an as Tayowan, Taiyowan, Tyovon, Teijoan, Toyouan, and so forth.
Indeed, already in his ship's log of 1622, the Dutchman Cornelis Reijersen referred to the area as Teijoan and Taiyowan.
蔡玉仙;  et al., eds. (2007).  府城文史 (in Chinese). Tainan City Government.
ISBN 978-986-00-9434-3.
Shih Shou-chien, ed. (2003).  福爾摩沙 : 十七世紀的臺灣、荷蘭與東亞 [Ilha Formosa: the Emergence of Taiwan on the World Scene in the 17th Century] (in Chinese). Taipei: National Palace Museum.
ISBN 978-957-562-441-5.
Kato, Mitsutaka (2007) .  昨日府城 明星台南: 發現日治下的老臺南 (in Chinese). Translated by 黃秉珩. 臺南市文化資產保護協會. ISBN 978-957-28079-9-6.
a b c Oosterhoff, J.L. (1985). "Zeelandia, a Dutch colonial city on Formosa (1624–1662)".  In Ross, Robert; Telkamp, Gerard J. (eds.). Colonial Cities: Essays on Urbanism in a Colonial Context.
Springer. pp. 51–62. ISBN 978-90-247-2635-6.
Thompson (1964), p. 166.
Thompson (1964), p. 163.
Baxter-Sagart.
a b Wilkinson, Endymion (2000), Chinese History: A Manual, Harvard-Yenching Institute Monograph No. 52, Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, p. 132, ISBN 978-0-674-00249-4
《尚書》, 梓材. (in Chinese)
Garver, John W. (April 1997). The Sino-American Alliance: Nationalist China and American Cold War Strategy in Asia. M.E. Sharp.
ISBN 978-0-7656-0025-7.
"Office of President of the Republic of China (Taiwan)". Office of President of the Republic of China (Taiwan). Retrieved 15 July 2015.
"About Taiwan". Taiwan.gov.tw.
Retrieved 16 June 2020.
"President Tsai interviewed by BBC". Office of the President of the Republic of China (Taiwan). 18 January 2020. Retrieved 16 June 2020. Well, the idea is that we don't have a need to declare ourselves an independent state.
We are an independent country already and we call ourselves the Republic of China (Taiwan)
a b Reid, Katie (18 May 2009). "Taiwan hopes WHO assembly will help boost its profile". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 15 October 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013.
a b c d "White Paper—The One-China Principle and the Taiwan Issue". Embassy of the PRC in the Kingdom of Norway.
The Taiwan Affairs Office and The Information Office of the State Council. 21 February 2000. Retrieved 27 November 2021. As we have already said, Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory and, after replacing the government of the Republic of China in 1949, the government of the PRC has become the sole legal government of China, enjoying and exercising sovereignty over the whole of China, including Taiwan.
Rosemary Gillespie; Rosemary G. Gillespie; D. A. Clague (2009). Encyclopedia of Islands.
University of California Press. p. 904. ISBN 978-0-520-25649-1.
Bagyo Prasetyo; Titi Surti Nastiti; Truman Simanjuntak (2021). AUSTRONESIAN DIASPORA: A New Perspective.
UGM PRESS. p. 125. ISBN 978-602-386-202-3.
Olsen, John W.; Miller-Antonio, Sari (1992). "The Palaeolithic in Southern China". Asian Perspectives. 31 (2): 129–160. hdl:10125/17011.
Hung, Hsiao-chun (2017). "Neolithic Cultures in Southeast China, Taiwan, and Luzon". First Islanders: Prehistory and Human Migration in Island Southeast Asia.
By Bellwood, Peter.
Wiley Blackwell. pp. 232–240. ISBN 978-1-119-25154-5. pp. 234–235.
Jiao (2007), pp. 91–94.
Diamond, Jared M (2000). "Taiwan's gift to the world" (PDF). Nature. 403 (6771): 709–710. Bibcode:2000Natur.403..709D. doi:10.1038/35001685. PMID 10693781. S2CID 4379227. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 September 2006.
Fox, James J (2004). "Current Developments in Comparative Austronesian Studies" (PDF). Symposium Austronesia.
Universitas Udayana, Bali.
Bellwood, Hung & Iizuka (2011), pp. 35–37, 41. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFBellwoodHungIizuka2011 (help)
Iizuka, Yoshiyuki, H. C. Hung, and Peter Bellwood. "A Noninvasive Mineralogical Study of Nephrite Artifacts from the Philippines and Surroundings: The Distribution of Taiwan Nephrite and the Implications for the Island Southeast Asian Archaeology." Scientific Research on the Sculptural Arts of Asia (2007): 12-19.
a b c Shepherd, John R. (1993). Statecraft and Political Economy on the Taiwan Frontier, 1600–1800. Stanford University Press. pp. 7–8. ISBN 978-0-8047-2066-3. Reprinted Taipei: SMC Publishing, 1995.
"歷史沿革". 澎湖縣政府全球資訊網. Penghu County Government.
Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2021.
「明萬曆年以後，澎湖第二次有移住民，以福建泉州府屬同安縣金門人遷來最早; 其後接踵而至者，亦以同安縣人為最多。彼等捷足先至者，得以優先選擇良好地區定居之，澎湖本島即多被同安人所先占; 尤其素稱土地沃之湖西鄉，完全成為同安人之區域。 李紹章《澎湖縣誌》，《續修澎湖縣志（卷三）｜人民志》
Wills (2006), p. 88.
Andrade (2008), Chapter 6 Note 5.
Campbell, William (1903). Formosa Under the Dutch: Described from Contemporary Records, with Explanatory Notes and a Bibliography of the Island.
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. pp. 6–7. ISBN 9789576380839.
Andrade 2008, Chapter 6.
Wills (2006), p. 98.
"Fort San Domingo". Tamsui Historical Museum. 3 July 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Fort San Domingo, located at the hilltop overlooking Tamsui River estuary, was established by the Spanish in 1628.
a b Wills (2006), p. 91.
Yan Xing. 臺南與鄭成功 [Tainan and Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga)]. Tainan Literature and History Research Database.
National Museum of Taiwan History.
Retrieved 12 February 2021.  這時成功意志堅决，便單獨倡導拒滿復明運動，以金，厦兩島爲根據地地，不斷地向閩，浙東南一進攻，奉永明王永曆正朔 ... 于永曆十一年（清順治十四年公元一六五七年）受永水明王封為延平王 [Then Chenggong (Koxinga) resolutely and independently advocated for the movement to resist the Manchus and restore Ming, with bases in Kinmen and Xiamen continuously attacked southeastern Min (Fujian) and Zhejiang, pledged to serve the Youngli emperor of Ming ... in 1657 was conferred the title King of Yanping by the Yong Ming emperor].
a b 2020–2021 Taiwan at a Glance (PDF). Taiwan: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of China (Taiwan). September 2020. p. 14. ISBN 978-986-5447-15-1.
Andrade (2008), Preface Note 1: "Second, this book is also about how Taiwan first came under Chinese political control, thanks to the Ming loyalist regime of Zheng Chenggong."
Wills (2006), pp. 94–95.
Struve, Lynn (1988). "The Southern Ming".  In Mote, Frederic W.; Twitchett, Denis (eds.). Cambridge History of China, Volume 7, The Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 641–725. ISBN 978-0-521-24332-2. pp. 722–725.
Wills, John E. (2001). The Dutch Reoccupation of Chi-lung, 1664–1668. California: University of California.
ISBN 9780936127095.
Shepherd 1993, p. 95.
Blussé, Leonard (1 January 1989). "Pioneers or cattle for the slaughterhouse? A rejoinder to A.R.T. Kemasang". Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde. 145 (2): 357. doi:10.1163/22134379-90003260. S2CID 57527820.
a b Ballantine (1952), p. 15.
Skoggard, Ian A. (1996). The Indigenous Dynamic in Taiwan's Postwar Development: The Religious and Historical Roots of Entrepreneurship. M.E. Sharpe.
ISBN 9781563248467. OL 979742M. p. 10
三年小反五年大亂. 台灣海外網 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Archived from the original on 13 April 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
民變 [Civil Strife]. Encyclopedia of Taiwan (台灣大百科). Taiwan Ministry of Culture.
Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 28 February 2021.  臺灣有「三年一小反，五年一大反」之謠。但是根據研究，這句俗諺所形容民變迭起的現象，以道光朝（1820-1850）的三十多年間為主 [The rumor of "every three years a small uprising, five years a large rebellion" circulated around Taiwan.
According to research, the repeated commotions described by this idiom occurred primarily during the 30-year period between 1820 and 1850.].
Ballantine (1952), p. 16.
Davidson (1903), pp. 247, 620.
"Treaty of Peace between China and Japan (Treaty of Shimonoseki)" (PDF). Ch'ing Dynasty Treaties and Agreements Preserved by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of China (Taiwan). National Palace Museum. 17 April 1895. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2021.  中國將管理下開地方之權並將該地方所有堡壘軍器工廠及一切屬公物件永遠讓於日本 ... 台湾全岛及所有附属各岛屿 ... 澎湖列岛 [China shall yield to Japan in perpetuity the rights to administer the following regions as well as all fortresses, munition factories, and public properties thereof ... the entire island of Taiwan and all appertaining islands ... Penghu archipelago].
Shiba, Ryōtarō (1995). Taiwan kikō : kaidō o yuku yonjū 台湾紀行: 街道をゆく〈40〉 (in Japanese). Tōkyō: Asahi Shinbunsha.
ISBN 978-4-02-256808-3.
Morris, Andrew (2002). "The Taiwan Republic of 1895 and the failure of the Qing modernizing project".  In Corcuff, Stéphane (ed.). Memories of the future: national identity issues and the search for a new Taiwan. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 3–24. ISBN 978-0-7656-0792-8.
"History of Taiwan". Windows on Asia.
Asian Studies Center, Michigan State University.
Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Hsu, Mutsu (1991). Culture, Self and Adaptation: The Psychological Anthropology of Two Malayo-Polynesian Groups in Taiwan.
Taipei, Taiwan: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica.
ISBN 978-957-9046-78-7.
Chou, Chuing Prudence; Ho, Ai-Hsin (2007). "Schooling in Taiwan".  In Postiglione, Gerard A.; Tan, Jason (eds.). Going to school in East Asia.
Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 344–377. ISBN 978-0-313-33633-1. Archived from the original on 19 April 2010.
Ballantine (1952), p. 39.
"History". The Republic of China Yearbook 2001. Government Information Office. 2001. Archived from the original on 27 October 2003.
Ballantine (1952), p. 48.
Tierney, Robert (2010). Tropics of Savagery: The Culture of Japanese Empire in Comparative Frame.
University of California Press. pp. 8–9. ISBN 978-0-520-94766-5.
吕, 正惠 (18 November 2014). 吕正惠：战后台湾左翼思想状况漫谈一——日本剥削下的台湾社会. 观察者.
Tsai, Chintang (2011). "Kominka Movement". Encyclopedia of Taiwan.
Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 25 August 2013.
Grajdanzev, A. J. (1942). "Formosa (Taiwan) Under Japanese Rule". Pacific Affairs. 15 (3): 311–324. doi:10.2307/2752241. JSTOR 2752241.
Ballantine (1952), p. 110.
a b Ballantine (1952), p. 47.
"Shu LinKou Air Station: World War II: U.S. Bombing Raids on Linkou and Taiwan". Shulinkou Air Station Taiwan. 10 October 2019.
"History". Oversea Office Republic of China (Taiwan). 2007. Archived from the original on 28 March 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2007.
Jacobs, J. Bruce; Liu, I-hao Ben (June 2007). "Lee Teng-Hui and the Idea of "Taiwan"". The China Quarterly. 190 (190): 375–393. doi:10.1017/S0305741007001245. JSTOR 20192775. S2CID 154384016.
再發"參拜靖國神社"論 李登輝媚日情結大起底 3 November 2010. People's Daily. 3 November 2010. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012 – via 兩岸網.
Hou, Elaine (14 August 2013). "Protesters demand justice from Japan on 'comfort women' (update)". Focus Taiwan.
Archived from the original on 25 June 2020.
Morris, Andrew D. (30 July 2015). Japanese Taiwan: Colonial Rule and its Contested Legacy.
Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 115–118. ISBN 978-1-4725-7674-3.
China: Five Thousand Years of History and Civilization.
City University Of Hong Kong Press. 2007. p. 116. ISBN 978-962-937-140-1. Retrieved 9 September 2014.
Roy, Denny (2003). Taiwan: A Political History.
Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. pp. 55, 56. ISBN 978-0-8014-8805-4.
Ballantine (1952), p. 57: "Chinese forces were prepared to move with American aid by an amphibious lift into Formosa ... In September 1945 the administration of Formosa was taken over from the Japanese by Chinese forces assisted by numerically small United States teams".
"The Exercise of Legitimate Authority". Taiwan Autonomy Foundation. 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2022. The rules of the post-Napoleonic world consider that military occupation is only a temporary situation.
The legal acquisition of territory and any long-term continuing exercise of legitimate authority over the territory is only accomplished through specific arrangements made in the final peace settlement.
"Far East (Formosa and the Pescadores)". Hansard. 540 (cc1870–4). 4 May 1955. Retrieved 1 September 2010. The sovereignty was Japanese until 1952. The Japanese Treaty came into force, and at that time Formosa was being administered by the Chinese Nationalists, to whom it was entrusted in 1945, as a military occupation.
Charney, Jonathan I.; Prescott, J. R. V. (2000). "Resolving Cross-Strait Relations Between China and Taiwan". American Journal of International Law. 94 (3): 453–477. doi:10.2307/2555319. JSTOR 2555319. S2CID 144402230. After occupying Taiwan in 1945 as a result of Japan's surrender, the Nationalists were defeated on the mainland in 1949, abandoning it to retreat to Taiwan.
"Cairo Communiqué, December 1, 1943". Birth of the Constitution of Japan.
Nationa Diet Library.
Retrieved 29 November 2021. It is their purpose that Japan shall be stripped of all the islands in the Pacific which she has seized or occupied since the beginning of the first World War in 1914, and that all the territories Japan has stolen from the Chinese, such as Manchuria, Formosa, and The Pescadores, shall be restored to the Republic of China.
Ballantine (1952), p. 162: "United States Government replied on this point as follows: ... Cairo Declaration provided that Manchuria, Formosa, and the Pescadores, shall be restored to the Republic of China".
"Potsdam Declaration". The Atomic Heritage Foundation.
The Atomic Heritage Foundation and the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History.
Retrieved 29 November 2021. The terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out and Japanese sovereignty shall be limited to the islands of Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, Shikoku and such minor islands as we determine.
"Japanese Instrument of Surrender". The National Archives Foundation.
The National Archives.
Retrieved 29 November 2021. We hereby undertake for the Emperor, the Japanese Government and their successors to carry out the provisions of the Potsdam Declaration in good faith
Ballantine (1952), p. 58.
"Treaty of Peace with Japan" (PDF). United Nations Treaties Collection.
The United Nations.
Retrieved 29 November 2021.
"Treaty of Peace between the Repuiblic of China and Japan" (PDF). United Nations Treaties Collection.
The United Nations.
Retrieved 29 November 2021.
Makinen & Woodward (1989): "Yet, the Chinese Nationalist government attempted to isolate Taiwan from the mainland inflation by creating it as an independent currency area.
And during the later stages of the civil war it was able to end the hyperinflation on Taiwan, something it was unable to do on the mainland despite two attempts."
"Formosa in transition". The World Today.
Vol. 4, no. 5. London: Royal Institute of International Affairs. 1948. p. 213.
Ballantine (1952), p. 59.
United States (1949), p. 923-925.
"China: Snow Red & Moon Angel". Time.
New York. 7 April 1947. Archived from the original on 11 January 2007.
Shackleton, Allan J. (1998). Formosa Calling: An Eyewitness Account of Conditions in Taiwan during the February 28th, 1947 Incident (PDF). Upland, California: Taiwan Publishing Company.
OCLC 40888167. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2011. Retrieved 18 December 2014.
Ballantine (1952), p. 63.
United States (1949), p. 932.
"Taiwan takes first steps to explain 1947 massacre". United Press International. 28 February 1991.
Ballantine (1952), p. 64-65.
Kubek, Anthony (1963). How the Far East was lost: American policy and the creation of Communist China.
ISBN 978-0-85622-000-5.
Huang, Fu-san (2010). 臺灣簡史－麻雀變鳳凰的故事 [A Brief History of Taiwan: A Sparrow Transformed into a Phoenix] (in Chinese). Government Information Office, Republic of China.
Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 1949年，國民政府退守臺灣後，以臺北為戰時首都
"Taiwan Timeline – Retreat to Taiwan". BBC News. 2000. Retrieved 21 June 2009.
Dunbabin, J.P.D. (2008). The Cold War.
Pearson Education. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-582-42398-5. In 1949 Chiang Kai-shek had transferred to Taiwan the government, gold reserve, and some of the army of his Republic of China.
Ng, Franklin (1998). The Taiwanese Americans.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-313-29762-5.
a b 三、 台灣戒嚴令 [III. Decree to establish martial law in Taiwan] (in Chinese). National Archives Administration, National Development Council. 2 October 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2012.
"28 February 1947 – Taiwan's Holocaust Remembered – 60th Commemoration". New Taiwan, Ilha Formosa. 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2009.
"Taiwan president apologises for 'white terror' era". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2009.
Gluck, Caroline (16 July 2008). "Taiwan sorry for white terror era". BBC News.
London.
US Department of Defense (1950). "Classified Teletype Conference, dated 27 June 1950, between the Pentagon and General Douglas MacArthur regarding authorization to use naval and air forces in support of South Korea.
Papers of Harry S. Truman: Naval Aide Files". Truman Presidential Library and Museum. p. 1 and 4. Archived from the original on 19 April 2006. Retrieved 9 March 2006. Page 1: In addition 7th Fleet will take station so as to prevent invasion of Formosa and to insure that Formosa not be used as base of operations against Chinese mainland." Page 4: "Seventh Fleet is hereby assigned to operational control CINCFE for employment in following task hereby assigned CINCFE: By naval and air action prevent any attack on Formosa, or any air or sea offensive from Formosa against mainland of China.
Jacoby, Neil H. (January 1966). "An Evaluation of U.S. Economic Aid to Free China, 1951–1965" (PDF). A.I.D. Discussion Paper.
United States Agency for International Development.
Retrieved 15 May 2022.
Alagappa, Muthiah (2001). Taiwan's presidential politics. M.E. Sharpe. p. 265. ISBN 978-0-7656-0834-5.
"Taiwan Timeline – Cold war fortress". BBC News. 2002. Retrieved 2 July 2009.
a b Hsü (1982), p. 173.
Hsü (1982), p. 174.
"China: Chiang Kai-shek: Death of the Casualty". Time. 14 April 1975. p. 3. Archived from the original on 20 December 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2009.
Hsü (1982), p. 175, 176.
Sun, Yat-sen; Julie Lee Wei; Ramon Hawley Myers; Donald G. Gillin (1994).  Julie Lee Wei; Ramon Hawley Myers; Donald G. Gillin (eds.). Prescriptions for saving China: selected writings of Sun Yat-sen.
Hoover Press. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-8179-9281-1. The party first applied Sun's concept of political tutelage by governing through martial law, not tolerating opposition parties, controlling the public media, and using the 1947 constitution drawn up on the China mainland to govern.
Thus, much of the world in those years gave the government low scores for democracy and human rights but admitted it had accomplished an economic miracle.
Chao, Linda; Ramon Hawley Myers (1997). Democracy's new leaders in the Republic of China on Taiwan.
Hoover Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8179-3802-4. Although this party [the KMT] had initiated a democratic breakthrough and guided the democratic transition, it had also upheld martial law for thirty-six years and severely repressed political dissent and any efforts to establish an opposition party. ... How was it possible that this party, so hated by opposition politicians and long regarded by Western critics as a dictatorial, Leninist-type party, still remained in power?
Fung (2000), p. 67: "Nanjing was not only undemocratic and repressive but also inefficient and corrupt. ... Furthermore, like other authoritarian regimes, the GMD sought to control people's mind."
Fung (2000), p. 85: "The response to national emergency, critics argued, was not merely military, it was, even more important, political, requiring the termination of one-party dictatorship and the development of democratic institutions."
Copper, John Franklin (2005). Consolidating Taiwan's democracy.
University Press of America. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-7618-2977-5. Also, the "Temporary Provisions" (of the Constitution) did not permit forming new political parties, and those that existed at this time did not seriously compete with the Nationalist Party.
Thus, at the national level the KMT did not permit competitive democratic elections.
"Out with the old". BBC News. 2002. Retrieved 30 October 2009.
Richard Kagan.
Taiwan's Statesman: Lee Teng-hui and Democracy in Asia.
Naval Institute Press, 2014. p. 91-93. ISBN 9781612517551
a b Eckholm, Erik (22 March 2000). "Why a Victory in Taiwan Wasn't Enough for Some". The New York Times.
Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Influence of Constitutional Reform on Parliamentary System in Taiwan: From the Perspective of the Abolishment of the National Assembly (thesis). Graduate Institute of National Development, National Taiwan University, the Republic of China. 29 November 2014.
Judit Árokay; Jadranka Gvozdanović; Darja Miyajima (2014). Divided Languages?: Diglossia, Translation and the Rise of Modernity in Japan, China, and the Slavic World.
Springer Science. p. 73. ISBN 978-3-319-03521-5.
"Central Election Commission:::Presidential Elections:::". Central Election Commission.
Retrieved 28 October 2021.
"Taiwan Timeline – Path to democracy". BBC News. 2002. Retrieved 3 July 2009.
"Annotated Republic of China Laws/Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China/1997". Wikibooks. 22 April 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2017.
Pomfret, James; Miller, Matthew; Blanchard, Ben (17 January 2016). "After vote, China tells Taiwan to abandon independence "hallucination"". Reuters.
Archived from the original on 11 February 2019.
BBC News: Taiwan scraps unification council, 27 February 2006
"Taiwan party asserts separate identity from China". USA Today.
a b c Wong, Edward (12 March 2008). "Taiwan's Independence Movement Likely to Wane". The New York Times.
Retrieved 12 February 2016.
a b Lam, Willy (28 March 2008). "Ma Ying-jeou and the Future of Cross-Strait Relations". China Brief. 8 (7). Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 4 April 2008.
"The Nationalists are back in Taiwan". The Economist.
London. 23 March 2008.
"Straitened times: Taiwan looks to China". Financial Times. 25 March 2008.
"Taiwan-China Economic Ties Boom, Military Tensions Remain | English". Voice of America. 20 August 2009. Archived from the original on 10 March 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2010.
Ho, Ming-sho. "The Activist Legacy of Taiwan's Sunflower Movement". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Retrieved 4 March 2021.
a b "Taiwan President Calls For International Support To Defend Democracy". 4 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019.
"China Must Democratize for Taiwan Progress, President Tsai Says". 5 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Tsai called on Beijing to become more democratic and renounce the use of military force if it wants to have any chance of winning over the hearts and minds of the Taiwanese public. ... Chinese President Xi Jinping offered on Wednesday to begin discussions on unification with any parties or individuals that accept Taiwan is part of "one China." Both Tsai and the China-friendly opposition Kuomintang rejected Xi's proposal, saying his "one country, two systems" framework lacks support in Taiwan.
"Taiwan election: Tsai Ing-wen wins second presidential term". BBC News. 11 January 2020.
Democracy Index 2020 (PDF). The Economist Intelligence Unit (Report). 2021. The star-performer in this year's Democracy Index, measured by the change in both its score and rank, is Taiwan, which was upgraded from a 'flawed democracy' to a 'full democracy', after rising 20 places in the global ranking from 31st place to 11th
Dinerstein, Eric;  et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869.
Grantham, H. S.;  et al. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.
Exec.
Yuan (2014), p. 44.
a b Exec.
Yuan (2014), p. 45.
"Climate of Taiwan". Travel Tips – USA Today.
Retrieved 18 September 2020.
"Is Taiwan Doing Enough to Address Climate Change in The Hottest Summer Ever?｜Politics & Society｜2020-08-19｜web only". CommonWealth Magazine.
Retrieved 18 September 2020.
"Geology of Taiwan". University of Arizona.
Retrieved 1 August 2010.
Clift, Schouten and Draut (2003) in Intra-Oceanic Subduction Systems: Tectonic and Magmatic Processes, ISBN 1-86239-147-5 p84–86
"USGS seismic hazard map of Eastern Asia". Seismo.ethz.ch.
Archived from the original on 3 March 2000. Retrieved 30 May 2011.
"Taiwan flashpoint: Introduction – Present status". BBC News.
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). 2009. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2020. But Taiwan's leaders say it is clearly much more than a province, arguing that it is a sovereign state.
It has its own constitution, democratically-elected leaders, and 400,000 troops in its armed forces.
Chang, Bi-yu (2015). Place, Identity, and National Imagination in Post-war Taiwan.
Oxon, UK, and New York City: Routledge. pp. 35–40, 46–60. ISBN 978-1-317-65812-2.
Molloy, Shannon (13 October 2021). "Proof China has been practising for years for a war that would spark mass global conflict". news.com.au.
Nationwide News.
Retrieved 13 October 2021.
Martin, Peter (10 November 2021). "U.S. Lawmakers' Visit to Taiwan Tests Detente With China". Bloomberg.
Retrieved 13 November 2021.
Yahoo News Staff (13 November 2021). "'Inconceivable': Peter Dutton warns of major China move". Yahoo News.
Yahoo.
Retrieved 13 November 2021.
a b Chapman, Alex (14 November 2021). "China's media mouthpiece issues thinly-veiled warning to Australia amid tension over Taiwan". 7News.
Retrieved 14 November 2021. Taiwan says it is an independent country and will defend itself if China attacks.
Chung, Lawrence (27 September 2014). "'One country, two systems' right formula for Taiwan, Xi Jinping reiterates". South China Morning Post.
Retrieved 14 April 2015.
a b "China-Taiwan tensions: We will not bow to Beijing pressure, says leader". BBC News.
BBC. 10 October 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2021.
"Liancheng / Lianfeng Airbase – Chinese Military Forces". Federation of American Scientists.
Retrieved 7 June 2009. In March 2000 it was reported that the PLA Air Force was deploying new air-defense missiles [possibly batteries of Russian-made S-300 missiles] opposite Taiwan at the coastal cities of Xiamen and Shantou, and at Longtian, near Fuzhou.
"2004 National Defense Report" (PDF). ROC Ministry of National Defense. 2004. Retrieved 27 November 2021.
a b "Luftraumverletzungen in Taiwan: Es geht um Einschüchterung" [Airspace intrusion in Taiwan: It's about intimidation]. SRF 4 News (in Swiss High German). SRF Schweizer Radio und Fernsehen. 5 October 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2021.
Huang, Jing (2017). "Xi Jinping's Taiwan Policy: Boxing Taiwan In with the One-China Framework".  In Dittmer, Lowell (ed.). Taiwan and China: Fitful Embrace (1st ed.). University of California Press. pp. 239–248. JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1w76wpm.
Shattuck, Thomas J. (2020). "The Race to Zero?: China's Poaching of Taiwan's Diplomatic Allies". Orbis. 64 (2): 334–352. doi:10.1016/j.orbis.2020.02.003. PMC 7102519. PMID 32292214.
Yu, Sophie; Jane Macartney (16 December 2008). "Direct flights between China and Taiwan mark new era of improved relations". The Times.
London.
Retrieved 4 June 2009.
"China/Taiwan: Evolution of the "One China" Policy—Key Statements from Washington, Beijing, and Taipei". 
a b "Lee denies existence of '1992 Consensus,'" Archived 14 April 2005 at the Wayback Machine The China Post,  8 November 2001
Cheng, Allen T. "Did He Say 'One China'?". Asiaweek.
Retrieved 11 March 2021.
Hong, Caroline (30 April 2005). "Lien, Hu share 'vision' for peace". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 3 June 2016.
"Taiwanese opposition leader in Beijing talks". The Guardian.
Associated Press. 29 April 2005.
Hong, Caroline (28 March 2005). "KMT delegation travels to China for historic visit". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 18 November 2014.
Hille, Kathrin (3 April 2008). "Hopes rise for Taiwan-China dialogue". Financial Times.
Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. According to a US account of the talks, Mr Hu said: It is China's consistent stand that the Chinese mainland and Taiwan should restore consultation and talks on the basis of 'the 1992 consensus', which sees both sides recognise there is only one China, but agree to differ on its definition.
"Chinese, U.S. presidents hold telephone talks on Taiwan, Tibet". Consulate-General of the People's Republic of China in Vancouver. 26 March 2008.
"Press Briefing by National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley on the President's Trip to the NATO Summit". White House Press Office.
Business Wire.
Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. He said that it is China's consistent stand that the Chinese mainland and Taiwan should restore consultation and talks on the basis of the 1992 consensus, which sees both sides recognize there is only one China, but agree to differ on its definitions.
Nylander, Johan (4 November 2014). "Taiwan president will deal with China but not at expense of sovereignty". CNN.
中華民國第12任總統就職演說全文 (in Chinese). Broadcasting Corporation of China. 20 May 2008. Archived from the original on 30 March 2009. Retrieved 30 May 2008.
Wang, Chris (12 February 2014). "MAC Minister Wang in historic meeting". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 3 June 2016.
"First minister-level Chinese official heads to Taipei for talks". Japan Times. 25 June 2014. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on 27 June 2014. Retrieved 4 June 2016.
Huang, Cary (5 November 2015). "Xi's a mister, so is Ma: China and Taiwan have an unusual solution for an old problem". South China Morning Post.
Retrieved 12 November 2015.
Lee, Shu-hua; Chang, S.C. "President Ma to meet China's Xi in Singapore Saturday (update)". Central News Agency.
Retrieved 4 November 2015.
Chiao, Yuan-Ming (7 November 2015). "Cross-strait leaders meet after 66 years of separation". China Post.
Archived from the original on 10 November 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2016.
Romberg, Alan D. "The "1992 Consensus"—Adapting to the Future?" (PDF). Hoover Institution.
Retrieved 10 March 2021.
"Tsai's inauguration speech 'incomplete test paper': Beijing". Taipei Times. 21 May 2016. Retrieved 10 March 2021.
"President Tsai issues statement on China's President Xi's "Message to Compatriots in Taiwan"". 2 January 2018.
"Tsai, Lai voice support for Hong Kong extradition bill protesters". Focus Taiwan.
The Central News Agency. 10 June 2019.
"President Tsai Ing-wen says Taiwan will not be forced to bow to China". ABC News.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Reuters. 10 October 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2021.
Horton, Chris (5 January 2019). "Taiwan's President, Defying Xi Jinping, Calls Unification Offer 'Impossible'". The New York Times.
Retrieved 18 January 2019.
"Countries – China". US Department of State, Office of the Historian.
Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Eyal Propper. "How China Views its National Security," The Israel Journal of Foreign Affairs, May 2008.
"General Assembly, 26th session : 1976th plenary meeting, Monday, 25 October 1971, New York (A/PV.1976)". United Nations Digital Library. 1974. p. 41.
Henckaerts, Jean-Marie (1996). The international status of Taiwan in the new world order.
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp. 96–97. ISBN 978-90-411-0929-3.
Wu, Sarah; Lee, Yimou (3 November 2021).  Schmollinger, Christian (ed.). "Taiwan welcomes first official European Parliament delegation". Reuters.
Retrieved 3 November 2021.
Vang, Pobzeb (2008). Five Principles of Chinese Foreign Policies.
AuthorHouse. p. 46. ISBN 978-1-4343-6971-0.
a b Yates, Stephen J. (16 April 1999). "The Taiwan Relations Act After 20 Years: Keys to Past and Future Success". The Heritage Foundation.
Archived from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2009.
"China: US spat over Taiwan could hit co-operation". Agence France-Presse. 2 February 2010. Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
Kelly, James A. (21 April 2004). "Overview of US Policy Towards Taiwan" (Press release). United States Department of State.
Retrieved 17 July 2014.
"US to sell arms to Taiwan despite Chinese opposition". BBC News. 16 December 2015.
"Obama to push ahead on Taiwan frigate sales despite Chinese anger". CNBC. Reuters. 14 December 2015.
"China warns against first major US-Taiwan arms sale in four years". The Guardian.
Reuters. 16 December 2015.
"China says war with US would be a disaster as tensions mount". The Guardian. 2 June 2019. Retrieved 2 June 2019.
"Trump Signs Taiwan Assurance Act". Taipei Times. 20 December 2020.
"Taiwan and the United Nations". New Taiwan.
Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Taiwan". UNPO. Retrieved 7 May 2009.
"About TFD". TFD. Archived from the original on 18 March 2008.
Tkacik, John (13 May 2009). "John Tkacik on Taiwan: Taiwan's 'undetermined' status". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Su, Joy (19 May 2004). "WHO application: a question of health or politics?". Taipei Times.
"Minister Chiu leads our WHA delegation to actively hold bilateral talks with delegations from other nations.
This event has been the most successful medical-related diplomatic record over the past years". Republic of China: Ministry of Health and Welfare. 18 June 2014. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2015.
"ROC urges world public to support WHO bid". Taiwan Info. 3 May 2002. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2015.
"Taiwan delegation to participate in WHA". Taiwan Today. 14 May 2010. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2015.
"WHO Bows to China Pressure, Contravenes Human Rights in Refusing Taiwan Media". international.thenewslens.com. 18 May 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2020.
Davidson, Helen (30 March 2020). "Senior WHO adviser appears to dodge question on Taiwan's Covid-19 response". The Guardian.
Blanchard, Ben (24 January 2020). "Parties unite over Taiwan's exclusion from WHO anti-virus planning". Reuters.
Retrieved 31 March 2020.
#sthash.04ZCBpL4.dpuf; George Mason University History News Network: Susan Brownell, "Could China stop Taiwan from coming to the Olympic Games?"; original source: Minutes of the Executive Board meeting, Nagoya, Japan, 23–25 October 1979, p. 103; viewed 26 August 2014.
Catherine K. Lin (5 August 2008). "How 'Chinese Taipei' came about". Taipei Times.
"Taiwan insists on 'Chinese Taipei'". China Post. 25 July 2008. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Taiwan flags in Salt Lake ruffle a few feelings". The Deseret News. 10 February 2002.
a b Horton, Chris (26 November 2018). "Taiwan Asked Voters 10 Questions.
It Got Some Unexpected Answers. (Published 2018)". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 17 February 2021.
"Taiwan Independence vs.
Unification with the Mainland". Election Study Center, National Chengchi University.
Retrieved 27 October 2021.
Devlin, Kat; Huang, Christine (12 May 2020). "In Taiwan, Views of Mainland China Mostly Negative". Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project.
Retrieved 5 August 2022.
Enav, Peter (16 May 2008). "Unification with China unlikely 'in our lifetimes': president-elect". China Post.
Retrieved 13 June 2009. 'It is very difficult for us to see any unification talks even in our lifetimes,' Ma said. 'Taiwanese people would like to have economic interactions with the mainland, but obviously they don't believe their political system is suitable for Taiwan.'
"Taiwan Flashpoint: Independence debate". BBC News. 2009. Since neither outcome looks likely in the short or even medium term, it is perhaps not surprising that opinion polls suggest most Taiwanese people want things to stay as they are, with the island's ambiguous status unresolved.
"Impulsa Taiwan la reconciliación". El Sol de México (in Spanish). 2 September 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2009. Esencialmente, no definiríamos la relación a través del estrecho de Taiwan como una relación de dos países o dos Chinas, porque nuestra Constitución no lo permite.
Nosotros definiríamos está relación como una relación muy especial, ya que la Constitución nuestra, igual que la Constitución de China continental, no permite la existencia de otro país dentro del territorio.
Grant, Stan (10 October 2021). "For China's Xi Jinping, attacking Taiwan is about identity – that's what makes it so dangerous". ABC News.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Retrieved 10 October 2021.
dpa (13 October 2021). "China: Manöver sollen Druck auf Taiwan und USA verstärken" [China: Maneuvers intended to increase pressure on Taiwan and the USA]. Süddeutsche Zeitung (in German). München.
Retrieved 17 October 2021. Ohnehin versteht sich Taiwan längst selbst als unabhängig. [In any case, Taiwan has long seen itself as independent.]
"Taiwanese premier's independence stance incurs Beijing's wrath". TODAYonline. 28 September 2017. Retrieved 6 October 2017.
a b c d e f g "Chapter 4: Government". The Republic of China Yearbook.
Government Information Office, Republic of China (Taiwan). 2011. pp. 55–65. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2008.
"Taiwan assembly passes changes". BBC News. 7 June 2005.
Huang, Jei-hsuan (14 September 2006). "Letter: KMT holds the key". Taipei Times. p. 8. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Jayasuriya, Kanishka (1999). Law, capitalism and power in Asia.
Routledge. p. 217. ISBN 978-0-415-19743-4.
Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China (2005) . Article 5 – via Wikisource.
Wang, Yang-yu; Kao, Evelyn (10 December 2019). "Legislature passes revised law to shrink Examination Yuan". Central News Agency.
Retrieved 19 February 2020.
Yang, Mien-chieh; Chung, Jake. "Examination Yuan at odds with self". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 10 March 2021.
Ginsburg, Tom (2003). Judicial review in new democracies.
Cambridge University Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-521-52039-3.
Chao, Linda; Myers, Ramon H. (1994). "The First Chinese Democracy: Political Development of the Republic of China on Taiwan, 1986–1994". Asian Survey. 34 (3): 213–230. doi:10.2307/2644981. JSTOR 2644981. Retrieved 8 August 2022.
Lin, Chien-Chih (2014). "Survival of the Fittest(?): The Endurance of the ROC Constitution and the Constitution of Japan". The American Journal of Comparative Law. 62 (3): 775–806. doi:10.5131/AJCL.2014.0007. JSTOR 43669518. Retrieved 7 August 2022.
Yeh, Jiunn-rong (2016). The Constitution of Taiwan.
Bloomsbury. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-1849465120.
Chang, Ming-hsuan; Mazzetta, Matthew. "DPP lawmakers seek removal of 'national unification' from Constitution". Central News Agency (Taiwan). No. 3 September 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
"蒙古不是中華民國固有之疆域". 自由時報 Liberty Times.
Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2021.
"Constitution of the Republic of China (Taiwan)". Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 14 February 2021.
Clark, Keith Allan II (3 September 2018). "Imagined Territory: The Republic of China's 1955 Veto of Mongolian Membership in the United Nations". Journal of American-East Asian Relations. 25 (3): 263–295. doi:10.1163/18765610-02503003. S2CID 240274376.
"Taiwan 'embassy' changes anger China". BBC News. 26 February 2002. Retrieved 14 February 2021.
"Mongolia not within national boundary under ROC Constitution: MAC". Central News Agency (Taiwan). 21 May 2012. Retrieved 8 March 2021.
a b "有關外蒙古是否為中華民國領土問題說明新聞參考資料" [Reference materials about the territory of the Republic of China excluding Outer Mongolia] (PDF) (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Mainland Affairs Council.
Retrieved 22 May 2012.
"Taiwan Flashpoint: Independence Debate". BBC News.
BBC. Retrieved 6 March 2021.
"Taiwan party asserts separate identity from China". USA Today. 30 September 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2009.
Crisis Group (6 June 2003). "Taiwan Strait I: What's Left of 'One China'?". International Crisis Group.
Archived from the original on 9 July 2008. Retrieved 29 May 2009.
Shirk, Susan L. (2007). China: Fragile Superpower.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-530609-5.
a b Pares, Susan (24 February 2005). A political and economic dictionary of East Asia.
Routledge. p. 267. ISBN 978-1-85743-258-9. The Pan-Blue coalition on the whole favours a Chinese nationalist identity and policies supporting reunification and increased economic links with the People's Republic of China.
Huang, Chin-Hao; James, Patrick (2014). "Blue, Green or Aquamarine? Taiwan and the Status Quo Preference in Cross-Strait Relations". The China Quarterly. 219 (219): 670–692. doi:10.1017/S0305741014000745. JSTOR 24740633. S2CID 40724777. Retrieved 7 August 2022.
Cho, Young Chul; Ahn, Mun Suk (2017). "Taiwan's international visibility in the twenty-first century: A suggestive note". International Journal. 72 (1): 79–90. doi:10.1177/0020702017692608. JSTOR 26414076. S2CID 151892075. Retrieved 8 August 2022.
Ko, Shu-Ling (8 October 2008). "Ma refers to China as ROC territory in magazine interview". Taipei Times.
"Taiwan and China in 'special relations': Ma". China Post. 4 September 2008. Archived from the original on 6 September 2008. Retrieved 11 September 2008.
"World | Asia-Pacific | Taiwan opposition leader in China". BBC News. 26 April 2005. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
a b "Taiwanese / Chinese Identity(1992/06~2021/06)". Election Study Center.
National Chengchi University.
Retrieved 27 October 2021.
Shambaugh, David L. (2006). Power shift.
University of California Press. pp. 179–183. ISBN 978-0-520-24570-9.
Okazaki, Hisahiko (30 December 2008). "No sign of a 'peace agreement'". Japan Times.
Retrieved 15 July 2009. For one thing, I believe there is recognition that the awareness of Taiwanese identity is now irreversible.
The KMT government did things like rename the "Taiwan Post" to "Chunghwa Post" as soon as it came in.
But it did not take much time to perceive that it would cause a backlash among the Taiwan populace.
The cross-strait exchanges have also brought about opposition demonstrations from time to time.
This appears to be one of the reasons for the abrupt decline in the approval rating of the Ma administration.
"10 Questions: Ma Ying-jeou". Time. 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Retrieved 15 July 2009. I am Taiwanese as well as Chinese.
"Survey on President Ma's Approval Rating and Cross-Strait Relations After First Year of Direct Flights" (PDF). Global Views Survey Research Center. 24 July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
Article 4 of the constitution
"Taiwan Provincial Government Official Website". Archived from the original on 29 January 2019. Retrieved 21 October 2018.
"Mongolian office to ride into Taipei by end of the year", Taipei Times, 11 October 2002, archived from the original on 10 February 2009, retrieved 5 February 2008
"Mongolian office to ride into Taipei by end of the year". Taipei Times. 11 October 2002. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009. In October 1945, the people of Outer Mongolia voted for independence, gaining the recognition of many countries, including the Republic of China. (...) Due to a souring of relations with the Soviet Union in the early 1950s, however, the ROC revoked recognition of Outer Mongolia, reclaiming it as ROC territory. {...} Long a province of China, Mongolia declared its independence in 1921 with Soviet backing.
After the Ministry of the Interior's recent decision to exclude Mongolia from the official ROC map, on 3 Oct, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that Taiwan recognizes Mongolia as an independent country -- 81 years after Mongolia declared its independence.
"World: Asia-Pacific Analysis: Flashpoint Spratly". BBC. 14 February 1999.
Fravel, M. Taylor (2002). "Towards Civilian Supremacy: Civil-Military Relations in Taiwans's Democratization" (PDF). Armed Forces & Society. 29 (1): 57–84. doi:10.1177/0095327X0202900104. S2CID 146212666. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2020.
"Committed to Taiwan". The Wall Street Journal. 26 April 2001. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Taiwan Yearbook 2004". Government Information Office, Republic of China.
Archived from the original on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"ROC National Defense Report 2021" (PDF). Ministry of National Defense, R.O.C. October 2021. pp. 64, 116. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"ASIA-PACIFIC | Military alternative in Taiwan". BBC News. 1 May 2000. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"Taiwan cuts compulsory military service to 4 months". taiwantoday.tw. 2 January 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"Taiwan weighs extending compulsory military service beyond 4 months". Reuters. 23 March 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"Taiwan Mulls Lengthening Military Service". VOA. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"Relax rules to boost reservist numbers: lawmakers". Taipei Times. 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
Li, Steven X. (2020). Why So Little? The Curious Case of Taiwan's Defense Spending (PhD). University of Washington.
Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"US report critical of Taiwan's defenses". Taipei Times. 8 May 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"Defense budget fails to meet Tsai campaign pledge". Taipei Times. 16 July 2018. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"OPINION: Taiwan Must Come to its Own Defense". The News Lens. 1 December 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
"Taiwan increases defense budget by 13.9% for 2023, rising to 2.4% of GDP". Taiwan News. 25 August 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022.
Shortall, Dominick; Johnson, Jesse (28 October 2020). "Once unimaginable, some now debating return of U.S. forces to Taiwan". The Japan Times.
Retrieved 6 January 2021.
Cabestan, Jean-Pierre (2001). "France's Taiwan Policy: A Case of Shopkeeper Diplomacy" (PDF). CERI. Retrieved 5 June 2009. By excluding the French companies from the bidding lists of many contract, Peking wanted above all to stop a growing trend ... to disregard its objections and interests in the Taiwan issue. ... In spite of the ban of arms sales to Taiwan approved by the French government in January 1994, discreet and small-sized deals have continued to be concluded since then.
"Taiwan trying to shore up weapons support". USA Today. 24 September 2004. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
"China Threat to Attack Taiwan Alarms Asia". Associated Press. 14 March 2005. Archived from the original on 11 April 2005.
Kapstein, Ethan B.; Michael Mastanduno (1999). Unipolar politics.
Columbia University Press. p. 194. ISBN 978-0-231-11309-0. The Japanese leadership openly split on whether a crisis in Taiwan was included in the geographic expression "area surrounding Japan." In the event, Japan refused to stipulate the contingencies under which it would provide rear area support for U.S. forces or even the geographic scope of the "area surrounding Japan". ... The two sides have not articulated clearly what the alliance stands for, nor who it is defined to protect against.
Tow, William (2005). "ANZUS: Regional versus Global Security in Asia?". International Relations of the Asia-Pacific. 5 (2): 197–216. doi:10.1093/irap/lci113.
Seidel, Jamie (31 October 2021). "China reacts to Peter Duttons 'jaw-dropping' promise to defend Taiwan". news.com.au.
Nationwide News.
Retrieved 13 November 2021. The Republic of China autocracy-turned-democracy didn't surrender to the Communist Party uprising during the 1949 civil war.
It has no intention of doing so now.
Now Taipei's own defence minister, Chiu Kuo-cheng, says his country is prepared to defend itself alone, if necessary. "The country must rely on itself," he told media Thursday. "If any friends or other groups can help us, then we're happy to have it.
But we cannot completely depend on it."
"China and Taiwan: flashpoint for a war". The Sydney Morning Herald. 14 July 2004. Retrieved 13 June 2009.
Mirski, Sean. "Stranglehold: The Context, Conduct and Consequences of an American Naval Blockade of China". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Journal Of Strategic Studies.
Retrieved 15 January 2021.
Lague, David; Kang Lim, Benjamin (30 April 2019). "China's fear of an American blockade". Reuters.
Reuters.
Retrieved 15 January 2021.
Axe, David. "To Defeat China In War, Strangle Its Economy: Expert". Forbes.
Retrieved 15 January 2021.
Williams (29 September 2020). "After "the War that Never Was"—The Real Beginning". U.S. Naval Institute. U.S. Naval Institute.
Retrieved 15 January 2021.
Mehra, Jyotsna. "The Australia-India-Japan-US Quadrilateral: Dissecting the China Factor". ORF. Observer Research Foundation.
Retrieved 15 January 2021.
"Full transcript of ABC News' George Stephanopoulos' interview with President Joe Biden". ABC News. 19 August 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2022.
"CNN Presidential Town Hall With President Joe Biden". CNN. 21 October 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2022.
"Remarks by President Biden and Prime Minister Kishida Fumio of Japan in Joint Press Conference". The White House. 23 May 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022.
"Biden says U.S. would intervene militarily if China invades Taiwan". CBS News. 23 May 2022.
"White House walks back Biden Taiwan defense claim for third time in 9 months". New York Post. 23 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022.
"Gold Shipped to Taiwan in 1949 Helped Stabilize ROC on Taiwan". Kuomintang News Network. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2011. Translated from 王銘義 (5 April 2011). 1949年運台黃金 中華民國保命本. China Times.
Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 21 February 2015.
Roy, Denny (2003). Taiwan: A Political History.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp. 76, 77. ISBN 978-0-8014-8805-4.
Shih, Da-Nien Liu and Hui-Tzu (4 December 2013). "The Transformation of Taiwan's Status Within the Production and Supply Chain in Asia". Brookings.
Retrieved 6 January 2021.
Makinen & Woodward 1989: "It was the fiscal regime change on Taiwan, as in the European episodes, that finally brought price stability.
It was the aid policy that brought the budget to near balance, and when the aid programme reached its full proportions in 1952, prices stabilized."
Ralph Clough, "Taiwan under Nationalist Rule, 1949–1982," in Roderick MacFarquar et al., ed., Cambridge History of China, Vol 15, The People's Republic Pt 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 837
a b "What is Foxconn? Only the world's No. 1 contract electronics maker". Chicago Tribune.
Retrieved 27 May 2022.
"COMPUTEX 2021 Virtual; Tech Leaders Gather to Decode the Progress of the Global Technology Ecosystems". 
"US-Taiwan FTA would have limited impact". bilaterals.org.
Archived from the original on 10 May 2006. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Morris, Peter (4 February 2004). "Taiwan business in China supports opposition". Asia Times Online.
Archived from the original on 13 February 2004.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
Harding, Phil (23 January 2010). "Taiwan's Grand Hotel welcome for Chinese visitors". BBC News.
DoIT 2008, p. 5 "Although used-to-be-hostile tension between Taiwan and China has been eased to a certain degree, Taiwan should seek to maintain stable relation with China while continuing to protect national security, and avoiding excessive "Sinicization" of Taiwanese economy.
Strategies to avoid excessive "Sinicization" of the Taiwanese economy could include efforts to increase geographic diversity of overseas Taiwanese employment, diversifying Taiwan's export markets and investment. "
BBC News, "Taiwan Flashpoint", "Some Taiwanese worry their economy is now dependent on China.
Others point out that closer business ties makes Chinese military action less likely, because of the cost to China's own economy."
Her, Kelly (12 January 2005). "Privatization Set in Motion". Taiwan Review.
Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2009.
"Reserves of foreign exchange and gold". World Fact Book.
CIA. 4 September 2008. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 3 January 2011. Rank 5 Taiwan $274,700,000,000 31 December 2007
Wang, Audrey (10 January 2011). "Taiwan's 2010 trade hits record high". Taiwan Today.
"Coping with Asian financial crisis: The Taiwan experience | Seoul Journal of Economics". Find Articles at BNET. 28 April 2009. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
How Taiwan Created TSMC, retrieved 23 May 2022
Mak, Robyn (17 December 2021). "Breakingviews – TSMC can fix Taiwan's stalled green transition". Reuters.
Retrieved 20 June 2022.
"TSMC (TSM) – Market capitalization". companiesmarketcap.com.
Retrieved 20 May 2022.
"TSMC Announces Intention to Build and Operate an Advanced Semiconductor Fab in the United States". Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Limited.
Retrieved 23 May 2022.
Gupta, Yashi (22 January 2022). "Techno Sports". technosports.co.in.
Retrieved 20 May 2022.
"Taiwan Semiconductor (TSMC): A Clear Winner At". seekingalpha.com.
Retrieved 27 May 2022.
Patterson, Alan (15 October 2019). "TSMC Leads in Adoption of EUV". EETimes.
Retrieved 3 October 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
"TSMC First Taiwan Company to List on NYSE". Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company Limited.
Retrieved 18 June 2022.
LaPedus, Mark (9 September 2009). "GlobalFoundries to give UMC a run for its money". EETimes.
Retrieved 22 May 2022.
"United Microelectronics: Good, But Not As Good As Competitors | Seeking Alpha". seekingalpha.com.
Retrieved 23 May 2022.
"Foxconn Technology Co Ltd Locations – Headquarters & Offices – GlobalData – GlobalData". 
"Hon Hai Precision Industry Co., Ltd. (2317.TW) Stock Price, News, Quote & History – Yahoo Finance". finance.yahoo.com.
Retrieved 30 June 2022.
Duhigg, Charles; Bradsher, Keith (21 January 2012). "How the U.S. Lost Out on iPhone Work". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 30 June 2022.
"Struggle for Foxconn girl who wanted to die". South China Morning Post. 15 December 2010. Retrieved 30 June 2022.
"Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu (Chinese Taipei) and the WTO". World Trade Organization.
Retrieved 7 June 2009.
"Taiwan – Embassies and Consulates Worldwide". Embassy WorldWide.
Retrieved 23 May 2022.
"Chinese state media warns of "severe" military measures if Taiwan office in U.S. changes name". Newsweek. 12 September 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2022.
交通部統計查詢網. stat.motc.gov.tw (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2019.
"2018 Annual Report of the Maritime and Port Bureau, MOTC" (PDF) (in Chinese). Maritime and Port Bureau, MOTC. p. 33. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
"Port throughput soars to record". Taipei Times.
Central News Agency. 15 February 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
Postiglione, Gerard A.; Grace C. L. Mak (1997). Asian higher education.
Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 346–348. ISBN 978-0-313-28901-9.
Prudence Chou, Chuing (2014). "A matter of trust: shadow education in Taiwan". OpenEdition. doi:10.4000/ries.3800. S2CID 128780332.
a b "Fears over over-education in Taiwan". The Australian. 3 September 2012.
"PISA – Results in Focus" (PDF). OECD. p. 5.
"Chinese Taipei Student performance (PISA 2015)". OECD. Retrieved 19 August 2019.
Kiersz, Andy (16 December 2016). The latest ranking of top countries in math, reading, and science is out – and the US didn't crack the top 10.
"TIMSS Math 2003" (PDF).
"TIMSS Science 2003" (PDF).
a b Chou, Chuing (12 November 2014). "Education in Taiwan: Taiwan's Colleges and Universities".
Wiese, Elizabeth (7 May 2015). "Taiwan's problem? Too many college graduates, too few machinists". USA Today.
Retrieved 19 August 2019.
a b Hsueh, Chia-Ming (5 August 2018). "Higher Education Crisis in Taiwan". Inside Higher Ed.
Retrieved 19 August 2019.
a b Sechiyama, Kaku (2013). Patriarchy in East Asia: A Comparative Sociology of Gender.
Brill Publishers. p. 254. ISBN 978-9004230606.
"5 mil.
Taiwanese hold degrees from higher education institutions". China Post. 13 March 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2019.
Lee, Pearl (13 April 2015). University degrees: Mindset shift needed.
The Straits Times.
Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2017.
"Taiwan's higher education enrolment starts a downward slide". ICEF Monitor. 16 August 2016.
Sui, Cindy (23 September 2013). "The draw of blue collar jobs in Taiwan". BBC News.
Taiwan Country: Strategic Information and Developments.
International Business Publications. 2012. p. 25. ISBN 978-1438775708.
a b Ihara, Kensaku (3 December 2020). "Taiwan loses 3,000 chip engineers to 'Made in China 2025'". nikkei.com.
Nikkei.
Retrieved 11 November 2020.
Kyng, James (4 December 2020). "Taiwan's brain drain: semiconductor engineers head to China". ft.com.
The Financial Times.
Retrieved 11 November 2020.
Strong, Matthew (1 October 2020). "Taiwan's 'Godfather of DRAM' leaves China". taiwannews.com.
Retrieved 11 November 2020.
"Over 70% of Taiwanese parents send kids to English bushibans". Invest in Taiwan, Department of Investment Services. 2 September 2005. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
C. Smith, Douglas (1997). Middle education in the Middle Kingdom.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-275-95641-7.
國人教育水準. gender.ey.gov.tw (in Chinese). Retrieved 3 October 2021.
Exec.
Yuan (2014), p. 36.
"Number of Villages, Neighborhoods, Households and Resident Population". MOI Statistical Information Service.
Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 2 February 2014.
Yan, Margaret Mian (2006). Introduction to Chinese Dialectology.
LINCOM Europa. p. 169. ISBN 978-3-89586-629-6.
Exec.
Yuan (2014), p. 49.
"Indigenous People". MOI Statistical Information Service.
February 2012. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 14 April 2012.
"An Overview of Taiwan's Indigenous Groups". Taipei: Government Information Office. 2006. Archived from the original on 11 April 2012. Retrieved 14 April 2012.
a b c "Chapter 2: People and Language" (PDF). The Republic of China Yearbook 2011. Government Information Office, Republic of China (Taiwan). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2012.
"Taiwan". Ethnologue.
Principal languages
"Official documents issued in Aboriginal languages". Taipei Times.
Retrieved 20 July 2017.
Zeitoun, Elizabeth; Yu, Ching-Hua. "The Formosan Language Archive: Linguistic Analysis and Language Processing" (PDF). Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing. 10 (2): 168. Retrieved 4 August 2012.
Tsao, Feng-fu (2000). "The language planning situation in Taiwan".  In Baldauf, Richard B.; Kaplan, Robert B. (eds.). Language planning in Nepal, Taiwan, and Sweden.
Vol. 115. Multilingual Matters. pp. 60–106. ISBN 978-1-85359-483-0. pages 75–76.
Cheong, Ching (2001). Will Taiwan break away: the rise of Taiwanese nationalism.
World Scientific. p. 187. ISBN 978-981-02-4486-6.
"法律統一用語表-常見公文用語說明" (PDF) (in Chinese). Retrieved 2 June 2021.
"《法律白話文運動》掀起一場法律革命" (in Chinese). 4 February 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2021.
Constitution of the Republic of China . Chapter II, Article 13 – via Wikisource.
The people shall have freedom of religious belief
"Freedom of religion, Scale". World Bank. 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2021.
"Taiwan Yearbook 2006". Government of Information Office. 2006. Archived from the original on 8 July 2007. Retrieved 1 September 2007.
"Religious Composition by Country, 2010–2050". Pew Research Center. 2 April 2015. Retrieved 19 May 2019.
Stainton, Michael (2002). "Presbyterians and the Aboriginal Revitalization Movement in Taiwan". Cultural Survival Quarterly 26.2, 5 May 2010. Retrieved 3 December 2014.
"Islam in Taiwan: Lost in tradition". Al Jazeera. 31 December 2014.
a b "表23各宗教教務概況" (in Chinese). Retrieved 2 June 2021.
Halpin, Hayley (28 October 2018). "These are the best and worst countries in the world to be an atheist". journal.ie.
Retrieved 2 November 2018.
"THE FREEDOM OF THOUGHT REPORT 2018". 2018. p. 14. Retrieved 15 October 2019. Taiwan is clearly an outlier in the top 3, all-clear countries.
It is non-European, and demographically much more religious.
But in its relatively open, democratic and tolerant society we have recorded no evidence of laws or social discrimination against members of the non-religious minority.
Wu, J. R. (24 May 2017). "Taiwan court rules in favor of same-sex marriage, first in Asia". Reuters.
Retrieved 11 October 2017.
"Taiwan gay marriage: Parliament legalises same-sex unions". BBC. 17 May 2019. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2019.
"Taiwan legalizes same-sex marriage in historic first for Asia". CNN. 17 May 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2019.
Steger, Isabella (17 May 2019). "In a first for Asia, Taiwan legalized same-sex marriage—with caveats". Quartz.
Retrieved 31 May 2021.
"Taiwan hosts biggest in-person LGBTQ Pride event of post-Covid 2020". NBC News.
Retrieved 24 May 2022.
"Thousands join Taiwan's 17th LGBT Pride parade – Taipei Times". 
Horton, Chris (28 June 2020). "Taiwan Celebrates Pride With a Public Parade". The New York Times.
ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 27 May 2022.
Fanchiang, Cecilia."New IC health insurance card expected to offer many benefits" Archived 6 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Taiwan Journal, 2 January 2004 Accessed 28 March 2008
"Premium Contribution". National Health Insurance Administration.
Retrieved 7 August 2022.
"How Premiums Are Calculated". National Health Insurance Administration.
Retrieved 7 August 2022.
"Copayments". National Health Insurance Administration.
Retrieved 7 August 2022.
"Taiwanese Hospital Public Satisfaction Poll" (in Chinese). Taiwan Department of Health.
October 2004. Archived from the original on 21 September 2009.
"Center for Disease Control". Taiwan CDC. 18 July 2006. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016.
"Statistics of Medical Care Institution's Status & Hospital Utilization 2019". 17 July 2020.
"Infant mortality rate". Archived from the original on 17 August 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
"Taiwan". 12 August 2020.
陳鐵健、黃鐵炫 (1992). 《蔣介石與中國文化》 (in Chinese). Hong Kong: 中華書局. p. 122.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)
"5 Reasons Why Chinese Tourists Are So Rude". 19 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021.
"Archived copy". Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
Yip 2004, pp. 230–248; Makeham 2005, pp. 2–8; Chang 2005, p. 224
Hsiau 2005, pp. 125–129; Winckler 1994, pp. 23–41
Hunt, Katie (13 January 2016). "Meet Freddy Lim, the death metal star running for political office in Taiwan". CNN. Retrieved 17 January 2016.
McVeigh, Tracy (26 December 2015). "Taiwan's heavy metal star rallies fans to run for parliament on anti-China platform". The Observer.
Retrieved 1 January 2016 – via The Guardian.
"Museum". archive.org.
Archived from the original on 28 October 2009.
Nguyen-Okwu, Leslie (6 March 2019). "16 Dishes That Define Taiwanese Food". eater.com.
Eater.
Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020.
Sontag, Elazar (25 August 2020). "Michelin Announces 2020 Stars for Taiwan". 
Gillan, Audrey (17 May 2014). "Taiwan, home to the best street food markets in the world". The Guardian.
Archived from the original on 16 May 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020.
Wong, Maggie Hiufu (29 April 2020). "The rise of bubble tea, one of Taiwan's most beloved beverages". Cable News Network.
CNN. Retrieved 29 July 2020.
"KTV: A Space for Sharing". taiwantoday.tw. 1 June 2011. Retrieved 7 August 2022.
American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei. "Convenience Stores Aim at Differentiation". Taiwan Business Topics. 34 (11). Archived from the original on 16 May 2008.
"FamilyMart rolls out laundry service in Taiwan". Taiwan News. 24 January 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2021.
"TRA tickets collectable at stores – Taipei Times". 
"台灣高鐵 Taiwan High Speed Rail". en.thsrc.com.tw.
Retrieved 5 April 2021.
Hwang, Dong-Jhy; Chiu, Wei-Cheng (October 2010). "Sport and National Identity in Taiwan: Some Preliminary Thoughts" (PDF). East Asian Sport Thoughts.
Vol. 1.
"About CPBL". CPBL. Retrieved 20 June 2022.
Wang, Audrey (1 June 2008). "A Passion for Hoops". The Taiwan Review.
Archived from the original on 15 February 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2012.
Long Po-an, William Yen and Joseph Yeh (14 February 2021). "New league a fresh start for pro basketball". Taipei Times.
Central News Agency.
Retrieved 20 June 2022.
"Kaohsiung Aquas drop Herobears in thrilling T1 opener". Taipei Times.
Central News Agency. 29 November 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2022.
"ASEAN Basketball League to tip off with two teams from Taiwan". Taiwan News.
Central News Agency. 31 October 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2020.
"Netherlands Retains World Youth Korfball Champion; Taiwan is on the Way to the World". Reuters Newswire. 8 November 2008. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 14 June 2011.
Chen, Christie (30 August 2017). "UNIVERSIADE: Foreign athletes praise Taipei's efforts as host city". Focus Taiwan.
Retrieved 25 May 2018.
"Fighting Adversity:Taiwan's Taekwondo Community Looks to Innovate". Taiwan Panorama.
April 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2022.
"At Only 22, Tseng Wins Fifth Major". The New York Times.
Associated Press. 1 August 2011.
"Victorious Tseng takes No. 1 ranking". Taipei Times.
Agence France-Presse. 14 February 2011.
"Stacy Lewis wins, now No. 1 in world". ESPN. Associated Press. 17 March 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013.
"Su-Wei Hsieh". wtatennis.com.
Retrieved 21 June 2022.
"Hsieh & Peng: Co-Doubles No.1s". WTA. 10 May 2014. Retrieved 16 September 2019.
Goh, ZK. "Meet Tai Tzu-ying, Chinese Taipei's Badminton Star". Who is Tai Tzu-ying.
Olympic Channel Services S.L. Retrieved 29 July 2020.
"BWF World Rankings". Rankings.
Badminton World Federation.
Retrieved 29 July 2020.
"Participations by athlete". olympedia.org.
Retrieved 20 June 2022.
"Chinese (Traditional Han, Taiwan) (zh-Hant-TW)". IBM Knowledge Center.
Retrieved 8 May 2019.
"Holidays and Festivals in Taiwan". Government Information Office, ROC. Archived from the original on 9 October 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2009.
Works cited
Andrade, Tonio (2008). How Taiwan Became Chinese.
Gutenberg-e E-book.
New York, NY; Chichester, West Sussex: Columbia University Press.
ISBN 978-0-231-50368-6.
Bird, Michael I; Hope, Geoffrey; Taylor, David (2004). "Populating PEP II: the dispersal of humans and agriculture through Austral-Asia and Oceania" (PDF). Quaternary International. 118–119: 145–163. Bibcode:2004QuInt.118..145B. doi:10.1016/s1040-6182(03)00135-6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2007.
Chang, Maukuei (2005). "The Movement to Indigenize to Social Sciences in Taiwan: Origin and Predicaments".  In Makeham, John; Hsiau, A-chin (eds.). Cultural, Ethnic, and Political Nationalism in Contemporary Taiwan: Bentuhua.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-4039-7020-6.
Davidson, James W. (1903). The Island of Formosa, Past and Present : history, people, resources, and commercial prospects : tea, camphor, sugar, gold, coal, sulphur, economical plants, and other productions.
London and New York: Macmillan.
OL 6931635M.
DoIT (2008). "2008 White Paper on Taiwan Industrial Technology" (PDF). Department of Industrial Technology.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011.
Exec.
Yuan (2014). The Republic of China Yearbook 2014 (PDF). Executive Yuan, R.O.C. ISBN 978-986-04-2302-0.
Fenby, Jonathan (2009). The Penguin History of Modern China: The Fall and Rise of a Great Power, 1850–2009. Penguin Books.
ISBN 978-0-7139-9832-0.
Fung, Edmund S. K. (2000). In search of Chinese democracy: civil opposition in Nationalist China, 1929–1949. Cambridge modern China series.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-77124-5.
Gold, Thomas B. (1985). State and Society in the Taiwan Miracle.
Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.
ISBN 9781317459408.
Hill, Catherine; Soares, Pedro; Mormina, Maru; Macaulay, Vincent; Clarke, Dougie; Blumbach, Petya B.; Vizuete-Forster, Matthieu; Forster, Peter; Bulbeck, David; Oppenheimer, Stephen; Richards, Martin (January 2007). "A Mitochondrial Stratigraphy for Island Southeast Asia". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 80 (1): 29–43. doi:10.1086/510412. PMC 1876738. PMID 17160892.
Hsiau, A-Chin (2005). "The Indigenization of Taiwanese Literature: Historical Narrative, Strategic Essentialism, and State Violence".  In Makeham, John; Hsiau, A-chin (eds.). Cultural, Ethnic, and Political Nationalism in Contemporary Taiwan: Bentuhua.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-4039-7020-6.
Jiao, Tianlong (2007). The Neolithic of southeast China: cultural transformation and regional interaction on the coast.
Cambria Press.
ISBN 978-1-934043-16-5.
Makeham, John (2005). "Indigenization Discourse in Taiwanese Confucian Revivalism".  In Makeham, John; Hsiau, A-chin (eds.). Cultural, Ethnic, and Political Nationalism in Contemporary Taiwan: Bentuhua.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-4039-7020-6.
Makinen, Gail E.; Woodward, G. Thomas (1989). "The Taiwanese hyperinflation and stabilization of 1945–1952". Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 21 (1): 90–105. doi:10.2307/1992580. JSTOR 1992580.
Thompson, Lawrence G. (1964). "The earliest eyewitness accounts of the Formosan aborigines". Monumenta Serica. 23: 163–204. doi:10.1080/02549948.1964.11731044. JSTOR 40726116.
Valentijn, François (1903) [First published 1724 in Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indiën]. "History of the Dutch Trade".  In Campbell, William (ed.). Formosa under the Dutch: described from contemporary records, with explanatory notes and a bibliography of the island.
London: Kegan Paul. pp. 25–75. ISBN 9789576380839. OCLC 644323041.
Wills, John E. Jr. (2006). "The Seventeenth-century Transformation: Taiwan under the Dutch and the Cheng Regime".  In Rubinstein, Murray A. (ed.). Taiwan: A New History (expanded ed.). M.E. Sharpe. pp. 84–106. ISBN 978-0-7656-1495-7.
Winckler, Edwin (1994).  Harrell, Stevan; Huang, Chun-chieh (eds.). Cultural Policy in Postwar Taiwan.
Cultural Change in Postwar Taiwan ( 10–14 April 1991; Seattle). Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
ISBN 978-0-8133-8632-4.
Yip, June (2004). Envisioning Taiwan: Fiction, Cinema and the Nation in the Cultural Imaginary.
Durham, N.C. and London: Duke University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8223-3357-9.
Ballantine, Joseph (1952). Formosa: A Problem for United States Foreign Policy.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
United States (1949). United States relations with China, with special reference to the period 1944–1949, based on the files of the Department of State.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Hsü, Immanuel Chung-yueh (1982). China Without Mao: The Search for a New Order.
Oxford University Press.
Further reading
"Taiwan Flashpoint". BBC News. 2005.
Bush, R.; O'Hanlon, M. (2007). A War Like No Other: The Truth About China's Challenge to America.
Wiley.
ISBN 978-0-471-98677-5.
Bush, R. (2006). Untying the Knot: Making Peace in the Taiwan Strait.
Brookings Institution Press.
ISBN 978-0-8157-1290-9.
Carpenter, T. (2006). America's Coming War with China: A Collision Course over Taiwan.
Palgrave Macmillan.
ISBN 978-1-4039-6841-8.
Clark, Cal; Tan, Alexander C. (2012). Taiwan's Political Economy: Meeting Challenges, Pursuing Progress.
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
ISBN 978-1-58826-806-8.
Cole, B. (2006). Taiwan's Security: History and Prospects.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-36581-9.
Copper, J. (2006). Playing with Fire: The Looming War with China over Taiwan.
Praeger Security International General Interest.
ISBN 978-0-275-98888-3.
Copper, John F. ed.
Historical dictionary of Taiwan (1993) online
Federation of American Scientists;  et al. (2006). "Chinese Nuclear Forces and US Nuclear War Planning" (PDF).
Feuerwerker, Albert (1968). The Chinese Economy, 1912–1949. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Fravel, M. Taylor (2002). "Towards Civilian Supremacy: Civil-military Relations in Taiwan's Democratization". Armed Forces & Society. 29 (1): 57–84. doi:10.1177/0095327x0202900104. S2CID 146212666.
Gill, B. (2007). Rising Star: China's New Security Diplomacy.
Brookings Institution Press.
ISBN 978-0-8157-3146-7.
Selby, Burnard (March 1955). "Formosa: The Historical Background". History Today. 5 (3): 186–194.
Shirk, S. (2007). China: Fragile Superpower: How China's Internal Politics Could Derail Its Peaceful Rise.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-530609-5.
Taeuber, Irene B. "Population Growth in a Chinese Microcosm: Taiwan." Population Index 27#2 (1961), pp. 101–126 online
Tsang, S. (2006). If China Attacks Taiwan: Military Strategy, Politics and Economics.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0-415-40785-4.
Tucker, N.B. (2005). Dangerous Strait: the US-Taiwan-China Crisis.
Columbia University Press.
ISBN 978-0-231-13564-1.
External links
Republic of China  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksTravel information from WikivoyageResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about  Taiwan 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Overviews and data
Taiwan.
The World Factbook.
Central Intelligence Agency.
Taiwan from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Taiwan country profile BBC News
Background Note: Taiwan US Department of State
Taiwan's 400 years of history New Taiwan, Ilha Formosa
Key Development Forecasts for Taiwan from International Futures
Chinese Taipei OECD
Wikimedia Atlas of Taiwan
Government agencies
Office of the Government
Office of the President
Executive Yuan
Judicial Yuan
Control Yuan
Examination Yuan
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Republic of China (Taiwan) Embassies and Missions Abroad
Taiwan, The Heart of Asia Archived 23 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Tourism Bureau, Republic of China (Taiwan)
Taiwan articlesHistory
Timeline of Taiwanese history
Prehistory
archaeological sites
Kingdom of Middag
Dutch Formosa
Spanish Formosa
Kingdom of Tungning
Taiwan under Qing rule
Republic of Formosa
Taiwan under Japanese rule
Republic of China
Retreat to Taiwan
Guanbi policy
White Terror
Martial law
Mandarin policy
GeographyOverviews
Beaches
Cities
Climate
Deforestation
Earthquakes
Endemic species / Protected species
Hot springs
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National parks
Rivers
Scenic areas
Superlatives
Volcanoes
GovernmentPoliticsEconomyGovernmentand politics
Cabinet
Censorship
Constitution
Additional Articles
Elections
Human rights
LGBT rights
Intelligence
Law
Law enforcement
Military
North–South divide
Parliament
President
Political parties
Propaganda
Regions of Taiwan
Administrative divisions
Special municipalities
Counties
Cities
List of administrative divisions
Metropolitan areas
Political issues
Cross-Strait relations
Chinese unification
Chinese nationalism
Chinese Taipei
Dang Guo
De-Sinicization
Foreign relations
One Country on Each Side
Political status of Taiwan
Special non-state-to-state relations
Two Chinas
Taiwanese nationalism
Taiwan independence movement
Economy
Agriculture
Aquaculture
Floriculture
Automotive industry
Banking
List of banks
Central bank
Companies
Defense industry
Dollar (currency)
Economic history
Energy
Forestry
Maritime industries
Mining
Semiconductor industry
State-owned enterprises
Stock exchange
Taiwan Miracle
Taxation
Telecommunications
Textile
Tourism
Transportation
National SymbolsPeopleSocietyCultureNational symbols
Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Flower
Seals
PeopleDemographics
Taiwanese people
Taiwanese indigenous peoples
Ethnic groups
Hans
Hoklos
Hakkas
Mainland Chinese
Languages
Formosan languages
Amis
Atayal
Bunun
Kanakanavu
Kavalan
Paiwan
Puyuma
Rukai
Saaroa
Saisiyat
Sakizaya
Seediq
Thao
Tsou
Yami
Sinitic
Mandarin
Taiwanese Hokkien
Hakka
Matsu dialect
Sign Language
Braille
Society
Architecture
Crime
Sex trafficking
Education
Healthcare
Inventions and discoveries
Prostitution
Public holidays
Squatting
Superlatives
Taiwan studies
Women
Culture
Animation
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural history
Drama
Gambling
Glove puppetry
Literature
Media
Music
Opera
Night markets
Philosophy
Photography
Religion
Smoking
Sports
T-Beauty
Taiwanese wave
Tea
Tourist attractions
Category
Portal
Outline
Links to related articles
Countries and dependencies of AsiaSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia2
Azerbaijan2
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus2
East Timor
Egypt1
Georgia
India
Indonesia1
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia1
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey1
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Northern Cyprus2
Palestine
South Ossetia2
Taiwan
DependentterritoriesAustralia
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
United Kingdom
Akrotiri and Dhekelia2 (Sovereign Base Areas)
British Indian Ocean Territory (British Overseas Territory)
Special administrativeregions of China
Hong Kong
Macau
Category
Asia portal
East AsiaCountries and regions
China
Mainland
Hong Kong
Macau
Taiwan
Japan
Ryukyu
Mongolia
North Korea
South Korea
Ethnic groups
Ainu
Han
subgroups
Hui
Japanese
Yamato
Koreans
in China
in Japan
in Sakhalin
Manchu
Miao
Mongolic
Mongols
in China
Khalkha in Mongolia
Qiang
Ryukyuans
Indigenous Taiwanese
Tibetans
Tujia
Uyghurs
Yi
Zhuang
other ethnic groups in China
unrecognized
historical
Culture
Age reckoning
Architecture‎
Art
Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Taiwanese
Blepharoplasty
Buddhism
Calligraphy
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural sphere
Dance
Decorative knotwork
Dragon
Fashion
Festivals
Gardens
Han characters
Hip-and-gable roof
Languages
Literature
Mādhyamaka
Music
Mythology
Philosophy
Religion
Scripts
Seal
Sino-Xenic pronunciations
Surnames
Television
Typography
Ming
Imitation Song
Gothic
Yogācāra
Zodiac
Environment
East Asia Climate Partnership
Monsoon
Rainy season
Flora
Economy and Politics
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit
Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia
Capitalism
East Asia Summit
East Asian Bureau of Economic Research
East Asian Community
Four Asian Tigers
Human rights in East Asia
Ports
Stock exchanges
History
Archaeology
Archaeological cultures
Bronze Age
Iron Age
Former countries
Sports
China–Japan–Korea Friendship Athletic Meeting
East Asian Football Federation
East Asian Games
East Asian Judo Championships
East Asian martial arts
East Asian Youth Games
EAFF E-1 Football Championship
Education
Association of East Asian Research Universities
CrossAsia
East Asian Economic Review
East Asia Image Collection
East Asia Law Review
East Asian studies
Journal of East Asian Studies
Ludwigshafen East Asia Institute
Military
Horses in East Asian warfare
Miyamoto Musashi
Sun Tzu
The Art of War
The Book of Five Rings
Yi Sun-sin
Science and technology
Needham Research Institute
Printing
Swords
Traditional medicine
States with limited recognitionDetails concerning international recognition and foreign relations provided by the articles linked in parenthesisUN member statesPartially unrecognised
Republic of Armenia
relations
People's Republic of China
relations
Republic of Cyprus
relations
State of Israel
recognition
relations
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
relations
Republic of Korea
relations
UN GA observer statesPartially unrecognised
State of Palestine
recognition
relations
Non-UN memberstatesRecognised by at leastone UN member
Republic of Abkhazia
recognition
relations
Republic of China
relations
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
relations
Republic of Kosovo
recognition
relations
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
recognition
relations
Republic of South Ossetia
recognition
relations
Recognised only bynon-UN members
Republic of Artsakh
recognition
relations
Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic
recognition
relations
Unrecognised
Republic of Somaliland
relations
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Spain
France (data)
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Australia
Korea
Vatican
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
MusicBrainz area
National Archives (US)
SUDOC (France)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiquoteWikivoyage
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 October 2022, at 13:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
