Terrorism - Wikipedia
Terrorism
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article needs to be updated.
Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (August 2021)Use of violence to further a political or ideological cause
"Terrorist" redirects here.
For other uses, see Terrorist (disambiguation).
United Airlines Flight 175 hits the South Tower of the World Trade Center during the September 11 attacks of 2001 in New York City.
Part of a series onTerrorism
Definitions
History
Incidents
By ideology
Anarchist
Communist
Green/Ecological
Left-wing/Far-left
Narcotics-driven
Nationalist
Right-wing/Far-right
Religious
Islamic (Salafi-Wahhabi)
Sikh
Christian (Mormon)
Buddhist
Hindu
Jewish
Special-interest / Single-issue
Suffragette
Anti-abortion
Environmental
Misogynist
Related topics
Violent extremism
Ethnic violence
Militia movement
Resistance movement
Structure
Financing
Fronting
Radicalization (online)
Training camp
Death squad
Clandestine cell system
Leaderless resistance
Lone wolf
Domestic
MethodsTactics
Agro-terrorism
Aircraft hijacking (list)
Animal-borne bomb attacks
Beheading
Bioterrorism
Car bombing (list)
Cyberterrorism
Dirty bomb
Dry run
Explosive
Hostage-taking
Improvised explosive device (IED)
Vehicle-ramming
Spree shooting
Individual terror
Insurgency
Kidnapping
Letter bomb
Lone wolf
Mass shooting
Nuclear
Paper terrorism
Piracy
Propaganda of the deed
Proxy bomb
School shooting
Stabbing
Suicide attack (list)
Rockets and mortars
Terrorist groups
Designated terrorist groups
Charities accused of ties to terrorism
Adherents
Violent non-state actors
State terrorism
Kazakhstan
Soviet Union
United States
Uzbekistan
State-sponsored terrorism
Iran
Israel
Kuwait
Pakistan
Qatar
Russia (Soviet Union)
Saudi Arabia
Syria
United States
Response to terrorism
Counter-terrorism
International conventions
Anti-terrorism legislation
Terrorism insurance
Part of a series onWar
History
Prehistoric
Ancient
Post-classical
Early modern
Late modern
industrial
fourth-gen
Battlespace
Aerospace
Air
Airborne
Space
Land
Cold-region
Desert
Jungle
Mountain
Urban
Sea
Amphibious
Blue
Brown
Green
Surface
Underwater
Subterranean
Tunnel
Cyber
Information
Weapons
Armor
Artillery
Barrage
Biological
Camouflage
Cavalry
Chemical
Class
Combined arms
Conventional
Cyber
Denial
Disinformation
Drone
Electronic
Infantry
Lawfare
Loitering
Music
Nuclear
Psychological
Radiological
Unconventional
TacticsList of military tactics
Aerial
Battle
Cavalry
Charge
Counterattack
Counterinsurgency
Defeat in detail
Foxhole
Envelopment
Guerrilla
Morale
Rapid dominance
Siege
Swarming
Tactical objective
Target saturation
Trench
Withdrawal
Operational
Military operation
Operations research
Blitzkrieg
Expeditionary
Deep operation
Maneuver
Operational manoeuvre group
StrategyList of military strategies and concepts
Military campaign
Attrition
Counter-offensive
Culminating
Defence in depth
Fabian
Mosaic
Deception
Defensive
Depth
Goal
Naval
Offensive
Scorched earth
Grand strategy
Asymmetric
Broken-backed
Cold war
Colonial
Conquest
Containment
Economic
Endemic
Irregular
Liberation
Limited
Network-centric
Perpetual
Political
Princely
Proxy
Religious
Resource
Strategic
Succession
Technology
Theater
Total war
World war
Administrative
Branch
Policy
Staff
Training
Service
Sociology
Organization
Chain of command
Command and control
Doctrine
Engineers
Intelligence
Ranks
Technology and equipment
Personnel
Military recruitment
Conscription
Recruit training
Military specialism
Women in the military
Children in the military
Transgender people and military service
Sexual harassment in the military
Conscientious objector
Counter-recruitment
Logistics
Military–industrial complex
Arms industry
Materiel
Supply-chain management
Main operating base
Forward operating base
Outpost
Science
Power projection
Loss of Strength Gradient
Law
Court-martial
Geneva Conventions
Geneva Protocol
Justice
Perfidy
Rules of engagement
Martial law
War crime
Theory
Air supremacy
Command of the sea
Full-spectrum dominance
Overmatch
Unrestricted Warfare
Related
Anti-war movement
Outline of war
Just war theory
Principles of war
Philosophy of war
War film
Military science fiction
War game
Lanchester's laws
Security dilemma
Tripwire force
Mercenary
War novel
Women in war
War resister
War studies
Wartime sexual violence
Lists
Battles
Military occupations
Military tactics
Operations
Sieges
War crimes
Wars
Weapons
Writers
Terrorism, in its broadest sense, is the use of intentional violence and fear to achieve political aims.
The term is used in this regard primarily to refer to intentional violence during peacetime or in the context of war against non-combatants (mostly civilians and neutral military personnel). The terms "terrorist" and "terrorism" originated during the French Revolution of the late 18th century but became widely used internationally and gained worldwide attention in the 1970s during the Northern Ireland conflict, the Basque conflict, and the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.
The increased use of suicide attacks from the 1980s onwards was typified by the 2001 September 11 attacks in the United States.
There are various different definitions of terrorism, with no universal agreement about it.
Terrorism is a charged term.
It is often used with the connotation of something that is "morally wrong". Governments and non-state groups use the term to abuse or denounce opposing groups.
Varied political organizations have been accused of using terrorism to achieve their objectives.
These include left-wing and right-wing political organizations, nationalist groups, religious groups, revolutionaries and ruling governments.
Legislation declaring terrorism a crime has been adopted in many states.
When terrorism is perpetrated by nation states, it is not considered terrorism by the state conducting it, making legality a largely grey-area issue.
There is no consensus as to whether terrorism should be regarded as a war crime.
The Global Terrorism Database, maintained by the University of Maryland, College Park, has recorded more than 61,000 incidents of non-state terrorism, resulting in at least 140,000 deaths, between 2000 and 2014.
Contents
Etymology
Etymologically, the word terror is derived from the Latin verb Tersere, which later becomes Terrere.
The latter form appears in European languages as early as the 12th century; its first known use in French is the word terrible in 1160. By 1356 the word terreur is in use.
Terreur is the origin of the Middle English term terrour, which later becomes the modern word "terror".
Historical background
Main article: Reign of Terror
Seal of the Jacobin Club: 'Society of the Jacobins, Friends of Freedom and Equality'
The term terroriste, meaning "terrorist", is first used in 1794 by the French philosopher François-Noël Babeuf, who denounces Maximilien Robespierre's Jacobin regime as a dictatorship.
In the years leading up to what became known as the Reign of Terror, the Brunswick Manifesto threatened Paris with an "exemplary, never to be forgotten vengeance: the city would be subjected to military punishment and total destruction" if the royal family was harmed, but this only increased the Revolution's will to abolish the monarchy.
Some writers attitudes about French Revolution grew less favorable after the French monarchy was abolished in 1792. During the Reign of Terror, which began in July 1793 and lasted thirteen months, Paris was governed by the Committee of Public Safety who oversaw a regime of mass executions and public purges.
Prior to the French Revolution, ancient philosophers wrote about tyrannicide, as tyranny was seen as the greatest political threat to Greco-Roman civilization.
Medieval philosophers were similarly occupied with the concept of tyranny, though the analysis of some theologians like Thomas Aquinas drew a distinction between usurpers, who could be killed by anyone, and legitimate rulers who abused their power—the latter, in Aquinas' view, could only be punished by a public authority.
John of Salisbury was the first medieval Christian scholar to defend tyrannicide.
General Napoléon Bonaparte quelling the October 5, 1795 royalist rebellion in Paris, in front of the Église Saint-Roch, Saint-Honoré Street, paving the way for Directory government.
Most scholars today trace the origins of the modern tactic of terrorism to the Jewish Sicarii Zealots who attacked Romans and Jews in 1st-century Palestine.
They follow its development from the Persian Order of Assassins through to 19th-century anarchists.
The "Reign of Terror" is usually regarded as an issue of etymology.
The term terrorism has generally been used to describe violence by non-state actors rather than government violence since the 19th-century Anarchist Movement.
In December 1795, Edmund Burke used the word "Terrorists" in a description of the new French government called 'Directory':
At length, after a terrible struggle, the [Directory] Troops prevailed over the Citizens ... To secure them further, they have a strong corps of irregulars, ready armed.
Thousands of those Hell-hounds called Terrorists, whom they had shut up in Prison on their last Revolution, as the Satellites of Tyranny, are let loose on the people.(emphasis added)
The terms "terrorism" and "terrorist" gained renewed currency in the 1970s as a result of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, the Northern Ireland conflict, the Basque conflict, and the operations of groups such as the Red Army Faction.
Leila Khaled was described as a terrorist in a 1970 issue of Life magazine.
A number of books on terrorism were published in the 1970s.
The topic came further to the fore after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings and again after the 2001 September 11 attacks and the 2002 Bali bombings.
Modern definitions
See also: Definitions of terrorism
Attack at the Bologna railway station on August 2, 1980, by the neo-fascist group Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari.
With 85 deaths, it is the deadliest massacre in the history of Italy as a Republic.
Aftermath of the 2002 bomb attack at the Myyrmanni shopping mall in Myyrmäki, Vantaa, Finland.
The bombing was especially shocking for Finland and the other Nordic countries, where bombings are extremely rare.
The Beslan school siege by Chechen rebels on September 1, 2004. It was the deadliest massacre in the history of Russia in the 21st century.
In 2006 it was estimated that there were over 109 different definitions of terrorism.
American political philosopher Michael Walzer in 2002 wrote: "Terrorism is the deliberate killing of innocent people, at random, to spread fear through a whole population and force the hand of its political leaders". Bruce Hoffman, an American scholar, has noted that it is not only individual agencies within the same governmental apparatus that cannot agree on a single definition of terrorism.
Experts and other long-established scholars in the field are equally incapable of reaching a consensus.
C. A. J. Coady has written that the question of how to define terrorism is "irresolvable" because "its natural home is in polemical, ideological and propagandist contexts".
Experts disagree about "whether terrorism is wrong by definition or just wrong as a matter of fact; they disagree about whether terrorism should be defined in terms of its aims, or its methods, or both, or neither; they disagree about whether states can perpetrate terrorism; they even disagree about the importance or otherwise of terror for a definition of terrorism."
State terrorism
Main article: State terrorism
State terrorism refers to acts of terrorism conducted by a state against its own citizens or against another state.
United Nations
In November 2004, a Secretary-General of the United Nations report described terrorism as any act "intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants with the purpose of intimidating a population or compelling a government or an international organization to do or abstain from doing any act". The international community has been slow to formulate a universally agreed, legally binding definition of this crime.
These difficulties arise from the fact that the term "terrorism" is politically and emotionally charged.
In this regard, Angus Martyn, briefing the Australian parliament, stated,
The international community has never succeeded in developing an accepted comprehensive definition of terrorism.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the United Nations attempts to define the term floundered mainly due to differences of opinion between various members about the use of violence in the context of conflicts over national liberation and self-determination.
These divergences have made it impossible for the United Nations to conclude a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism that incorporates a single, all-encompassing, legally binding, criminal law definition of terrorism.
The international community has adopted a series of sectoral conventions that define and criminalize various types of terrorist activities.
Since 1994, the United Nations General Assembly has repeatedly condemned terrorist acts using the following political description of terrorism:
Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the public, a group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstance unjustifiable, whatever the considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature that may be invoked to justify them.
U.S. law
Various legal systems and government agencies use different definitions of terrorism in their national legislation.
U.S. Code Title 22 Chapter 38, Section 2656f(d) defines terrorism as:
"Premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents".
"International terrorism" means activities with the following three characteristics:
Involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or state law;
Appear to be intended (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (ii) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (iii) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping; and
occur primarily outside the territorial jurisdiction of the U.S., or transcend national boundaries in terms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appear intended to intimidate or coerce, or the locale in which their perpetrators operate or seek asylum.
Media spectacle
A definition proposed by Carsten Bockstette at the George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies, underlines the psychological and tactical aspects of terrorism:
Terrorism is defined as political violence in an asymmetrical conflict that is designed to induce terror and psychic fear (sometimes indiscriminate) through the violent victimization and destruction of noncombatant targets (sometimes iconic symbols). Such acts are meant to send a message from an illicit clandestine organization.
The purpose of terrorism is to exploit the media in order to achieve maximum attainable publicity as an amplifying force multiplier in order to influence the targeted audience(s) in order to reach short- and midterm political goals and/or desired long-term end states.
Terrorists attack national symbols, which may negatively affect a government, while increasing the prestige of the given terrorist group or its ideology.
Political violence
See also: Political violence
Luis Posada and CORU are widely considered responsible for the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner that killed 73 people.
Terrorist acts frequently have a political purpose.
Some official, governmental definitions of terrorism use the criterion of the illegitimacy or unlawfulness of the act.[better source needed] to distinguish between actions authorized by a government (and thus "lawful") and those of other actors, including individuals and small groups.
For example, carrying out a strategic bombing on an enemy city, which is designed to affect civilian support for a cause, would not be considered terrorism if it were authorized by a government.
This criterion is inherently problematic and is not universally accepted,[attribution needed] because: it denies the existence of state terrorism.
An associated term is violent non-state actor.
According to Ali Khan, the distinction lies ultimately in a political judgment.
Pejorative use
Having the connotation of "something morally wrong", the term "terrorism" is often used to abuse or denounce opposite parties, either governments or non-state groups.
An example of this is the terruqueo political attack used by right-wing groups in Peru to target leftist groups or those opposed to the neoliberal status quo, likening opponents to guerillas from the internal conflict in Peru.
Those labeled "terrorists" by their opponents rarely identify themselves as such, and typically use other terms or terms specific to their situation, such as separatist, freedom fighter, liberator, revolutionary, vigilante, militant, paramilitary, guerrilla, rebel, patriot, or any similar-meaning word in other languages and cultures.
Jihadi, mujahideen, and fedayeen are similar Arabic words that have entered the English lexicon.
It is common for both parties in a conflict to describe each other as terrorists.
On whether particular terrorist acts, such as killing non-combatants, can be justified as the lesser evil in a particular circumstance, philosophers have expressed different views: while, according to David Rodin, utilitarian philosophers can (in theory) conceive of cases in which the evil of terrorism is outweighed by the good that could not be achieved in a less morally costly way, in practice the "harmful effects of undermining the convention of non-combatant immunity is thought to outweigh the goods that may be achieved by particular acts of terrorism". Among the non-utilitarian philosophers, Michael Walzer argued that terrorism can be morally justified in only one specific case: when "a nation or community faces the extreme threat of complete destruction and the only way it can preserve itself is by intentionally targeting non-combatants,then it is morally entitled to do so".
In his book Inside Terrorism Bruce Hoffman offered an explanation of why the term terrorism becomes distorted:
On one point, at least, everyone agrees: terrorism is a pejorative term.
It is a word with intrinsically negative connotations that is generally applied to one's enemies and opponents, or to those with whom one disagrees and would otherwise prefer to ignore. 'What is called terrorism,' Brian Jenkins has written, 'thus seems to depend on one's point of view.
Use of the term implies a moral judgment; and if one party can successfully attach the label terrorist to its opponent, then it has indirectly persuaded others to adopt its moral viewpoint.' Hence the decision to call someone or label some organization terrorist becomes almost unavoidably subjective, depending largely on whether one sympathizes with or opposes the person/group/cause concerned.
If one identifies with the victim of the violence, for example, then the act is terrorism.
If, however, one identifies with the perpetrator, the violent act is regarded in a more sympathetic, if not positive (or, at the worst, an ambivalent) light; and it is not terrorism.The pejorative connotations of the word can be summed up in the aphorism, "One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter". This is exemplified when a group using irregular military methods is an ally of a state against a mutual enemy, but later falls out with the state and starts to use those methods against its former ally.
President Reagan meeting with Afghan Mujahideen leaders in the Oval Office in 1983
During the Second World War, the Malayan People's Anti-Japanese Army were allied with the British, but during the Malayan Emergency, members of its successor organisation (the Malayan National Liberation Army) started campaigns against them, and were branded "terrorists" as a result.
More recently, Ronald Reagan and others in the American administration frequently called the mujaheddin "freedom fighters" during the Soviet–Afghan War, however twenty years later, when a new generation of Afghan men (militant groups like the Taliban and allies) were fighting against what they perceive to be a regime installed by foreign powers, their attacks were labelled terrorism by George W. Bush.
Groups accused of terrorism understandably prefer terms reflecting legitimate military or ideological action.
Leading terrorism researcher Professor Martin Rudner, director of the Canadian Centre of Intelligence and Security Studies at Ottawa's Carleton University, defines "terrorist acts" as unlawful attacks for political or other ideological goals, and said:
There is the famous statement: 'One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.' But that is grossly misleading.
It assesses the validity of the cause when terrorism is an act.
One can have a perfectly beautiful cause and yet if one commits terrorist acts, it is terrorism regardless.
Some groups, when involved in a "liberation" struggle, have been called "terrorists" by the Western governments or media.
Later, these same persons, as leaders of the liberated nations, are called "statesmen" by similar organizations.
Two examples of this phenomenon are the Nobel Peace Prize laureates Menachem Begin and Nelson Mandela.
WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange has been called a "terrorist" by Sarah Palin and Joe Biden.
Sometimes, states that are close allies, for reasons of history, culture and politics, can disagree over whether members of a certain organization are terrorists.
For instance, some branches of the United States government refused to label members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) as terrorists while the IRA was using methods against one of the United States' closest allies (the United Kingdom) that the UK branded as terrorism.
This was highlighted by the Quinn v.
Robinson case.
Media outlets who wish to convey impartiality may limit their usage of "terrorist" and "terrorism" because they are loosely defined, potentially controversial in nature, and subjective terms.
The 2020 Nashville bombing revived a debate over the use of the word "terrorism", with critics saying it is quickly applied to attacks by Muslims but reluctantly if at all used by white Christian men, such as the Nashville bomber.
History
Main article: History of terrorism
The Irish Republican Brotherhood was one of the earliest organizations to use modern terrorist tactics.
Pictured, "The Fenian Guy Fawkes" by John Tenniel (1867).
Depending on how broadly the term is defined, the roots and practice of terrorism can be traced at least to the 1st century AD. According to the contemporary Jewish-Roman historian Josephus, after the Zealotry rebellion against Roman rule in Judea, when some prominent Jewish collaborators with Roman rule were killed, Judas of Galilee formed a small and more extreme offshoot of the Zealots, the Sicarii Zealots, in 6 AD. They were a smaller and more radical offshoot of the Zealots which was active in Judaea Province at the beginning of the 1st century AD, and they can be considered early terrorists, although this is disputed.
Their terror was directed against Jewish "collaborators", including temple priests, Sadducees, Herodians, and other wealthy elites.
The term "terrorism" itself was originally used to describe the actions of the Jacobin Club during the "Reign of Terror" in the French Revolution. "Terror is nothing other than justice, prompt, severe, inflexible", said Jacobin leader Maximilien Robespierre.
In 1795, Edmund Burke denounced the Jacobins for letting "thousands of those hell-hounds called Terrorists ... loose on the people" of France.
In January 1858, Italian patriot Felice Orsini threw three bombs in an attempt to assassinate French Emperor Napoleon III. Eight bystanders were killed and 142 injured.
The incident played a crucial role as an inspiration for the development of the early terrorist groups.
Arguably the first organization to utilize modern terrorist techniques was the Irish Republican Brotherhood, founded in 1858 as a revolutionary Irish nationalist group that carried out attacks in England.
The group initiated the Fenian dynamite campaign in 1881, one of the first modern terror campaigns.
Instead of earlier forms of terrorism based on political assassination, this campaign used timed explosives with the express aim of sowing fear in the very heart of metropolitan Britain, in order to achieve political gains.
Another early terrorist-type group was Narodnaya Volya, founded in Russia in 1878 as a revolutionary anarchist group inspired by Sergei Nechayev and "propaganda by the deed" theorist Carlo Pisacane.
The group developed ideas—such as targeted killing of the 'leaders of oppression'—that were to become the hallmark of subsequent violence by small non-state groups, and they were convinced that the developing technologies of the age—such as the invention of dynamite, which they were the first anarchist group to make widespread use of—enabled them to strike directly and with discrimination.
David Rapoport refers to four major waves of global terrorism: "the Anarchist, the Anti-Colonial, the New Left, and the Religious.
The first three have been completed and lasted around 40 years; the fourth is now in its third decade."
Infographics
See also: Number of terrorist incidents by country
Terrorist incidents, 1970–2015. A total of 157,520 incidents are plotted.
Orange: 1970–1999, Red: 2000–2015
Top 10 Countries (2000–2014)
Worldwide non-state terrorist incidents 1970–2017
Share who are worried about vs. share of deaths from terrorism
Types
This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Depending on the country, the political system, and the time in history, the types of terrorism are varying.
Number of failed, foiled or successful terrorist attacks by year and type within the European Union.
Source: Europol.
Aftermath of the King David Hotel bombing by the Zionist militant group Irgun, July 1946
A view of damage to the U.S. Embassy in the aftermath of the 1983 Beirut bombing caused by Islamic Jihad Organization and Hezbollah
In early 1975, the Law Enforcement Assistant Administration in the United States formed the National Advisory Committee on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals.
One of the five volumes that the committee wrote was titled Disorders and Terrorism, produced by the Task Force on Disorders and Terrorism under the direction of H. H. A. Cooper, Director of the Task Force staff.
The Task Force defines terrorism as "a tactic or technique by means of which a violent act or the threat thereof is used for the prime purpose of creating overwhelming fear for coercive purposes". It classified disorders and terrorism into six categories:
Civil disorder – A form of collective violence interfering with the peace, security, and normal functioning of the community.
Political terrorism – Violent criminal behaviour designed primarily to generate fear in the community, or substantial segment of it, for political purposes.
Non-Political terrorism – Terrorism that is not aimed at political purposes but which exhibits "conscious design to create and maintain a high degree of fear for coercive purposes, but the end is individual or collective gain rather than the achievement of a political objective".
Anonymous terrorism – In the two decades prior to 2016–19, "fewer than half" of all terrorist attacks were either "claimed by their perpetrators or convincingly attributed by governments to specific terrorist groups". A number of theories have been advanced as to why this has happened.
Quasi-terrorism – The activities incidental to the commission of crimes of violence that are similar in form and method to genuine terrorism but which nevertheless lack its essential ingredient.
It is not the main purpose of the quasi-terrorists to induce terror in the immediate victim as in the case of genuine terrorism, but the quasi-terrorist uses the modalities and techniques of the genuine terrorist and produces similar consequences and reaction.
For example, the fleeing felon who takes hostages is a quasi-terrorist, whose methods are similar to those of the genuine terrorist but whose purposes are quite different.
Limited political terrorism – Genuine political terrorism is characterized by a revolutionary approach; limited political terrorism refers to "acts of terrorism which are committed for ideological or political motives but which are not part of a concerted campaign to capture control of the state".
Official or state terrorism – "referring to nations whose rule is based upon fear and oppression that reach similar to terrorism or such proportions". It may be referred to as Structural Terrorism defined broadly as terrorist acts carried out by governments in pursuit of political objectives, often as part of their foreign policy.
Other sources have defined the typology of terrorism in different ways, for example, broadly classifying it into domestic terrorism and international terrorism, or using categories such as vigilante terrorism or insurgent terrorism.
One way the typology of terrorism may be defined:
Political terrorism
Sub-state terrorism
Social revolutionary terrorism
Nationalist-separatist terrorism
Religious extremist terrorism
Religious fundamentalist Terrorism
New religions terrorism
Right-wing terrorism
Left-wing terrorism
Communist terrorism
State-sponsored terrorism
Regime or state terrorism
Criminal terrorism
Pathological terrorism
Causes and motivations
Choice of terrorism as a tactic
Individuals and groups choose terrorism as a tactic because it can:
Act as a form of asymmetric warfare in order to directly force a government to agree to demands
Intimidate a group of people into capitulating to the demands in order to avoid future injury
Get attention and thus political support for a cause
Directly inspire more people to the cause (such as revolutionary acts) – propaganda of the deed
Indirectly inspire more people to the cause by provoking a hostile response or over-reaction from enemies to the cause
Attacks on "collaborators" are used to intimidate people from cooperating with the state in order to undermine state control.
This strategy was used in Ireland, in Kenya, in Algeria and in Cyprus during their independence struggles.
Stated motives for the September 11 attacks included inspiring more fighters to join the cause of repelling the United States from Muslim countries with a successful high-profile attack.
The attacks prompted some criticism from domestic and international observers regarding perceived injustices in U.S. foreign policy that provoked the attacks, but the larger practical effect was that the United States government declared a War on Terror that resulted in substantial military engagements in several Muslim-majority countries.
Various commentators have inferred that al-Qaeda expected a military response, and welcomed it as a provocation that would result in more Muslims fight the United States.
Some commentators believe that the resulting anger and suspicion directed toward innocent Muslims living in Western countries and the indignities inflicted upon them by security forces and the general public also contributes to radicalization of new recruits.
Despite criticism that the Iraqi government had no involvement with the September 11 attacks, Bush declared the 2003 invasion of Iraq to be part of the War on Terror.
The resulting backlash and instability enabled the rise of Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the temporary creation of an Islamic caliphate holding territory in Iraq and Syria, until ISIL lost its territory through military defeats.
Attacks used to draw international attention to struggles that are otherwise unreported have included the Palestinian airplane hijackings in 1970 and the 1975 Dutch train hostage crisis.
Causes motivating terrorism
Specific political or social causes have included:
Independence or separatist movements
Irredentist movements
Adoption of a particular political philosophy, such as socialism (left-wing terrorism), anarchism, or fascism (possibly through a coup or as an ideology of an independence or separatist movement)
Environmental protection (eco-terrorism)
Supremacism of a particular group
Preventing a rival group from sharing or occupying a particular territory (such as by discouraging immigration or encouraging flight)
Subjugation of a particular population (such as lynching of African Americans)
Spread or dominance of a particular religion – religious terrorism
Ending perceived government oppression
Responding to a violent act (for example, tit-for-tat attacks in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, in The Troubles in Northern Ireland, or Timothy McVeigh's revenge for the Waco siege and Ruby Ridge incident)
Causes for right-wing terrorism have included white nationalism, ethnonationalism, fascism, anti-socialism, the anti-abortion movement, and tax resistance.
Sometimes terrorists on the same side fight for different reasons.
For example, in the Chechen–Russian conflict secular Chechens using terrorist tactics fighting for national independence are allied with radical Islamist terrorists who have arrived from other countries.
Personal and social factors
Main article: Radicalization
Various personal and social factors may influence the personal choice of whether to join a terrorist group or attempt an act of terror, including:
Identity, including affiliation with a particular culture, ethnicity, or religion
Previous exposure to violence
Financial reward (for example, the Palestinian Authority Martyrs Fund)
Mental health disorder
Social isolation
Perception that the cause responds to a profound injustice or indignity
A report conducted by Paul Gill, John Horgan and Paige Deckert[dubious  – discuss] found that for "lone wolf" terrorists:
At least 37% lived alone at the time of their event planning and/or execution, a further 26% lived with others, and no data were available for the remaining cases
Ariel Merari, a psychologist who has studied the psychological profiles of suicide terrorists since 1983 through media reports that contained biographical details, interviews with the suicides' families, and interviews with jailed would-be suicide attackers, concluded that they were unlikely to be psychologically abnormal.
In comparison to economic theories of criminal behaviour, Scott Atran found that suicide terrorists exhibit none of the socially dysfunctional attributes—such as fatherless, friendless, jobless situations—or suicidal symptoms.
By which he means, they do not kill themselves simply out of hopelessness or a sense of 'having nothing to lose'.
Abrahm suggests that terrorist organizations do not select terrorism for its political effectiveness.
Individual terrorists tend to be motivated more by a desire for social solidarity with other members of their organization than by political platforms or strategic objectives, which are often murky and undefined.
Michael Mousseau shows possible relationships between the type of economy within a country and ideology associated with terrorism.[example  needed] Many terrorists have a history of domestic violence.
Democracy and domestic terrorism
Terrorism is most common in nations with intermediate political freedom, and it is least common in the most democratic nations.
Some examples of "terrorism" in non-democratic nations include ETA in Spain under Francisco Franco (although the group's terrorist activities increased sharply after Franco's death), the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists in pre-war Poland, the Shining Path in Peru under Alberto Fujimori, the Kurdistan Workers Party when Turkey was ruled by military leaders and the ANC in South Africa.
Democracies, such as Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, Israel, Indonesia, India, Spain, Germany, Italy and the Philippines, have experienced domestic terrorism.
While a democratic nation espousing civil liberties may claim a sense of higher moral ground than other regimes, an act of terrorism within such a state may cause a dilemma: whether to maintain its civil liberties and thus risk being perceived as ineffective in dealing with the problem; or alternatively to restrict its civil liberties and thus risk delegitimizing its claim of supporting civil liberties.
For this reason, homegrown terrorism has started to be seen as a greater threat, as stated by former CIA Director Michael Hayden.
This dilemma, some social theorists would conclude, may very well play into the initial plans of the acting terrorist(s); namely, to delegitimize the state and cause a systematic shift towards anarchy via the accumulation of negative sentiments towards the state system.
Religious terrorism
Main article: Religious terrorism
Islamabad Marriott Hotel bombing.
Approximately 35,000 Pakistanis died from terrorist attacks between 2001 and 2011.
According to the Global Terrorism Index by the University of Maryland, College Park, religious extremism has overtaken national separatism and become the main driver of terrorist attacks around the world.
Since 9/11 there has been a five-fold increase in deaths from terrorist attacks.
The majority of incidents over the past several years can be tied to groups with a religious agenda.
Before 2000, it was nationalist separatist terrorist organizations such as the IRA and Chechen rebels who were behind the most attacks.
The number of incidents from nationalist separatist groups has remained relatively stable in the years since while religious extremism has grown.
The prevalence of Islamist groups in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and Syria is the main driver behind these trends.
Five of the terrorist groups that have been most active since 2001 are Hamas, Boko Haram, al-Qaeda, the Taliban and ISIL. These groups have been most active in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and Syria.
Eighty percent of all deaths from terrorism occurred in one of these five countries.
In 2015 four Islamic extremist groups were responsible for 74% of all deaths from Islamic terrorism: ISIS, Boko Haram, the Taliban, and al-Qaeda, according to the Global Terrorism Index 2016. Since approximately 2000, these incidents have occurred on a global scale, affecting not only Muslim-majority states in Africa and Asia, but also states with non-Muslim majority such as United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Belgium, Sweden, Russia, Australia, Canada, Sri Lanka, Israel, China, India and Philippines.
Such attacks have targeted both Muslims and non-Muslims, however the majority affect Muslims themselves.
Terrorism in Pakistan has become a great problem.
From the summer of 2007 until late 2009, more than 1,500 people were killed in suicide and other attacks on civilians for reasons attributed to a number of causes—sectarian violence between Sunni and Shia Muslims; easy availability of guns and explosives; the existence of a "Kalashnikov culture"; an influx of ideologically driven Muslims based in or near Pakistan, who originated from various nations around the world and the subsequent war against the pro-Soviet Afghans in the 1980s which blew back into Pakistan; the presence of Islamist insurgent groups and forces such as the Taliban and Lashkar-e-Taiba.
On July 2, 2013, in Lahore, 50 Muslim scholars of the Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) issued a collective fatwa against suicide bombings, the killing of innocent people, bomb attacks, and targeted killings declaring them as Haraam or forbidden.
In 2015, the Southern Poverty Law Center released a report on terrorism in the United States.
The report (titled The Age of the Wolf) analyzed 62 incidents and found that, between 2009 and 2015, "more people have been killed in America by non-Islamic domestic terrorists than jihadists." The "virulent racist and anti-semitic" ideology of the ultra-right wing Christian Identity movement is usually accompanied by anti-government sentiments.
Adherents of Christian Identity are not connected with specific Christian denominations, and they believe that whites of European descent can be traced back to the "Lost Tribes of Israel" and many consider Jews to be the Satanic offspring of Eve and the Serpent.
This group has committed hate crimes, bombings and other acts of terrorism.
Its influence ranges from the Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazi groups to the anti-government militia and sovereign citizen movements.
Christian Identity's origins can be traced back to Anglo-Israelism, which held the view that the British people were descendants of ancient Israelites.
However, in the United States, the ideology started to become rife with anti-Semitism, and eventually Christian Identity theology diverged from the philo-semitic Anglo-Israelism, and developed what is known as the "two seed" theory.
According to the two-seed theory, the Jewish people are descended from Cain and the serpent (not from Shem). The white European seedline is descended from the "lost tribes" of Israel.
They hold themselves to "God's laws", not to "man's laws", and they do not feel bound to a government that they consider run by Jews and the New World Order.
The Ku Klux Klan is widely denounced by Christian denominations.
Dawabsheh family home after Duma arson attack
Israel has had problems with Jewish religious terrorism even before independence in 1948. During British mandate over Palestine, the Irgun were among the Zionist groups labelled as terrorist organisations by the British authorities and United Nations, for violent terror attacks against Britons and Arabs.
Another extremist group, the Lehi, openly declared its members as "terrorists". Historian William Cleveland stated many Jews justified any action, even terrorism, taken in the cause of the creation of a Jewish state.
In 1995, Yigal Amir assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
For Amir, killing Rabin was an exemplary act that symbolized the fight against an illegitimate government that was prepared to cede Jewish Holy Land to the Palestinians. 
Perpetrators
Al-Qaida in Magreb members pose with weapons.
The perpetrators of acts of terrorism can be individuals, groups, or states.
According to some definitions, clandestine or semi-clandestine state actors may carry out terrorist acts outside the framework of a state of war.
The most common image of terrorism is that it is carried out by small and secretive cells, highly motivated to serve a particular cause and many of the most deadly operations in recent times, such as the September 11 attacks, the London underground bombing, 2008 Mumbai attacks and the 2002 Bali bombing were planned and carried out by a close clique, composed of close friends, family members and other strong social networks.
These groups benefited from the free flow of information and efficient telecommunications to succeed where others had failed.
Over the years, much research has been conducted to distill a terrorist profile to explain these individuals' actions through their psychology and socio-economic circumstances.
Others, like Roderick Hindery, have sought to discern profiles in the propaganda tactics used by terrorists.
Some security organizations designate these groups as violent non-state actors.[citation needed] A 2007 study by economist Alan B. Krueger found that terrorists were less likely to come from an impoverished background (28 percent versus 33 percent) and more likely to have at least a high-school education (47 percent versus 38 percent). Another analysis found only 16 percent of terrorists came from impoverished families, versus 30 percent of male Palestinians, and over 60 percent had gone beyond high school, versus 15 percent of the populace.A study into the poverty-stricken conditions and whether terrorists are more likely to come from here,show that people who grew up in these situations tend to show aggression and frustration towards others.
This theory is largely debated for the simple fact that just because one is frustrated,does not make them a potential terrorist.
To avoid detection, a terrorist will look, dress, and behave normally until executing the assigned mission.
Some claim that attempts to profile terrorists based on personality, physical, or sociological traits are not useful.
The physical and behavioral description of the terrorist could describe almost any normal person. the majority of terrorist attacks are carried out by military age men, aged 16 to 40.
Non-state groups
There is speculation that the 2001 anthrax attacks were the work of a lone wolf.
Main articles: List of designated terrorist groups, Lone wolf (terrorism), and Violent non-state actor
Groups not part of the state apparatus of in opposition to the state are most commonly referred to as a "terrorist" in the media.
According to the Global Terrorism Database, the most active terrorist group in the period 1970 to 2010 was Shining Path (with 4,517 attacks), followed by Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), Irish Republican Army (IRA), Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA), Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Taliban, Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, New People's Army, National Liberation Army of Colombia (ELN), and Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK).
State sponsors
Main article: State-sponsored terrorism
A state can sponsor terrorism by funding or harboring a terrorist group.
Opinions as to which acts of violence by states consist of state-sponsored terrorism vary widely.
When states provide funding for groups considered by some to be terrorist, they rarely acknowledge them as such.[citation needed]
State terrorism
Main article: State terrorism
Civilization is based on a clearly defined and widely accepted yet often unarticulated hierarchy.
Violence done by those higher on the hierarchy to those lower is nearly always invisible, that is, unnoticed.
When it is noticed, it is fully rationalized.
Violence done by those lower on the hierarchy to those higher is unthinkable, and when it does occur it is regarded with shock, horror, and the fetishization of the victims.— Derrick Jensen
Infant crying in Shanghai's South Station after the Japanese bombing, August 28, 1937
As with "terrorism" the concept of "state terrorism" is controversial.
The Chairman of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee has stated that the committee was conscious of 12 international conventions on the subject, and none of them referred to state terrorism, which was not an international legal concept.
If states abused their power, they should be judged against international conventions dealing with war crimes, international human rights law, and international humanitarian law.
Former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has said that it is "time to set aside debates on so-called 'state terrorism'. The use of force by states is already thoroughly regulated under international law". he made clear that, "regardless of the differences between governments on the question of the definition of terrorism, what is clear and what we can all agree on is that any deliberate attack on innocent civilians [or non-combatants], regardless of one's cause, is unacceptable and fits into the definition of terrorism."
USS Arizona (BB-39) burning during the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941
State terrorism has been used to refer to terrorist acts committed by governmental agents or forces.
This involves the use of state resources employed by a state's foreign policies, such as using its military to directly perform acts of terrorism.
Professor of Political Science Michael Stohl cites the examples that include the German bombing of London, the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor, the Allied firebombing of Dresden, and the U.S. atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II. He argues that "the use of terror tactics is common in international relations and the state has been and remains a more likely employer of terrorism within the international system than insurgents." He cites the first strike option as an example of the "terror of coercive diplomacy" as a form of this, which holds the world hostage with the implied threat of using nuclear weapons in "crisis management" and he argues that the institutionalized form of terrorism has occurred as a result of changes that took place following World War II. In this analysis, state terrorism exhibited as a form of foreign policy was shaped by the presence and use of weapons of mass destruction, and the legitimizing of such violent behavior led to an increasingly accepted form of this behavior by the state.
St Paul's Cathedral after the German bombing of London, c. 1940 Charles Stewart Parnell described William Ewart Gladstone's Irish Coercion Act as terrorism in his "no-Rent manifesto" in 1881, during the Irish Land War.
The concept is used to describe political repressions by governments against their own civilian populations with the purpose of inciting fear.
For example, taking and executing civilian hostages or extrajudicial elimination campaigns are commonly considered "terror" or terrorism, for example during the Red Terror or the Great Terror.
Such actions are often described as democide or genocide, which have been argued to be equivalent to state terrorism.
Empirical studies on this have found that democracies have little democide.
Western democracies, including the United States, have supported state terrorism and mass killings, with some examples being the Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 and Operation Condor.
Connection with tourism
The connection between terrorism and tourism has been widely studied since the Luxor massacre in Egypt.
In the 1970s, the targets of terrorists were politicians and chiefs of police while now, international tourists and visitors are selected as the main targets of attacks.
The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, were the symbolic center, which marked a new epoch in the use of civil transport against the main power of the planet.
From this event onwards, the spaces of leisure that characterized the pride of West were conceived as dangerous and frightful.
Funding
Main article: Terrorist financing
State sponsors have constituted a major form of funding; for example, Palestine Liberation Organization, Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and other groups sometimes considered to be terrorist organizations, were funded by the Soviet Union.
The Stern Gang received funding from Italian Fascist officers in Beirut to undermine the British authorities in Palestine.
"Revolutionary tax" is another major form of funding, and essentially a euphemism for "protection money". Revolutionary taxes "play a secondary role as one other means of intimidating the target population".
Other major sources of funding include kidnapping for ransoms, smuggling (including wildlife smuggling), fraud, and robbery.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has reportedly received funding "via private donations from the Gulf states".
The Financial Action Task Force is an inter-governmental body whose mandate, since October 2001, has included combating terrorist financing.
Tactics
Main article: Tactics of terrorism
The Wall Street bombing at noon on September 16, 1920, killed thirty-eight people and injured several hundred.
The perpetrators were never caught.
Terrorist attacks are often targeted to maximize fear and publicity, most frequently using explosives.
Terrorist groups usually methodically plan attacks in advance, and may train participants, plant undercover agents, and raise money from supporters or through organized crime.
Communications occur through modern telecommunications, or through old-fashioned methods such as couriers.
There is concern about terrorist attacks employing weapons of mass destruction.
Some academics have argued that while it is often assumed terrorism is intended to spread fear, this is not necessarily true, with fear instead being a by-product of the terrorist's actions, while their intentions may be to avenge fallen comrades or destroy their perceived enemies.
Terrorism is a form of asymmetric warfare, and is more common when direct conventional warfare will not be effective because opposing forces vary greatly in power.
Yuval Harari argues that the peacefulness of modern states makes them paradoxically more vulnerable to terrorism than pre-modern states.
Harari argues that because modern states have committed themselves to reducing political violence to almost zero, terrorists can, by creating political violence, threaten the very foundations of the legitimacy of the modern state.
This is in contrast to pre-modern states, where violence was a routine and recognised aspect of politics at all levels, making political violence unremarkable.
Terrorism thus shocks the population of a modern state far more than a pre-modern one and consequently the state is forced to overreact in an excessive, costly and spectacular manner, which is often what the terrorists desire.
The type of people terrorists will target is dependent upon the ideology of the terrorists.
A terrorist's ideology will create a class of "legitimate targets" who are deemed as its enemies and who are permitted to be targeted.
This ideology will also allow the terrorists to place the blame on the victim, who is viewed as being responsible for the violence in the first place.
The context in which terrorist tactics are used is often a large-scale, unresolved political conflict.
The type of conflict varies widely; historical examples include:
Secession of a territory to form a new sovereign state or become part of a different state
Dominance of territory or resources by various ethnic groups
Imposition of a particular form of government
Economic deprivation of a population
Opposition to a domestic government or occupying army
Religious fanaticism
Responses
Sign notifying shoppers of increased surveillance due to a perceived increased risk of terrorism
Responses to terrorism are broad in scope.
They can include re-alignments of the political spectrum and reassessments of fundamental values.
Specific types of responses include:
Targeted laws, criminal procedures, deportations, and enhanced police powers
Target hardening, such as locking doors or adding traffic barriers
Preemptive or reactive military action
Increased intelligence and surveillance activities
Preemptive humanitarian activities
More permissive interrogation and detention policies
The term "counter-terrorism" has a narrower connotation, implying that it is directed at terrorist actors.
Terrorism research
Terrorism research, also called terrorism studies, or terrorism and counter-terrorism research, is an interdisciplinary academic field which seeks to understand the causes of terrorism, how to prevent it as well as its impact in the broadest sense.
Terrorism research can be carried out in both military and civilian contexts, for example by research centres such as the British Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence, the Norwegian Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies, and the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism (ICCT). There are several academic journals devoted to the field, including Perspectives on Terrorism.
International agreements
One of the agreements that promote the international legal anti-terror framework is the Code of Conduct Towards Achieving a World Free of Terrorism that was adopted at the 73rd session of the United Nations General Assembly in 2018. The Code of Conduct was initiated by Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev.
Its main goal is to implement a wide range of international commitments to counter terrorism and establish a broad global coalition towards achieving a world free of terrorism by 2045. The Code was signed by more than 70 countries.
Response in the United States
See also: War on Terror
X-ray backscatter technology (AIT) machine used by the TSA to screen passengers.
According to the TSA, this is what the remote TSA agent would see on their screen.
According to a report by Dana Priest and William M. Arkin in The Washington Post, "Some 1,271 government organizations and 1,931 private companies work on programs related to counterterrorism, homeland security and intelligence in about 10,000 locations across the United States."
America's thinking on how to defeat radical Islamists is split along two very different schools of thought.
Republicans, typically follow what is known as the Bush Doctrine, advocate the military model of taking the fight to the enemy and seeking to democratize the Middle East.
Democrats, by contrast, generally propose the law enforcement model of better cooperation with nations and more security at home.
In the introduction of the U.S. Army / Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual, Sarah Sewall states the need for "U.S. forces to make securing the civilian, rather than destroying the enemy, their top priority.
The civilian population is the center of gravity—the deciding factor in the struggle.... Civilian deaths create an extended family of enemies—new insurgent recruits or informants—and erode support of the host nation." Sewall sums up the book's key points on how to win this battle: "Sometimes, the more you protect your force, the less secure you may be.... Sometimes, the more force is used, the less effective it is.... The more successful the counterinsurgency is, the less force can be used and the more risk must be accepted.... Sometimes, doing nothing is the best reaction." This strategy, often termed "courageous restraint", has certainly led to some success on the Middle East battlefield.
However, it does not address the fact that terrorists are mostly homegrown.
Mass media
Causes of death in the US vs media coverage.
The percentage of media attention for terrorism is much greater than the percentage of deaths caused by terrorism.
La Terroriste, a 1910 poster depicting a female member of the Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party throwing a bomb at a Russian official's car
Mass media exposure may be a primary goal of those carrying out terrorism, to expose issues that would otherwise be ignored by the media.
Some consider this to be manipulation and exploitation of the media.
The Internet has created a new way for groups to spread their messages.
This has created a cycle of measures and counter measures by groups in support of and in opposition to terrorist movements.
The United Nations has created its own online counter-terrorism resource.
The mass media will, on occasion, censor organizations involved in terrorism (through self-restraint or regulation) to discourage further terrorism.
This may encourage organizations to perform more extreme acts of terrorism to be shown in the mass media.
Conversely James F. Pastor explains the significant relationship between terrorism and the media, and the underlying benefit each receives from the other.
There is always a point at which the terrorist ceases to manipulate the media gestalt.
A point at which the violence may well escalate, but beyond which the terrorist has become symptomatic of the media gestalt itself.
Terrorism as we ordinarily understand it is innately media-related.— Novelist William Gibson, 2004Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher famously spoke of the close connection between terrorism and the media, calling publicity 'the oxygen of terrorism'.
Outcome of terrorist groups
How terrorist groups end (n = 268): The most common ending for a terrorist group is to convert to nonviolence via negotiations (43 percent), with most of the rest terminated by routine policing (40 percent). Groups that were ended by military force constituted only 7 percent.
Jones and Libicki (2008) created a list of all the terrorist groups they could find that were active between 1968 and 2006. They found 648. Of those, 136 splintered and 244 were still active in 2006. Of the ones that ended, 43 percent converted to nonviolent political actions, like the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland.
Law enforcement took out 40 percent.
Ten percent won.
Only 20 groups, 7 percent, were destroyed by military force.
Forty-two groups became large enough to be labeled an insurgency; 38 of those had ended by 2006. Of those, 47 percent converted to nonviolent political actors.
Only 5 percent were ended by law enforcement.
Twenty-six percent won.
Twenty-one percent succumbed to military force.
Jones and Libicki concluded that military force may be necessary to deal with large insurgencies but are only occasionally decisive, because the military is too often seen as a bigger threat to civilians than the terrorists.
To avoid that, the rules of engagement must be conscious of collateral damage and work to minimize it.
Another researcher, Audrey Cronin, lists six primary ways that terrorist groups end:
Capture or killing of a group's leader. (Decapitation).
Entry of the group into a legitimate political process. (Negotiation).
Achievement of group aims. (Success).
Group implosion or loss of public support. (Failure).
Defeat and elimination through brute force. (Repression).
Transition from terrorism into other forms of violence. (Reorientation).
Databases
The following terrorism databases are or were made publicly available for research purposes, and track specific acts of terrorism:
Global Terrorism Database, an open-source database by the University of Maryland, College Park on terrorist events around the world from 1970 through 2017 with more than 150,000 cases.
MIPT Terrorism Knowledge Base
Worldwide Incidents Tracking System
Tocsearch (dynamic database)
The following public report and index provides a summary of key global trends and patterns in terrorism around the world
Global Terrorism Index, produced annually by the Institute for Economics and Peace
The following publicly available resources index electronic and bibliographic resources on the subject of terrorism
Human Security Gateway
The following terrorism databases are maintained in secrecy by the United States Government for intelligence and counter-terrorism purposes:
Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment
Terrorist Screening Database
Jones and Libicki (2008) includes a table of 268 terrorist groups active between 1968 and 2006 with their status as of 2006: still active, splintered, converted to nonviolence, removed by law enforcement or military, or won. (These data are not in a convenient machine-readable format but are available.)
See also
Agro-terrorism
Archives of Terror
Communist terrorism
Crimes against humanity
Cyberterrorism
Definitions of terrorism
Domestic terrorism in the United States
Economic terrorism
Economics of terrorism
Environmental terrorism
Fearmongering
Government negotiation with terrorists
House of Terror
Left-wing terrorism
Right-wing terrorism
List of designated terrorist groups
List of terrorist incidents
Narcoterrorism
Nationalist terrorism
Nuclear terrorism
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
Police state
Religious terrorism
Hindutva terrorism
Islamic terrorism
Christian terrorism
Jewish religious terrorism
Victims of Acts of Terror Memorial
Violent extremism
Notes
Wisnewski, J. Jeremy, ed. (2008). Torture, Terrorism, and the Use of Violence (also available as Review Journal of Political Philosophy Volume 6, Issue Number 1). Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 175. ISBN 978-1-4438-0291-8.
Stevenson, Angus, ed. (2010). Oxford dictionary of English (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-957112-3.
Halibozek, Edward P.; Jones, Andy; Kovacich, Gerald L. (2008). The corporate security professional's handbook on terrorism (illustrated ed.). Elsevier (Butterworth-Heinemann). pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0-7506-8257-2. Retrieved December 17, 2016.
a b c d Mackey, Robert (November 20, 2009). "Can Soldiers Be Victims of Terrorism?". The New York Times.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. Terrorism is the deliberate killing of innocent people, at random, in order to spread fear through a whole population and force the hand of its political leaders.
a b Sinclair, Samuel Justin; Antonius, Daniel (2012). The Psychology of Terrorism Fears.
Oxford University Press, US. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-19-538811-4.
a b White, Jonathan R. (January 1, 2016). Terrorism and Homeland Security.
Cengage Learning. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-305-63377-3.
a b c d e Heryanto, Ariel (April 7, 2006). State Terrorism and Political Identity in Indonesia: Fatally Belonging.
Routledge. p. 161. ISBN 978-1-134-19569-5.
a b Ruthven, Malise; Nanji, Azim (April 24, 2017). Historical Atlas of Islam.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-01385-8.
"Terrorism". Encyclopædia Britannica. p. 3. Retrieved September 8, 2020.
a b Majoran, Andrew (August 1, 2014). "The Illusion of War: Is Terrorism a Criminal Act or an Act of War?". Mackenzie Institute.
Retrieved April 24, 2020.
a b c Jenny Teichman (1989). "How to Define Terrorism". Philosophy. 64 (250): 505–517. doi:10.1017/S0031819100044260. JSTOR 3751606. S2CID 144723359.
Eviatar, Daphne (June 13, 2013). "Is 'Terrorism' a War Crime Triable by Military Commission? Who Knows?". HuffPost.
Retrieved April 29, 2017.
"Global Terrorism Index 2015" (PDF). Institute for Economics and Peace. p. 33. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 7, 2019. Retrieved July 19, 2016.
a b Fine, Jonathan (2010). "Political and Philological Origins of the Term 'Terrorism' from the Ancient Near East to Our Times". Middle Eastern Studies. 46 (2): 271–288. doi:10.1080/00263201003619927. JSTOR 20720662. S2CID 143268246.
Palmer, R.R. (2014). "The French Directory Between Extremes". The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800. The Age of the Democratic Revolution.
Princeton University Press. pp. 544–567. ISBN 9780691161280. JSTOR j.ctt5hhrg5.29.
Kellner, Douglas (April 2004). "9/11, spectacles of terror, and media manipulation: A critique of Jihadist and Bush media politics". Critical Discourse Studies. 1 (1): 41–64. doi:10.1080/17405900410001674515. eISSN 1740-5912. ISSN 1740-5904.
a b Ken Duncan (2011). "A Blast from the Past Lessons from a Largely Forgotten Incident of State-Sponsored Terrorism". Perspectives on Terrorism. 5 (1): 3–21. JSTOR 26298499.
Crawford, Joseph (September 12, 2013). Gothic Fiction and the Invention of Terrorism: The Politics and Aesthetics of Fear in the Age of the Reign of Terror.
Bloomsbury Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4725-0912-3.
Houen, Alex (September 12, 2002). "Introduction". Terrorism and Modern Literature: From Joseph Conrad to Ciaran Carson.
OUP Oxford.
ISBN 978-0-19-154198-8.
Thackrah, John Richard (2013). Dictionary of Terrorism.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-135-16595-6.
Edmund Burke – To The Earl Fitzwilliam (Christmas, 1795.) In: Edmund Burke, Select Works of Edmund Burke, vol. 3 (Letters on a Regicide Peace) (1795).This Internet version contains two, mingled, indications of page numbers: one with single brackets like , one with double brackets like [  ]. Burke lengthily introduces his view on 'this present Directory government', and then writes on page : "Those who arbitrarily erected the new building out of the old materials of their own Convention, were obliged to send for an Army to support their work. (...) At length, after a terrible struggle, the Troops prevailed over the Citizens. (...) This power is to last as long as the Parisians think proper. (...)  To secure them further, they have a strong corps of irregulars, ready armed.
Thousands of those Hell-hounds called Terrorists, whom they had shut up in Prison on their last Revolution, as the Satellites of Tyranny, are let loose on the people. (...)"
Peleg, Ilan (1988). "Terrorism in the Middle East: The Case of the Arab-Israeli Conflict".  In Stohl, Michael (ed.). The Politics of Terrorism (Third ed.). CRC Press. p. 531. ISBN 978-0-8247-7814-9. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
Crenshaw, Martha (2010). Terrorism in Context.
Penn State Press. p. xiii.
ISBN 978-0-271-04442-2. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
Shabad, Goldie; Llera Ramo, Francisco Jose (2010). "Political Violence in a Democratic State: Basque Terrorism in Spain".  In Crenshaw, Martha (ed.). Terrorism in Context.
ISBN 9780271044422. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
Corrado, Raymond R.; Evans, Rebecca (January 29, 1988). "Ethnic and Ideological Terrorism in Western Europe".  In Stohl, Michael (ed.). The Politics of Terrorism (Third ed.). p. 373. ISBN 9780824778149. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
Khaled, Leila (September 18, 1970). "This is Your New Captain Speaking". Life. p. 34. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
Committee on the Judiciary, Terroristic Activity: International terrorism; Lester A. Sobel, Political Terrorism; Lauran Paine, The Terrorists (1975); Walter Laqueur, Guerrilla Warfare: A Historical and Critical Study; Paul Wilkinson, Terrorism versus liberal democracy: the problems of response; Albert Parry, Terrorism: from Robespierre to Arafat (1976); Ovid Demaris, Brothers in Blood: The International Terrorist Network (1977); Yonah Alexander, David Carlton and Paul Wilkinson, Terrorism: Theory and Practice; Christopher Dobson and Ronald Payne, The Weapons of Terror: International Terrorism at Work; Brian Michael Jenkins, The Terrorist Mindset and Terrorist Decisionmaking (1979)
Faimau, Gabriel (July 26, 2013). Socio-Cultural Construction of Recognition: The Discursive Representation of Islam and Muslims in the British Christian News Media.
Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-4438-5104-6.
Campo, Juan Eduardo (January 1, 2009). Encyclopedia of Islam.
Infobase Publishing. p. xxii.
ISBN 978-1-4381-2696-8.
Örtenwall, Per; Almgren, Ola; Deverell, Edward (2003). "The bomb explosion in Myyrmanni, Finland 2002". International Journal of Disaster Medicine. 1 (2): 120. doi:10.1080/15031430310029062. ISSN 1503-1438.
a b Arie W. Kruglanski and Shira Fishman Current Directions in Psychological Science Vol. 15, No. 1 (Feb. 2006), pp. 45–48
Hoffman 2006, p. 34.
Aust, Anthony (2010). Handbook of International Law (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 265. ISBN 978-0-521-13349-4.
"UN Reform". United Nations.
March 21, 2005. Archived from the original on April 27, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2008. The second part of the report, entitled "Freedom from Fear backs the definition of terrorism–an issue so divisive agreement on it has long eluded the world community – as any action "intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants with the purpose of intimidating a population or compelling a government or an international organization to do or abstain from doing any act"
a b Hoffman 1998, p. 32.
"Radicalisation, De-Radicalisation, Counter-Radicalisation: A Conceptual Discussion and Literature Review". The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism – The Hague (ICCT). March 27, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2016.
Angus Martyn, The Right of Self-Defence under International Law-the Response to the Terrorist Attacks of 11 September, Australian Law and Bills Digest Group, Parliament of Australia Web Site, February 12, 2002. Archived February 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
Diaz-Paniagua (2008), Negotiating terrorism: The negotiation dynamics of four UN counter-terrorism treaties, 1997–2005, p. 47.
1994 United Nations Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism annex to UN General Assembly resolution 49/60, "Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism", of December 9, 1994, UN Doc. A/Res/60/49.
"22 U.S. Code § 2656f – Annual country reports on terrorism". LII / Legal Information Institute.
"18 U.S. Code § 2331 – Definitions". LII / Legal Information Institute.
Bockstette, Carsten (2008). "Jihadist Terrorist Use of Strategic Communication Management Techniques" (PDF). George C. Marshall Center Occasional Paper Series (20). ISSN 1863-6039. Retrieved January 1, 2009.
Juergensmeyer, Mark (2000). Terror in the Mind of God.
University of California Press. pp. 125–135. ISBN 9780520223011.
Bardach, Ann Louis; Rohter, Larry (July 13, 1998). "A Bomber's Tale: Decades of Intrigue". The New York Times.
"Number of Terrorist Attacks, Fatalities". The Washington Post.
June 12, 2009. Retrieved January 11, 2010. The nation's deadliest terrorist acts – attacks designed to achieve a political goal
"Terrorism in the United States 1999" (PDF). Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Archived from the original (PDF) on July 9, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2008.
"/Iraq accuses US of state terrorism". BBC News.
February 20, 2002. Retrieved January 11, 2010. Iraq has accused the United States of state terrorism amid signs that the war of words between the two countries is heating up.
Mendelsohn, Barak (January 2005). "Sovereignty under attack: the international society meets the Al Qaeda network (abstract)". Cambridge Journals.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. This article examines the complex relations between a violent non-state actor, the Al Qaeda network, and order in the international system.
Al Qaeda poses a challenge to the sovereignty of specific states but it also challenges the international society as a whole.
Khan, Ali (October 8, 2006). "A Theory of International Terrorism". Connecticut Law Review. 19: 945 – via Social Science Research Network.
Feline Freier, Luisa; Castillo Jara, Soledad (January 13, 2021). ""Terruqueo" and Peru's Fear of the Left". Americas Quarterly.
Retrieved November 18, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
"Qué es el "terruqueo" en Perú y cómo influye en la disputa presidencial entre Fujimori y Castillo". BBC News (in Spanish). Retrieved November 18, 2021.
Asensio, Raúl; Camacho, Gabriela; González, Natalia; Grompone, Romeo; Pajuelo Teves, Ramón; Peña Jimenez, Omayra; Moscoso, Macarena; Vásquez, Yerel; Sosa Villagarcia, Paolo (August 2021). El Profe: Cómo Pedro Castillo se convirtió en presidente del Perú y qué pasará a continuación (in Spanish) (1 ed.). Lima, Peru: Institute of Peruvian Studies. pp. 13–24. ISBN 978-612-326-084-2. Retrieved November 17, 2021.
a b Reynolds, Paul; quoting David Hannay; Former UK ambassador (September 14, 2005). "UN staggers on road to reform". BBC News.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. This would end the argument that one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter ...
a b Rodin, David (2006). "Terrorism". In E. Craig (Ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
London: Routledge.
Steinfels, Peter (March 1, 2003). "Beliefs; The just-war tradition, its last-resort criterion and the debate on an invasion of Iraq". The New York Times.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. For those like Professor Walzer who value the just-war tradition as a disciplined way to think about the morality of war ...
Bonner, Raymond (November 1, 1998). "Getting Attention: A scholar's historical and political survey of terrorism finds that it works". Books.
The New York Times.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. Inside Terrorism falls into the category of 'must read,' at least for anyone who wants to understand how we can respond to international acts of terror.
Malayan People's Anti-Japanese Army Archived March 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Britannica Concise.
Dr Chris Clark "Malayan Emergency, 16 June 1948". Archived from the original on June 8, 2007., June 16, 2003.
Ronald Reagan, speech to National Conservative Political Action Conference Archived August 20, 2006, at the Wayback Machine March 8, 1985. On the Spartacus Educational web site.
"President Meets with Afghan Interim Authority Chairman". Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov.
January 29, 2002. Retrieved August 10, 2009.
President Discusses Progress in War on Terrorism to National Guard White House web site February 9, 2006.
"An unbiased look at terrorism in Afghanistan [in 2009] reveals that many of these 'terrorists' individuals or groups were once 'freedom fighters' struggling against the Soviets during the 1980s." (Chouvy, Pierre-Arnaud (2009). Opium: Uncovering the Politics of the Poppy (illustrated, reprint ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-674-05134-8.)
Sudha Ramachandran Death behind the wheel in Iraq Asian Times, November 12, 2004, "Insurgent groups that use suicide attacks therefore do not like their attacks to be described as suicide terrorism.
They prefer to use terms like "martyrdom ..."
Alex Perry How Much to Tip the Terrorist? Time, September 26, 2005. "The Tamil Tigers would dispute that tag, of course.
Like other guerrillas and suicide bombers, they prefer the term "freedom fighters".
Terrorism: concepts, causes, and conflict resolution George Mason University Institute for Conflict Analysis and Resolution, Printed by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, Fort Belvoir, Virginia, January 2003.
Quinney, Nigel; Coyne, A. Heather (2011). Peacemaker's Toolkit Talking to Groups that Use Terrorism (PDF). United States Institute of Peace.
ISBN 978-1-60127-072-6. Retrieved December 11, 2016.
Theodore P. Seto The Morality of Terrorism Includes a list in The Times published on July 23, 1946, which were described as Jewish terrorist actions, including those launched by Irgun, of which Begin was a leading member.
BBC News: Profiles: Menachem Begin BBC website "Under Begin's command, the underground terrorist group Irgun carried out numerous acts of violence."
Ahmad, Eqbal (January 2002). "Straight talk on terrorism". Monthly Review.
Archived from the original on February 5, 2012. Retrieved September 10, 2006. ...including Menachem Begin, appearing in "Wanted" posters saying, "Terrorists, reward this much." The highest reward I have seen offered was 100,000 British pounds for the head of Menachem Begin.
Lord Desai Hansard, House of Lords Archived March 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine September 3, 1998 : Column 72, "However, Jomo Kenyatta, Nelson Mandela and Menachem Begin – to give just three examples – were all denounced as terrorists but all proved to be successful political leaders of their countries and good friends of the United Kingdom."
BBC NEWS:World: Americas: UN reforms receive mixed response BBC website "Of all groups active in recent times, the ANC perhaps represents best the traditional dichotomous view of armed struggle.
Once regarded by western governments as a terrorist group, it now forms the legitimate, elected government of South Africa, with Nelson Mandela one of the world's genuinely iconic figures."
BBC NEWS: World: Africa: Profile: Nelson Mandela BBC website "Nelson Mandela remains one of the world's most revered statesman".
Beckford, Martin (November 30, 2010). "Hunt WikiLeaks founder like al-Qaeda and Taliban Leaders". The Daily Telegraph.
London.
Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2011.
MacAskill, Ewen (December 19, 2010). "Julian Assange like a hi-tech terrorist". The Guardian.
London.
Retrieved January 7, 2011.
"Quinn v.
Robinson, 783 F2d. 776 (9th Cir. 1986)". Uniset.ca.
Retrieved November 23, 2010.
McCabe, Zachary E. (August 25, 2003). "Northern Ireland: The paramilitaries, Terrorism, and September 11th" (PDF). Queen's University Belfast School of Law. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 1, 2007.
"Guardian and Observer style guide: T". The Guardian.
London.
December 19, 2008. Retrieved April 9, 2014.
"BBC Editorial Guidelines on Language when Reporting Terrorism". BBC. Archived from the original on December 30, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2011.
"Nashville Bombing Revives Debate Over Which Acts Get Terrorism Label". NPR.
a b Parrikar, Manohar. "PM Modi's vow to avenge Uri won't remain just words". The Times of India.
Hoffman 1988, p. 83.
Chaliand, Gerard.
The History of Terrorism: From Antiquity to al Qaeda.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007. p. 56
Hoffman 1988, p. 167.
a b c Crenshaw, Martha, Terrorism in Context, p. 38.
"Terrorism: From the Fenians to Al Qaeda". Archived from the original on December 3, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
Irish Freedom, by Richard English Publisher: Pan Books (2007), ISBN 0-330-42759-8 p. 179
Irish Freedom, by Richard English Publisher: Pan Books (November 2, 2007), ISBN 0-330-42759-8 p. 180
Whelehan, Niall (2012). The Dynamiters: Irish Nationalism and Political Violence in the Wider World 1867–1900. Cambridge.
"The Fenian Dynamite campaign 1881–85". Retrieved December 17, 2012.
"Center for Defense Information". Project On Government Oversight.
Archived from the original on May 11, 2012.
Hoffman 1998, p. 5.
A History of Terrorism, by Walter Laqueur, Transaction Publishers, 2000, ISBN 0-7658-0799-8, p. 92 
Adam Roberts (September 18, 2014). "The Changing Faces of Terrorism". BBC – History.
Retrieved December 1, 2017.
Rapoport, David C., ed. (2017). "Terrorism as a Global Wave Phenomenon: An Overview". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics.
New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.299. ISBN 9780190228637.
"TE-SAT 2011 EU Terrorism Situation and Trend Report" (PDF). Europol. 2011. Retrieved December 1, 2017.
"TE-SAT 2010 Terrorism Situation and Trend Report" (PDF). Europol. 2010. Retrieved December 1, 2017.
"TE-SAT 2009 Terrorism Situation and Trend Report" (PDF). Europol. 2009. Retrieved December 1, 2017.
"Disorders and Terrorism" (PDF). National Advisory Committee on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals. 1976. pp. 3–6.
"Why do terrorists claim credit for some attacks but not others?". The Economist.
February 1, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2021.
"Quasi-terrorism". Mukkulreddy.wordpress.com.
March 24, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2016.
"Types of Terrorism". Crime Museum.
Retrieved July 13, 2016.
"TERRORISM". Earth Dashboard.
Retrieved July 13, 2016.
Purpura, Philip P. (2007). Terrorism and homeland security: an introduction with applications.
Butterworth-Heinemann. pp. 16–19. ISBN 978-0-7506-7843-8.
Hudson, Rex A. Who Becomes a Terrorist and Why: The 1999 Government Report on Profiling Terrorists, Federal Research Division, The Lyons Press, 2002.
Barry Scheider, Jim Davis, Avoiding the abyss: progress, shortfalls and the way ahead in combatting the WMD threat, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2009 p. 60.
a b The Psychology Of Terrorism, audio interview summarizing Special Report: The Psychology of Terrorism
Madigan, Michael L. (December 6, 2017). Handbook of Emergency Management Concepts: A Step-by-Step Approach.
CRC Press.
ISBN 9781351337472.
Janeczko, Matthew (June 19, 2014). "'Faced with death, even a mouse bites': Social and religious motivations behind terrorism in Chechnya": 428–456. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Gill, Paul; Horgan, John; Deckert, Paige (March 1, 2014). "Bombing Alone: Tracing the Motivations and Antecedent Behaviors of Lone-Actor Terrorists". Journal of Forensic Sciences. 59 (2): 425–435. doi:10.1111/1556-4029.12312. PMC 4217375. PMID 24313297.
Merari, Ariel (2006). "Psychological Aspects of Suicide Terrorism," in Bruce Bongar et al., Psychology of Terrorism.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Atran, Scott (2004). "Mishandling Suicide Terrorism". The Washington Quarterly. 27 (3): 67–90. doi:10.1162/016366004323090269. S2CID 155714216.
a b Abrahms, Max (March 2008). "What Terrorists Really Want: Terrorist Motives and Counterterrorism Strategy" (PDF 1933 KB). International Security. 32 (4): 86–89. doi:10.1162/isec.2008.32.4.78. ISSN 0162-2889. S2CID 57561190. Retrieved November 4, 2008.
Mousseau, Michael (2002). "Market Civilization and its Clash with Terror". International Security. 27 (3): 5–29. doi:10.1162/01622880260553615. S2CID 26190384.
"Many terrorists' first victims are their wives – but we're not allowed to talk about that". June 7, 2017. New Statesman
"Freedom squelches terrorist violence: Harvard Gazette Archives". Archived from the original on September 19, 2015.
"Freedom squelches terrorist violence: Harvard Gazette Archives" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 21, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2008.
"Poverty, Political Freedom, and the Roots of Terrorism" (PDF). 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 21, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2008.
"Unemployment, Inequality and Terrorism: Another Look at the Relationship between Economics and Terrorism" (PDF). 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 14, 2007. Retrieved December 28, 2008.
"Basque Terrorist Group Marks 50th Anniversary with New Attacks". Time.
July 31, 2009. Archived from the original on August 4, 2009. Retrieved January 11, 2010. Europe's longest-enduring terrorist group.
This week, ETA (the initials stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom in Euskera, the Basque language)
Timothy Snyder.
A fascist hero in democratic Kiev.
New York Review of Books.
February 24, 2010
Romero, Simon (March 18, 2009). "Shining Path". The New York Times.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. The Shining Path, a faction of Peruvian militants, has resurfaced in the remote corners of the Andes.
The war against the group, which took nearly 70,000 lives, supposedly ended in 2000. ... In the 1980s, the rebels were infamous for atrocities like planting bombs on donkeys in crowded markets, assassinations and other terrorist tactics.
"1983: Car bomb in South Africa kills 16". BBC. May 20, 2005. Retrieved January 11, 2010. The outlawed anti-apartheid group the African National Congress has been blamed for the attack ... He said the explosion was the "biggest and ugliest" terrorist incident since anti-government violence began in South Africa 20 years ago.
Young, Rick (May 16, 2007). "PBS Frontline: 'Spying on the Home Front'". PBS: Frontline.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. ... we and Frontline felt that it was important to look more comprehensively at the post-9/11 shift to prevention and the dilemma we all now face in balancing security and privacy.
Yager, Jordy (July 25, 2010). "Former intel chief: Homegrown terrorism is a devil of a problem". thehill.com.
shabad, goldie and francisco jose llera ramo. "Political Violence in a Democratic State", Terrorism in Context.
Ed.
Martha Crenshaw.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University, 1995. p. 467.
"Pakistan: A failed state or a clever gambler?". BBC News.
May 7, 2011.
a b Arnett, George (November 19, 2014). "Religious extremism main cause of terrorism, according to report". The Guardian.
Retrieved March 22, 2017.
Global Terrorism Index 2016 (PDF). Institute for Economics and Peace. 2016. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 17, 2019. Retrieved December 14, 2016.
Siddiqui, Mona (August 23, 2014). "Isis: a contrived ideology justifying barbarism and sexual control". The Guardian.
Archived from the original on August 24, 2014. Retrieved January 7, 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
Agence France Press "Two bomb blasts kill 27 in northwest Pakistan".
"Fatwa issued against suicide bombings, targeted killings and terrorism". Lahore.
July 2, 2013.
Lenz, Ryan (February 2015). Age of the Wolf (PDF) (Report). Southern Poverty Law Center. p. 4. Retrieved March 22, 2017. A large number of independent studies have agreed that since the 9/11 mass murder, more people have been killed in America by non-Islamic domestic terrorists than jihadists.
a b c d e f "". Anti-Defamation League 2017.
"Bigotry Behind Bars: Racist Groups In U.S. Prisons". Archived from the original on July 29, 2015.
Perlmutter, Philip (1999). Legacy of Hate: A Short History of Ethnic, Religious, and Racial Prejudice in America. M. E. Sharpe. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-7656-0406-4. Kenneth T. Jackson, in his The Ku Klux Klan in the City 1915–1930, reminds us that 'virtually every' Protestant denomination denounced the KKK, but that most KKK members were not 'innately depraved or anxious to subvert American institutions', but rather believed their membership in keeping with 'one-hundred percent Americanism' and Christian morality.
Martin Gilbert.
Churchill and the Jew Quotings. p. 270.
Pope Brewer, Sam.
Irgun Bomb Kills 11 Arabs, 2 Britons.
New York Times.
December 30, 1947.
Parker, Ned; Farrell, Stephen (July 20, 2006). "British anger at terror celebration". The Times.
London.
Retrieved May 5, 2010.
Calder Walton (2008). "British Intelligence and the Mandate of Palestine: Threats to British national security immediately after the Second World War". Intelligence and National Security. 23 (4): 435–462. doi:10.1080/02684520802293049. S2CID 154775965.
Heller, J. (1995). The Stern Gang.
Frank Cass.
ISBN 0-7146-4558-3
Cleveland, William L. A History of the Modern Middle East.
Boulder, CO: Westview, 2004. Print. p. 243
Spaaij 2012, p. 68.
Sageman, Mark (2004). Understanding Terror Networks.
International Journal of Emergency Mental Health.
Vol. 7. Philadelphia: U. of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 166–167. ISBN 978-0-8122-3808-2. PMID 15869076.
Prof.
Dr.
Edwin Bakker; Jeanine de Roy van Zuijdewijn (February 29, 2016). "Personal Characteristics of Lone-Actor Terrorists". Retrieved September 6, 2016.
Levitt, Steven D.; Dubner, Stephen J. (2009). Superfreakonomics: global cooling, patriotic prostitutes, and why suicide bombers should buy life insurance.
William Morrow. pp. 62, 231. ISBN 978-0-06-088957-9. citing Alan B. Krueger, What Makes a Terrorist (Princeton University Press 2007); Claude Berrebi, "Evidence About the Link Between Education, Poverty, and Terrorism among Palestinians", Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working paper, 2003 and Krueger and Jita Maleckova, "Education, Poverty and Terrorism: Is There a Causal Connection?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 no. 4 Fall 2003 / 63.
Coughlan, Sean (August 21, 2006). "Fear of the unknown". BBC News.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. A passenger on the flight, Heath Schofield, explained the suspicions: "It was a return holiday flight, full of people in flip-flops and shorts.
There were just two people in the whole crowd who looked like they didn't belong there."
a b Library of Congress – Federal Research Division The Sociology and Psychology of Terrorism.
"Background Report: ETA Ceasefires by the Numbers" (PDF). The National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START). Retrieved November 12, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
"State Sponsored Terrorism". trackingterrorism.org.
Retrieved May 28, 2017.
Endgame: Resistance, by Derrick Jensen, Seven Stories Press, 2006, ISBN 1-58322-730-X, p. ix.
"Pds Sso" (PDF). Eprints.unimelb.edu.au.
Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2008. Retrieved August 10, 2009.
"Addressing Security Council, Secretary-General Calls on Counter-Terrorism Committee To Develop Long-Term Strategy To Defeat Terror". United Nations.
Retrieved August 10, 2009.
Lind, Michael (May 2, 2005). "The Legal Debate is Over: Terrorism is a War Crime | The New America Foundation". Newamerica.net.
Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2009.
"Press conference with Kofi Annan & FM Kamal Kharrazi". United Nations.
January 26, 2002. Retrieved August 10, 2009.
Stohl, Michael (April 1, 1984). "The Superpowers and International Terror". International Studies Association, Atlanta.
Stohl, Michael (1988). "Terrible beyond Endurance? The Foreign Policy of State Terrorism". International Studies Association, Atlanta.
Stohl, Michael (1984). "The State as Terrorist: The Dynamics of Governmental Violence and Repression". International Studies Association, Atlanta. p. 49.
"The 'No Rent' Manifesto.; Text of the Document Issued by the Land League". The New York Times.
August 2, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2009.
Nicolas Werth, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Panné, Jean-Louis Margolin, Andrzej Paczkowski, Stéphane Courtois, The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression, Harvard University Press, 1999, hardcover, 858 pp., ISBN 0-674-07608-7
Kisangani, E.; Nafziger, E. Wayne (2007). "The Political Economy of State Terror". Defence and Peace Economics. 18 (5): 405–414. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.579.1472. doi:10.1080/10242690701455433. S2CID 155020309.
Death by Government by R.J. Rummel New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1994. Online links:   
No Lessons Learned from the Holocaust?, Barbara Harff, 2003. Archived October 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
Blakeley, Ruth (2009). State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South.
Routledge. pp. 4, 20–23, 88. ISBN 978-0-415-68617-4.
Valentino, Benjamin A. (2005). Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century.
Cornell University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8014-7273-2.
Bevins, Vincent (2020). The Jakarta Method: Washington's Anticommunist Crusade and the Mass Murder Program that Shaped Our World.
PublicAffairs. p. 238. ISBN 978-1541742406.
Simpson, Bradley (2010). Economists with Guns: Authoritarian Development and U.S.–Indonesian Relations, 1960–1968. Stanford University Press. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-8047-7182-5. Washington did everything in its power to encourage and facilitate the army-led massacre of alleged PKI members, and U.S. officials worried only that the killing of the party's unarmed supporters might not go far enough, permitting Sukarno to return to power and frustrate the [Johnson] Administration's emerging plans for a post-Sukarno Indonesia.
This was efficacious terror, an essential building block of the neoliberal policies that the West would attempt to impose on Indonesia after Sukarno's ouster
Mark Aarons (2007). "Justice Betrayed: Post-1945 Responses to Genocide." In David A. Blumenthal and Timothy L.H. McCormack (eds). The Legacy of Nuremberg: Civilising Influence or Institutionalised Vengeance? (International Humanitarian Law). Archived January 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
ISBN 90-04-15691-7 pp. 71 & 80–81
McSherry, J. Patrice (2011). "Chapter 5: "Industrial repression" and Operation Condor in Latin America".  In Esparza, Marcia; Huttenbach, Henry R.; Feierstein, Daniel (eds.). State Violence and Genocide in Latin America: The Cold War Years (Critical Terrorism Studies). Routledge. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-415-66457-8.
Sönmez, S.F.; Apostolopoulos, Y.; Tarlow, P. (1999). "Tourism in crisis: Managing the effects of terrorism" (PDF). Journal of Travel Research. 38 (1): 13–18. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.465.286. doi:10.1177/004728759903800104. S2CID 154984322.
Tarlow, P.E. (2006). "Tourism and Terrorism". In Wilks J, Pendergast D & Leggat P. (Eds) Tourism in turbulent times: Towards safe experiences for visitors (Advances in Tourism Research), Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 80–82.
Bianchi, R (2006). "Tourism and the globalisation of fear: Analysing the politics of risk and (in) security in global travel". Tourism and Hospitality Research. 7 (1): 64–74. doi:10.1057/palgrave.thr.6050028. S2CID 154888544.
Floyd, M. et al. (2003). "The Effects of Risk Perception on Intention to Travel in the Aftermath of September 11, 2001". In Safety and Security in Tourism: relationships, Management and Marketing, (Eds) Hall, M. Timothy, D. y Duval, T. New York: Haworth Hospitality Press
Brun, W.; Wolff, K.; Larsen, S. (2011). "Tourist worries after terrorist attacks: Report from a field experiment". Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism. 11 (3): 387–394. doi:10.1080/15022250.2011.593365. S2CID 143842574.
a b c d Detection of Terrorist Financing Archived August 14, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), 2002.
Lott, Jeremy (October 6, 2004). "Tripped Up". Reason Magazine.
Retrieved January 11, 2010. and before the Soviet Union fell, terrorist organizations were funding themselves through subsidies from Communist governments
"Aims and activities of the Stern Group in Palestine". Research and Analysis Branch. 2717 (R & N). December 1, 1944.
Gerben Jan Gerbrandy claiming that terrorist networks hunt wildlife for funding themselves Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
"Syria's top Islamist and jihadist groups". France 24.
"Terrorist Financing". The Financial Action Task Force.
Retrieved January 7, 2011.
Gage, Beverly (2009). The Day Wall Street Exploded: A Story of America in its First Age of Terror.
New York: Oxford University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-19-975928-6.
Suicide bombings are the most effective terrorist act in this regard.
See the following works:
Hoffman, Bruce (June 2003). "The Logic of Suicide Terrorism". Atlantic Monthly.
Vol. 291, no. 5. pp. 40–47.
Pape, Robert A. (2003). "The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism" (reprint). American Political Science Review. 97 (3): 343–361. doi:10.1017/s000305540300073x. hdl:1811/31746. S2CID 1019730.
Ricolfi, Luca (2005). "Palestinians 1981–2003".  In Gambetta, Diego (ed.). Making Sense of Suicide Missions (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 76–130. ISBN 978-0-19-927699-8.
Cited in Richardson, Louise (2006). What Terrorists Want: Understanding the Terrorist Threat.
London: John Murray. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7195-6306-5.
Kurtulus, Ersun N. "Terrorism and fear: do terrorists really want to scare?." Critical Studies on Terrorism 10, no. 3 (2017): 501–522.
"Hackers warn high street chains". BBC News.
April 25, 2008. Retrieved January 11, 2010. That's the beauty of asymmetric warfare.
You don't need a lot of money, or an army of people.
Harari, Yuval Noah.
Homo Deus: A brief history of tomorrow.
Random House, 2016, pp.103–106
Drake, Charles JM. "The role of ideology in terrorists’ target selection." Terrorism and Political Violence 10, no. 2 (1998): 53–85.
Hoffman, Bruce. "The contrasting ethical foundations of terrorism in the 1980s." Terrorism and Political Violence 1, no. 3 (1989): 361–377, p.8
Tinnes, J (2013). "100 Core and Periphery Journals for Terrorism Research". Perspectives on Terrorism. 7 (2). Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2015.
Freedman, Benjamin (November 2010). "Terrorism Research Centres: 100 Institutes, Programs and Organisations in the Field of Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism, Radicalisation and Asymmetric Warfare Studies" (PDF). Perspectives on Terrorism. 4 (5): 48–56. JSTOR 26298483.
"70 countries sign Counter-Terrorism Code initiated by Kazakhstan". inform.kz.
November 8, 2018.
Priest, Dana; Arkin, William (July 19, 2010). "A hidden world, growing beyond control". The Washington Post.
Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2010.
a b Ankony, Robert C., "A New Strategy for America's War on Terrorism", Patrolling magazine, 75th Ranger Regiment Association, Winter 2011, 56–57.
Sewall, Sarah, introduction to The U.S. Army / Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, (2007).
The Media and Terrorism: A Reassessment Paul Wilkinson.
Terrorism and Political Violence, Vol. 9, No. 2 (Summer 1997), pp. 51–64 Published by Frank Cass, London.
Dr.
Bibi van Ginkel (March 31, 2015). "Responding to Cyber Jihad: Towards an Effective Counter Narrative". The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism – The Hague (ICCT). Retrieved September 7, 2016.
"Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee". Retrieved June 17, 2009.
Pastor, James F. (2009). Terrorism & Public Safety Policing: Implications of the Obama Presidency.
New York: Taylor & Francis.
ISBN 978-1-4398-1580-9.
William Gibson's blog, October 31, 2004. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
"Speech to American Bar Association | Margaret Thatcher Foundation". , 2015.
The researchers found 648 terrorist groups active between 1968 and 2006.  Of those, 136 splintered and 244 were still active in 2006 (Jones and Libicki, 2008, p. 19)
Jones and Libicki (2008, p. 19)
Jones and Libicki (2008, p. 101, Table 5.4)
Cronin, Audrey Kurth (2009). How Terrorism Ends: Understanding the Decline and Demise of Terrorist Campaigns.
Princeton U. Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-13948-7.
References
Hoffman, Bruce (1988). Inside Terrorism.
New York: Columbia University Press.[verification needed]
Hoffman, Bruce (1998). "Inside Terrorism". Columbia University Press. p. 32. ISBN 0-231-11468-0. Retrieved January 11, 2010.
Hoffman, Bruce (1998a). "Chapter One". Inside Terrorism.
Retrieved January 11, 2010 – via The New York Times.
Hoffman, Bruce (2006). Inside Terrorism (2nd ed.). Columbia University Press.
Spaaij, Ramon (2012). Understanding Lone Wolf Terrorism: Global Patterns, Motivations and Prevention.
Perspectives on Terrorism's Bibliography: Root Causes of Terrorism. 2017. Archived October 22, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
Further reading
Bakker, Edwin.
Forecasting the Unpredictable: A Review of Forecasts on Terrorism 2000–2012 (International Centre for Counter-Terrorism – The Hague, 2014)
Bowie, Neil G. (April 2021). "40 Terrorism Databases and Data Sets: A New Inventory" (PDF). Perspectives on Terrorism.
Leiden University.
XV (2). ISSN 2334-3745.
Burleigh, Michael.
Blood and rage: a cultural history of terrorism.
Harper, 2009.
Chaliand, Gérard and Arnaud Blin, eds.
The history of terrorism: from antiquity to al Qaeda.
University of California Press, 2007.
Coates, Susan W., Rosenthal, Jane, and  Schechter, Daniel S. September 11: Trauma and Human Bonds.
New York: Taylor and Francis, Inc., 2003.
Crenshaw, Martha, ed.
Terrorism in context.
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995.
Jones, Seth G.; Libicki, Martin C. (2008), How Terrorist Groups End: Lessons for Countering al Qa'ida (PDF), RAND Corporation, ISBN 978-0-8330-4465-5
Hennigfeld, Ursula/ Packard, Stephan, ed., Abschied von 9/11? Distanznahme zur Katastrophe.
Berlin: Frank & Timme, 2013.
Hennigfeld, Ursula, ed., Poetiken des Terrors.
Narrative des 11. September 2001 im interkulturellen Vergleich.
Heidelberg: Winter, 2014.
Jones, Sidney.
Terrorism: myths and facts.
Jakarta: International Crisis Group, 2013.
Land, Isaac, ed., Enemies of humanity : the nineteenth-century war on terrorism.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
Lee, Newton.
Counterterrorism and Cybersecurity: Total Information Awareness (2nd Edition). New York: Springer, 2015. ISBN 978-3-319-17243-9
Lutz, James and Brenda Lutz.
Terrorism : origins and evolution.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005
Miller, Martin A. The foundations of modern terrorism : state, society and the dynamics of political violence.
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Nairn, Tom; James, Paul (2005). Global Matrix: Nationalism, Globalism and State-Terrorism.
London and New York: Pluto Press.
Neria, Yuval, Gross, Raz, Marshall, Randall D., and Susser, Ezra.
September 11, 2001: Treatment, Research and Public Mental Health in the Wake of a Terrorist Attack.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Schmid, Alex P. (November 2020). Handbook of Terrorism Prevention and Preparedness.
International Centre for Counter-Terrorism. doi:10.19165/2020.6.01 (inactive July 31, 2022). ISBN 9789090339771. ISSN 2468-0486.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2022 (link) An open-access publication, issued since November 2020 on the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism  (ICCT) website, with a chapter published each week.
Stern, Jessica.
The Ultimate Terrorists.
First Harvard University Press Pbk. ed.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000, cop. 1995. 214 p.
ISBN 0-674-00394-2
Tausch, Arno, Estimates on the Global Threat of Islamic State Terrorism in the Face of the 2015 Paris and Copenhagen Attacks (December 11, 2015). Middle East Review of International Affairs, Rubin Center, Research in International Affairs, Idc Herzliya, Israel, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Spring 2015).
Terrorism, Law & Democracy: 10 years after 9/11, Canadian Institute for the Administration of Justice.
ISBN 978-2-9809728-7-4.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Terrorism.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Terrorism.
Look up terrorism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Library resources about  Terrorism 
Online books
Resources in your library
United Nations: Conventions on Terrorism
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: "Conventions against terrorism". Archived from the original on August 5, 2007.
UNODC – United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime – Terrorism Prevention
Terrorism and international humanitarian law, International Committee of the Red Cross
UK Counter Terrorism Policing
TerrorismMain articles
Definitions
History of terrorism
International conventions
Anti-terrorism legislation
Counter-terrorism
War on Terror
By ideology
Communist
Environmental
Left-wing
Right-wing
Ethnic violence
Palestinian
Zionist
Narcoterrorism
Nationalist
Religious (Christian
Islamic
Jewish)
Types and tactics
Agro-terrorism
Aircraft hijacking
Bioterrorism
Car bombing
Environmental
Nuclear
Piracy
Propaganda of the deed
Proxy bomb
Suicide attack
State involvement
State terrorism
State-sponsored terrorism
Organisation
Clandestine cell system
Financing
Front
Lone wolf
Training camp
Historical
Red Terror
Reign of Terror
White Terror
Lists
Charities accused of ties to terrorism
Designated terrorist organizations
Incidents
Islamic terrorist attacks
Memorials and museums
House of Terror
Topography of Terror
Victims of Acts of Terror Memorial
By country
Iran
Israel
Kuwait
Pakistan
Qatar
Russia
Soviet Union
Sri Lanka
United States
Sponsored
War on terror
War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)
Iraq War (2003–2011)
Symbolism of terrorism
ParticipantsOperational
ISAF
Operation Enduring Freedom participants
Afghanistan
Northern Alliance
Iraq (Iraqi Armed Forces)
NATO
Pakistan
United Kingdom
United States
European Union
Philippines
Ethiopia
TargetsIndividuals
Osama bin Laden
Hamza bin Laden
Anwar al-Awlaki
Sirajuddin Haqqani
Jalaluddin Haqqani
Anas Haqqani
Khalil Haqqani
Hafiz Saeed
Mahmoud Mohamed Ahmed Bahaziq
Abu Bakr al Baghdadi
Factions
al-Qaeda
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
Abu Sayyaf
Al-Shabaab
Boko Haram
Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami
Hizbul Mujahideen
Islamic Courts Union
Jaish-e-Mohammed
Jemaah Islamiyah
Lashkar-e-Taiba
Taliban
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan
Islamic State
ConflictsOperationEnduring Freedom
War in Afghanistan
OEF – Philippines
Georgia Train and Equip Program
Georgia Sustainment and Stability
OEF – Horn of Africa
OEF – Trans Sahara
Drone strikes in Pakistan
Other
Operation Active Endeavour
Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present)
Insurgency in the North Caucasus
Moro conflict in the Philippines
Iraq War
Iraqi insurgency
Operation Linda Nchi
Terrorism in Saudi Arabia
Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
War in Somalia (2006–2009)
al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen
See also
Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse
Axis of evil
Bush Doctrine
Clash of Civilizations
Cold War
Combatant Status Review Tribunal
Criticism of the war on terror
CIA black sites
Killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri
Killing of Osama bin Laden
Enhanced interrogation techniques
Torture Memos
Extrajudicial prisoners
Extraordinary rendition
Guantanamo Bay detention camp
Iranian Revolution
Islamic terrorism
Islamism
Military Commissions Act of 2006
Military Commissions Act of 2009
North Korea and weapons of mass destruction
Terrorist Surveillance Program
Operation Noble Eagle
Operation Eagle Assist
Pakistan's role
Patriot Act
President's Surveillance Program
Protect America Act of 2007
September 11 attacks
State Sponsors of Terrorism
Targeted killing
Targeted Killing in International Law
Targeted Killings: Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World
Unitary executive theory
Unlawful combatant
Withdrawal of United States troops from Afghanistan (2011–2016)
Withdrawal of United States troops from Iraq (2007–2011)
CAGE
Category
Commons
Authority control National libraries
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikiversity
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 October 2022, at 00:37 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
