Traditional African religions - Wikipedia
Traditional African religions
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Diverse traditional beliefs and practices of African people
Part of a series onTraditional African religions
Doctrines
Divination
African divination
Dogon astronomy (the star Sirius)
Dogon astronomy (Nommo)
Index of African mythology and creation narratives
Philosophy
Serer astronomy (the star Sirius)
Deities
Index of African deities
List of African deities and mythical figures
Sacred places
Bandiagara Escarpment
Benin City
Dahomey
Fatick
Ifẹ
Igbo-Ukwu
Kanem–Bornu
Mount Hombori
Nri-Igbo
Nsukka
Ouidah
Oyo
Point of Sangomar
Sangha
Sangha Ogol Leye
Sine
Sine River
Somb
Tattaguine
Tukar
Yaboyabo
Youga Dogorou
Education
Ndut
Okuyi
Priesthood
Hogon
Houngan
Mambo
Saltigue
Relation with other religions
African diaspora religions
Persecution
Persecution of Dogons
Persecution of Serers
Traditional African religion and other religions
Category Portal
Local African ceremony in Benin featuring a zangbeto.
The traditional beliefs and practices of African people are highly diverse beliefs that include various ethnic religions.
Generally, these traditions are oral rather than scriptural and passed down from one generation to another through folk tales, songs, and festivals, include belief in an amount of higher and lower gods, sometimes including a supreme creator or force, belief in spirits, veneration of the dead, use of magic and traditional African medicine.
Most religions can be described as animistic with various polytheistic and pantheistic aspects.
The role of humanity is generally seen as one of harmonizing nature with the supernatural.
Contents
Spread
An early-20th-century Igbo medicine man in Nigeria, West Africa
Adherents of traditional religions in Africa are distributed among 43 countries and are estimated to number over 100 million.
Although most Africans today are adherents of Christianity or Islam, African people often combine the practice of their traditional beliefs with the practice of Abrahamic religions.
The two Abrahamic religions are widespread across Africa, though mostly concentrated in different areas.
They have replaced indigenous African religions but are often adapted to African cultural contexts and belief systems.
Abrahamic religious beliefs, especially monotheistic elements, such as the belief in a single creator god, was introduced into traditionally polytheistic African religions rather early.
Followers of traditional African religions are also found around the world.
In recent times, religions, such as the Yoruba religion, are on the rise.
The religion of the Yoruba is finding roots in the Islands of the Caribbean and portions of Central and South America.
In the United States, Voodoo is more predominant in the states along the Gulf of Mexico.
Basics
Animism builds the core concept of traditional African religions.
This includes the worship of tutelary deities, nature worship, ancestor worship and the belief in an afterlife.
While some religions adopted a pantheistic worldview, most follow a polytheistic system with various gods, spirits and other supernatural beings.
Traditional African religions also have elements of fetishism, shamanism and veneration of relics.
Traditional Vodun dancer enchanting gods and spirits, in Ganvie, Benin.
Traditional African, like most other ancient traditional religions around the world, were based on oral traditions.
These traditions are not religious principles, but a cultural identity that is passed on through stories, myths and tales, from one generation to the next.
The community and ones family, but also the environment, plays an important role in one's personal life.
Followers believe in the guidance of their ancestors spirits.
Among many traditional African religions, there are spiritual leaders and kinds of priests.
These persons are essential in the spiritual and religious survival of the community.
There are mystics that are responsible for healing and 'divining' - a kind of fortune telling and counseling, similar to shamans.
These traditional healers have to be called by ancestors or gods.
They undergo strict training and learn many necessary skills, including how to use natural herbs for healing and other, more mystical skills, like the finding of a hidden object without knowing where it is.
Traditional African religion believe that ancestors maintain a spiritual connection with their living relatives.
Most ancestral spirits are generally good and kind.
Negative actions taken by ancestral spirits is to cause minor illnesses to warn people that they have gotten onto the wrong path.
Native African religions are centered on ancestor worship, the belief in a spirit world, supernatural beings and free will (unlike the later developed concept of faith). Deceased humans (and animals or important objects) still exist in the spirit world and can influence or interact with the physical world.
Forms of polytheism was widespreaded in most of ancient African and other regions of the world, before the introduction of Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.
An exception was the short-lived monotheistic religion created by Pharaoh Akhenaten, who made it mandatory to pray to his personal god Aton (see Atenism). This remarkable change to traditional Egyptian religion was however reverted by the next Pharaoh of Egypt.
High gods, along with other more specialized deities, ancestor spirits, territorial spirits, and beings, are a common theme among traditional African religions, highlighting the complex and advanced culture of ancient Africa.
Some research suggests that certain monotheistic concepts, such as the belief in a high god or force (next to other many other gods, deities and spirits, sometimes seen as intermediaries between humans and the creator) were present within Africa, before the introduction of Abrahamic religions.
These indigenous concepts were different from the monotheism found in Abrahamic religions.
Traditional Koku dancer, bearing strong similarities to religious dancers of the Dravidian folk religion in Southern India.
Traditional African medicine is also directly linked to traditional African religions.
According to Clemmont E. Vontress, the various religious traditions of Africa are united by a basic Animism.
According to him, the belief in spirits and ancestors is the most important element of African religions.
Gods were either self-created or evolved from spirits or ancestors which got worshiped by the people.
He also notes that most modern African folk religions were strongly influenced by non-African religions, mostly Christianity and Islam and thus may differ from the ancient forms.
Traditional African religions generally hold the beliefs of life after death (a spirit world or realms, in which spirits, but also gods reside), with some also having a concept of reincarnation, in which deceased humans may reincarnate into their family lineage (blood lineage), if they want to, or have something to do.
Nigerian American professor of indigenous African religions at Harvard University, Jacob Olupona summarized the many traditional African religions as complex animistic religious traditions and beliefs of the African people before the Christian and Islamic "colonization" of Africa.
Ancestor veneration has always played a "significant" part in the traditional African cultures and may be considered as central to the African worldview.
Ancestors (ancestral ghosts/spirits) are an integral part of reality.
The ancestors are generally believed to reside in an ancestral realm (spiritworld), while some believe that the ancestors became equal in power to deities.
The defining line between deities and ancestors is often contested, but overall, ancestors are believed to occupy a higher level of existence than living human beings and are believed to be able to bestow either blessings or illness upon their living descendants.
Ancestors can offer advice and bestow good fortune and honor to their living descendants, but they can also make demands, such as insisting that their shrines be properly maintained and propitiated.
A belief in ancestors also testifies to the inclusive nature of traditional African spirituality by positing that deceased progenitors still play a role in the lives of their living descendants.
Olupona rejects the western/Islamic definition of Monotheism and says that such concepts could not reflect the complex African traditions and are too simplistic.
While some traditions have a supreme being (next to other deities), others have not.
Monotheism does not reflect the multiplicity of ways that the traditional African spirituality has conceived of deities, gods, and spirit beings.
He summarizes that traditional African religions are not only religions, but a worldview, a way of life.
Ceremonies
West and Central African religious practices generally manifest themselves in communal ceremonies or divinatory rites in which members of the community, overcome by force (or ashe, nyama, etc.), are excited to the point of going into meditative trance in response to rhythmic or driving drumming or singing.
One religious ceremony practiced in Gabon and Cameroon is the Okuyi, practiced by several Bantu ethnic groups.
In this state, depending upon the region, drumming or instrumental rhythms played by respected musicians (each of which is unique to a given deity or ancestor), participants embody a deity or ancestor, energy or state of mind by performing distinct ritual movements or dances which further enhance their elevated consciousness.
When this trance-like state is witnessed and understood, adherents are privy to a way of contemplating the pure or symbolic embodiment of a particular mindset or frame of reference.
This builds skills at separating the feelings elicited by this mindset from their situational manifestations in daily life.
Such separation and subsequent contemplation of the nature and sources of pure energy or feelings serves to help participants manage and accept them when they arise in mundane contexts.
This facilitates better control and transformation of these energies into positive, culturally appropriate behavior, thought, and speech.  Also, this practice can give rise to those in these trances uttering words which, when interpreted by a culturally educated initiate or diviner, can provide insight into appropriate directions which the community (or individual) might take in accomplishing its goal.
Spirits
Main article: List of African mythological figures
Followers of traditional African religions pray to various spirits as well as to their ancestors.
This includes also nature, elementary and animal spirits.
The difference between powerful spirits and gods is often minimal.
Most African societies believe in several “high gods” and a large amount of lower gods and spirits.
There are also some religions with a single supreme being (Chukwu, Nyame, Olodumare, Ngai, Roog, etc.). Some recognize a dual god and goddess such as Mawu-Lisa.
Traditional African religions generally believe in an afterlife, one or more Spirit worlds, and Ancestor worship is an important basic concept in mostly all African religions.
Some African religions adopted different views through the influence of Islam or even Hinduism.
Practices and rituals
Bakongo masks from the Kongo Central
There are more similarities than differences in all traditional African religions.
The deities and spirits are honored through libation or sacrifice (of animals, vegetables, cooked food, flowers, semi-precious stones and precious metals). The will of the gods or spirits is sought by the believer also through consultation of divinities or divination.
Traditional African religions embrace natural phenomena – ebb and tide, waxing and waning moon, rain and drought – and the rhythmic pattern of agriculture.
According to Gottlieb and Mbiti: The environment and nature are infused in every aspect of traditional African religions and culture.
This is largely because cosmology and beliefs are intricately intertwined with the natural phenomena and environment.
All aspects of weather, thunder, lightning, rain, day, moon, sun, stars, and so on may become amenable to control through the cosmology of African people.
Natural phenomena are responsible for providing people with their daily needs.
For example, in the Serer religion, one of the most sacred stars in the cosmos is called Yoonir (the Star of Sirius). With a long farming tradition, the Serer high priests and priestesses (Saltigue) deliver yearly sermons at the Xooy Ceremony (divination ceremony) in Fatick before Yoonir's phase in order to predict winter months and enable farmers to start planting.
Traditional healers are common in most areas, and their practices include a religious element to varying degrees.
Divination
Early-20th-century Yoruba divination boardMain article: African divination
Since Africa is a large continent with many ethnic groups and cultures, there is not one single technique of casting divination.
The practice of casting may be done with small objects, such as bones, cowrie shells, stones, strips of leather, or flat pieces of wood.
Traditional healer of South Africa performing a divination by reading the bones
Some castings are done using sacred divination plates made of wood or performed on the ground (often within a circle).
In traditional African societies, many people seek out diviners on a regular basis.
There are generally no prohibitions against the practice.
Diviner (also known as priest) are also sought for their wisdom as counselors in life and for their knowledge of herbal medicine.
Ubuntu
Main article: Ubuntu philosophy
Ubuntu is a Nguni Bantu term meaning "humanity". It is sometimes translated as "I am because we are" (also "I am because you are"), or "humanity towards others" (in Zulu, umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu). In Xhosa, the latter term is used, but is often meant in a more philosophical sense to mean "the belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity". It is a collection of values and practices that people of Africa or of African origin view as making people authentic human beings.
While the nuances of these values and practices vary across different ethnic groups, they all point to one thing – an authentic individual human being is part of a larger and more significant relational, communal, societal, environmental and spiritual world.
Virtue and vice
Virtue in traditional African religion is often connected with carrying out obligations of the communal aspect of life.
Examples include social behaviors such as the respect for parents and elders, raising children appropriately, providing hospitality, and being honest, trustworthy, and courageous.
In some traditional African religions, morality is associated with obedience or disobedience to God regarding the way a person or a community lives.
For the Kikuyu, according to their primary supreme creator, Ngai, acting through the lesser deities, is believed to speak to and be capable of guiding the virtuous person as one's conscience.
In many cases, Africans who have converted to other religions have still kept up their traditional customs and practices, combining them in a syncretic way.
Sacred places
Some sacred or holy locations for traditional religions include Nri-Igbo, the Point of Sangomar, Yaboyabo, Fatick, Ife, Oyo, Dahomey, Benin City, Ouidah, Nsukka, Kanem-Bornu, Igbo-Ukwu, and Tulwap Kipsigis, among others.
Religious persecution
This section is an excerpt from Persecution of traditional African religion.
Part of a series onTraditional African religions
Doctrines
Divination
African divination
Dogon astronomy (the star Sirius)
Dogon astronomy (Nommo)
Index of African mythology and creation narratives
Philosophy
Serer astronomy (the star Sirius)
Deities
Index of African deities
List of African deities and mythical figures
Sacred places
Bandiagara Escarpment
Benin City
Dahomey
Fatick
Ifẹ
Igbo-Ukwu
Kanem–Bornu
Mount Hombori
Nri-Igbo
Nsukka
Ouidah
Oyo
Point of Sangomar
Sangha
Sangha Ogol Leye
Sine
Sine River
Somb
Tattaguine
Tukar
Yaboyabo
Youga Dogorou
Education
Ndut
Okuyi
Priesthood
Hogon
Houngan
Mambo
Saltigue
Relation with other religions
African diaspora religions
Persecution
Persecution of Dogons
Persecution of Serers
Traditional African religion and other religions
Category Portal
Freedom of religion
Concepts
Religious discrimination
Religious censorship
Religious liberty
Religious pluralism
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Anti-clericalism
School prayer
Catholic priests in public office
Confessionalism
Theocracy
State religion
Secular state
Confessional state
Atheist state
Status by country
Africa
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
DR Congo
Egypt
Mauritania
Morocco
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
North and South America
Brazil
Canada
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Panama
Paraguay
United States
Asia
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
Northern Cyprus
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Japan
Kazakhstan
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Europe
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Northern Cyprus
France
Georgia
Germany
Hungary
Italy
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Norway
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia 
Slovenia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Middle East
Bahrain
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman
Palestinian territories
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syria
UAE
Yemen
Oceania
Australia
Topical
Apostasy in Islam by country
Blasphemy laws by country
Female genital mutilation laws by country
Legal aspects of ritual slaughter
Religious male circumcision
Religious persecution
Traditional African religion
Atheism
Baháʼí Faith
Buddhism
Christianity
Christophobia
post-Cold War era
Catholicism
Catholic Church
Mormonism
Jehovah's Witness
Eastern Orthodox Christianity
Oriental Orthodox Christianity
Protestantism
Falun Gong
Hinduism (Hinduphobia)
Islam
Sunni
Shi'a
Ahmadiyya
Alevism
Sufis
Islamophobia
Judaism
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Religious antisemitism
New religious movements
Christian countercult movement
Neopaganism
Rastafari
Zoroastrianism
Religion portal
Traditional African religions have faced persecution from Christians and Muslims.
Adherents of these religions have been forcefully converted to Islam and Christianity, demonized and marginalized.
The atrocities include killings, waging war, destroying of sacred places, and other atrocities.
Traditions by region
This list is limited to a few well-known traditions.
Central Africa
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern Africa)
Bushongo mythology (Congo)
Kongo religion (Congo)
Lugbara mythology (Congo)
Baluba mythology (Congo)
Mbuti mythology (Congo)
Hausa animism (Chad, Gabon)
Lotuko mythology (South Sudan)
Eastern Africa
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern Africa)
Gikuyu mythology (Kenya)
Akamba mythology (Kenya)
Dinka religion (South Sudan)
Malagasy mythology (Madagascar)
Maasai mythology (Kenya, Tanzania, Ouebian)
Kalenjin mythology (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania)
Dini Ya Msambwa (Bungoma, Trans Nzoia, Kenya)
Waaqeffanna (Ethiopia)
Somali mythology (Somalia)
Northern Africa
Ancient Egyptian religion (Egypt, Sudan)
Kemetism
Punic religion (Tunisia, Algeria, Libya)
Traditional Berber religion (Morocco (including Western Sahara), Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, Burkina Faso)
Hausa animism (Sudan)
Southern Africa
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern Africa)
Lozi mythology (Zambia)
Tumbuka mythology (Malawi)
Zulu traditional religion (South Africa)
Badimo (Botswana)
San religion (Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa)
Traditional healers of South Africa
Indigenous religion in Zimbabwe
Western Africa
Ga-Adangme religion (Gana/Ghana)
Abwoi religion (Nigeria)
Akan religion (Gana/Ghana, Ivory Coast)
Dahomean religion (Benin, Togo)
Efik religion (Nigeria, Cameroon)
Edo religion (Benin kingdom, Nigeria)
Hausa animism (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Gana/Ghana, Ivory Coast, Niger, Nigeria, Togo)
Ijo traditional religion (Ijo people, Nigeria)
Godianism (the umbrella religion of all traditional religions of Africa)
West African mythology (the umbrella religion of all traditional religions of West Africa)
Odinala (Igbo people, Nigeria)
Asaase Yaa (Bono people (found mostly in Gana/Ghana), Gana/Ghana and Ivory Coast)
Serer religion (A ƭat Roog) (Senegal, Gambia, Mauritania)
Yoruba religion (Nigeria, Benin, Togo)
Vodou (Gana/Ghana, Benin, Togo, Nigeria)
Dogon religion (Mali)
African diaspora
Main article: African diaspora religions
Afro-American religions involve ancestor worship and include a creator deity along with a pantheon of divine spirits such as the Orisha, Loa, Vodun, Nkisi and Alusi, among others.
In addition to the religious syncretism of these various African traditions, many also incorporate elements of Folk Catholicism including folk saints and other forms of Folk religion, Native American religion, Spiritism, Spiritualism, Shamanism (sometimes including the use of Entheogens) and European folklore.
Various "doctoring" spiritual traditions also exist such as Obeah and Hoodoo which focus on spiritual health.
African religious traditions in the Americas can vary.
They can have non-prominent African roots or can be almost wholly African in nature, such as religions like Trinidad Orisha.
See also
Folk religion
Notes
a b c Encyclopedia of African Religion (Sage, 2009) Molefi Kete Asante
Ndlovu, Tommy Matshakayile (1995). Imikhuba lamasiko AmaNdebele.
Doris Ndlovu, Bekithemba S. Ncube.
Gweru,GasiyaZimbabwe: Mambo Press.
ISBN 0-86922-624-X. OCLC 34114180.
Juergensmeyer, Mark (2006). The Oxford Handbook Of Global Religions.
ISBN 0-19-513798-1.
S. Mbiti, John (1991). Introduction to African religion.
ISBN 0-435-94002-3.
Kimmerle, Heinz (2006-04-11). "The world of spirits and the respect for nature: towards a new appreciation of animism". The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa. 2 (2): 15. doi:10.4102/td.v2i2.277. ISSN 2415-2005.
Vontress, Clemmont E. (2005), "Animism: Foundation of Traditional Healing in Sub-Saharan Africa", Integrating Traditional Healing Practices into Counseling and Psychotherapy, SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 124–137, doi:10.4135/9781452231648, ISBN 9780761930471, retrieved 2019-10-31
An African Story BBC Archived November 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
What is religion? An African understanding Archived May 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
Britannica Book of the Year (2003), Encyclopædia Britannica (2003) ISBN 978-0-85229-956-2 p.306 According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, as of mid-2002, there were 480,453,000 Christians, 329,869,000 Muslims and 98,734,000 people who practiced traditional religions in Africa.
Ian S. Markham, A World Religions Reader (1996) Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine is cited by Morehouse University as giving the mid-1990s figure of 278,250,800 Muslims in Africa, but still as 40.8% of the total.
These numbers are estimates, and remain a matter of conjecture (see Amadu Jacky Kaba). The spread of Christianity and Islam in Africa: a survey and analysis of the numbers and percentages of Christians, Muslims and those who practice indigenous religions.
The Western Journal of Black Studies, Vol 29, Number 2, (June 2005), discusses the estimations of various almanacs and encyclopedias, placing Britannica's estimate as the most agreed on figure.
Notes the figure presented at the World Christian Encyclopedia, summarized here Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, as being an outlier.
On rates of growth, Islam and Pentecostal Christianity are highest, see: The List: The World's Fastest-Growing Religions, Foreign Policy, May 2007.
Lugira, Aloysius M., African Traditional Religions (New York: Chelsea House, 2009), p. 36 [in] Varghese, Roy Abraham, Christ Connection: How the World Religions Prepared the Way for the Phenomenon of Jesus, Paraclete Press (2011), p. 1935, ISBN 9781557258397  (Retrieved 24 March 2019)
Mbiti, John S (1992). Introduction to African religion.
ISBN 9780435940027.When Africans are converted to other religions, they often mix their traditional religion with the one to which they are converted.
In this way they are not losing something valuable, but are gaining something from both religious customs
Riggs, Thomas (2006). Worldmark Encyclopedia of Religious Practices: Religions and denominations. p. 1. ISBN 9780787666125.Although a large proportion of Africans have converted to Islam an Christianity, these two world religions have been assimilated into African culture, and many African Christians and Muslims maintain traditional spiritual beliefs
Gottlieb, Roger S (2006-11-09). The Oxford handbook of religion and ecology.
ISBN 9780195178722.Even in the adopted religions of Islam and Christianity, which on the surface appear to have converted millions of Africans from their traditional religions, many aspect of traditional religions are still manifest
"US study sheds light on Africa's unique religious mix". AFP.t doesn't seem to be an either-or for many people.
They can describe themselves primarily as Muslim or Christian and continue to practice many of the traditions that are characteristic of African traditional religion," Luis Lugo, executive director of the Pew Forum, told AFP.
Quainoo, Samuel Ebow (2000-01-01). In Transitions and consolidation of democracy in Africa.
ISBN 9781586840402.Even though the two religions are monotheistic, most African Christians and Muslims convert to them and still retain some aspects of their traditional religions
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Britannica Book of the Year 2003. Encyclopædia Britannica, (2003) ISBN 9780852299562 p.306. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, as of mid-2002, there were 376,453,000 Christians, 329,869,000 Muslims and 98,734,000 people who practiced traditional religions in Africa.
Ian S. Markham,(A World Religions Reader.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers, 1996.) is cited by Morehouse University as giving the mid-1990s figure of 278,250,800 Muslims in Africa, but still as 40.8% of the total.
These numbers are estimates, and remain a matter of conjecture.
See Amadu Jacky Kaba.
The spread of Christianity and Islam in Africa: a survey and analysis of the numbers and percentages of Christians, Muslims and those who practice indigenous religions.
The Western Journal of Black Studies, Vol 29, Number 2, June 2005. Discusses the estimations of various almanacs and encyclopedium, placing Britannica's estimate as the most agreed figure.
Notes the figure presented at the World Christian Encyclopedia, summarized here, as being an outlier.
The World Book Encyclopedia has estimated that in 2002 Christians formed 40% of the continent's population, with Muslims forming 45%. It was also estimated in 2002 that Christians form 45% of Africa's population, with Muslims forming 40.6%.
"Ancient African Religion Finds Roots In America". NPR.org.
Retrieved 2020-11-27.
Kimmerle, Heinz (2006-04-11). "The world of spirits and the respect for nature: towards a new appreciation of animism". The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa. 2 (2): 15. doi:10.4102/td.v2i2.277. ISSN 2415-2005.
Asukwo (2013). "The Need to Re-Conceptualize African Traditional Religion".
"African Traditional Religion | South African History Online". 
Hornung, Erik (2001) . Akhenaten and the Religion of Light.
Translated by Lorton, David.
Ithaca, New York; London: Cornell University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8014-8725-5. OCLC 48417401.
Hexham , Irvin ((1981), Lord of the Sky-King of the earth: Zulu Traditional Religion and Belief in the Skrelicsy God, Sciences Religieuses Studies in Religion, vol. 10: 273-78)
Busia, K. A. (1963). "Has the distinction between primitive and higher religions any sociological significance ?". Archives de Sciences Sociales des Religions. 16 (1): 22–25. doi:10.3406/assr.1963.1996.
Peterson, Olof. "Foreigen influences on the idea of God in African religions".{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
a b c Okwu AS (1979). "Life, Death, Reincarnation, and Traditional Healing in Africa". Issue: A Journal of Opinion. 9 (3): 19–24. doi:10.2307/1166258. JSTOR 1166258.
Stanton, Andrea L. (2012). Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia.
SAGE. ISBN 9781412981767.
Baldick, Julian (1997). Black God: the Afroasiatic roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim religions.
Syracuse University Press:ISBN 0-8156-0522-6
The Civilizations of Africa: A History to 1800, by Christopher Ehret, James Currey, 2002 
Ehret, Christopher (November 2004). "A Conversation with Christopher Ehret". World History Connected (Interview). Interviewed by Laichas, Tom.
Retrieved 30 May 2020. (Citation with date provided here)
Stanton, Andrea L. (2012). Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia.
SAGE. ISBN 9781412981767.
Vontress, Clemmont E. (2005), "Animism: Foundation of Traditional Healing in Sub-Saharan Africa", Integrating Traditional Healing Practices into Counseling and Psychotherapy, SAGE Publications, Inc., pp. 124–137, doi:10.4135/9781452231648, ISBN 9780761930471, retrieved 2019-10-31
Ndemanu, Michael T. (January 2018). "Traditional African religions and their influences on the worldviews of Bangwa people of Cameroon". Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad.
Ball State University; Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad. 30: 70–84. doi:10.36366/frontiers.v30i1.405. There is an unwavering belief in life after death in traditional African religions with some even believing in reincarnation...
"The spirituality of Africa". Harvard Gazette. 2015-10-06. Retrieved 2020-11-30.
"The spirituality of Africa". Harvard Gazette. 2015-10-06. Retrieved 2020-11-30.
Karade, B. The Handbook of Yoruba Religious Concepts, pages 39–46. Samuel Weiser Inc, 1994
Annemarie De Waal Malefijt (1968) Religion and Culture: an Introduction to Anthropology of Religion, p. 220–249, Macmillan
"The spirituality of Africa". Harvard Gazette. 2015-10-06. Retrieved 2019-10-31.
Willie F. Page (2001) Encyclopedia of African History and Culture, Volume 1, p. 55. Published by Facts on File, ISBN 0-8160-4472-4
Peter C. Rogers (2009) Ultimate Truth, Book 1, p100. Published by AuthorHouse, ISBN 1-4389-7968-1
Parrinder, E. G. (1959). "Islam and West African Indigenous Religion". Numen. 6 (2): 130–141. doi:10.2307/3269310. ISSN 0029-5973. JSTOR 3269310.
Ndemanu, Michael T. (January 2018). "Traditional African religions and their influences on the worldviews of Bangwa people of Cameroon". Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad. 30: 70–84. doi:10.36366/frontiers.v30i1.405.
John S. Mbiti (1990) African Religions & Philosophy 2nd Ed., p 100–101, Heinemann, ISBN 0-435-89591-5
John S. Mbiti (1992) Introduction to African Religion 2nd Ed., p. 68, Published by East African Publishers ISBN 9966-46-928-1
Roger S. Gottlieb (2006) The Oxford Handbook of Religion and Ecology, p. 261, Oxford Handbooks Online ISBN 0-19-517872-6
Henry Gravrand (1990) La Civilisation Sereer Pangool, PP 21, 152, Published by Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines du Sénégal, ISBN 2-7236-1055-1
Simone Kalis (1997) Médecine Traditionnelle, Religion et Divination Chez les Seereer Siin du Sénégal: La Coonaissance de la Nuit, L'Harmattan, ISBN 2-7384-5196-9
Mugumbate, Jacob Rugare; Chereni, Admire (2020-04-23). "Editorial: Now, the theory of Ubuntu has its space in social work". African Journal of Social Work. 10 (1). ISSN 2409-5605.
Resolving the Prevailing Conflicts Between Christianity and African (Igbo) Traditional Religion Through Inculturation, by Edwin Anaegboka Udoye
Anne C. Bailey, African Voices of the Atlantic Slave Trade: Beyond the Silence and the Shame.
M. Darrol Bryant, Rita H. Mataragnon, The Many faces of religion and society (1985), Page 100, :"African traditional religion went through and survived this type of persecution at the hands of Christianity and Islam..."
Garrick Bailey, Essentials of Cultural Anthropology, 3rd edn (2013), p. 268:"Later, during the nineteenth century, Christian missionaries became active in Africa and Oceania.
Attempts by Christian missionaries to convert nonbelievers to Christianity took two main forms: forced conversions and proselytizing."
Festus Ugboaja Ohaegbulam, Towards and Understanding of the African Experience (1990), p. 161:"The role of Christian missionaries are a private interest group in European colonial occupation of Africa was a significant one...Collectively their activities promoted division within traditional African societies into rival factions...the picture denigrated African culture and religion..."
Toyin Falola et al., Hot Spot: Sub-Saharan Africa: Sub-Saharan Africa (2010), p. 7:"A religion of Middle Eastern origin, Islam reached Africa via the northern region of the continent by means of conquest.
The Islamic wars of conquest that would lead to the Islamization of North Africa occurred first in Egypt, when in about 642 CE the country fell to the invading Muslim forces from Arabia.
Over the next centuries, the rest of the Maghreb would succumb to Jihadist armies...The notion of religion conversion, whether by force or peaceful means, is foreign to indigenous African beliefs...Islam, however, did not become a religion of the masses by peaceful means.
Forced conversion was an indispensable element of proselytization."
Eltis, David; Richardson, David (1997). Routes to slavery: direction, ethnicity, and mortality in the transatlantic slave trade.
Routledge. p. 88. ISBN 0-7146-4820-5.
Houk, James (1995). Spirits, Blood, and Drums: The Orisha Religion in Trinidad.
Temple University Press.
ISBN 1566393507.
References
Information presented here was gleaned from World Eras Encyclopaedia, Volume 10, edited by Pierre-Damien Mvuyekure (New York: Thomson-Gale, 2003), in particular pp. 275–314.
Baldick, J (1997) Black God: The Afroasiatic Roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Religions.
New York: Syracuse University Press.
Doumbia, A. & Doumbia, N (2004) The Way of the Elders: West African Spirituality & Tradition.
Saint Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications.
Ehret, Christopher, (2002)  The Civilizations of Africa: a History to 1800. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Ehret, Christopher, An African Classical Age: Eastern and Southern Africa in World History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400, page 159, University of Virginia Press, ISBN 0-8139-2057-4
Karade, B (1994) The Handbook of Yoruba Religious Concepts.
York Beach, MA: Samuel Weiser Inc.
P'Bitek, Okot.
African Religions and Western Scholarship.
Kampala: East African Literature Bureau, 1970.
Princeton Online, History of Africa
Wiredu, Kwasi Toward Decolonizing African Philosophy And Religion in African Studies Quarterly, The Online Journal for African Studies, Volume 1, Issue 4, 1998
Further reading
Encyclopedia of African Religion, - Molefi Asante, Sage Publications, 2009 ISBN 1412936365
Abimbola, Wade (ed. and trans., 1977). Ifa Divination Poetry NOK, New York).
Baldick, Julian (1997). Black God: the Afroasiatic roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim religions.
Syracuse University Press:ISBN 0-8156-0522-6
Barnes, Sandra.
Africa's Ogun: Old World and New (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989).
Beier, Ulli, ed.
The Origins of Life and Death: African Creation Myths (London: Heinemann, 1966).
Bowen, P.G. (1970). Sayings of the Ancient One - Wisdom from Ancient Africa.
Theosophical Publishing House, U.S.
Chidester, David. "Religions of South Africa" pp. 17–19
Cole, Herbert Mbari.
Art and Life among the Owerri Igbo (Bloomington: Indiana University press, 1982).
Danquah, J. B., The Akan Doctrine of God: A Fragment of Gold Coast Ethics and Religion, second edition (London: Cass, 1968).
Einstein, Carl.
African Legends, First English Edition, Pandavia, Berlin 2021. ISBN 9783753155821
Gbadagesin, Segun.
African Philosophy: Traditional Yoruba Philosophy and Contemporary African Realities (New York: Peter Lang, 1999).
Gleason, Judith.
Oya, in Praise of an African Goddess (Harper Collins, 1992).
Griaule, Marcel; Dietterlen, Germaine.
Le Mythe Cosmogonique (Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie, 1965).
Idowu, Bolaji, God in Yoruba Belief (Plainview: Original Publications, rev. and enlarged ed., 1995)
LaGamma, Alisa (2000). Art and oracle: African art and rituals of divination.
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
ISBN 978-0-87099-933-8. Archived from the original on 2013-05-10.
Lugira, Aloysius Muzzanganda.
African traditional religion.
Infobase Publishing, 2009.
Mbiti, John  African Religions and Philosophy (1969) African Writers Series, Heinemann ISBN 0-435-89591-5
Opoku, Kofi Asare (1978). West African Traditional Religion Kofi Asare Opoku | Publisher: FEP International Private Limited.
ASIN: B0000EE0IT
Parrinder, Geoffrey.
African Traditional Religion, Third ed. (London: Sheldon Press, 1974). ISBN 0-85969-014-8 pbk.
Parrinder, Geoffrey. "Traditional Religion", in his Africa's Three Religions, Second ed. (London: Sheldon Press, 1976, ISBN 0-85969-096-2), p. [15-96].
Peavy, D., (2009)."Kings, Magic & Medicine". Raleigh, NC: SI.
Peavy, D., (2016). The Benin Monarchy, Olokun & Iha Ominigbon.
Umewaen: Journal of Benin & Edoid Studies: Osweego, NY.
Popoola, S. Solagbade.
Ikunle Abiyamo: It is on Bent Knees that I gave Birth (2007 Asefin Media Publication)
Soyinka, Wole, Myth, Literature and the African World (Cambridge University Press, 1976).
Alice Werner, Myths and Legends of the Bantu (1933). Available online at sacred-texts.com
Umeasigbu, Rems Nna.
The Way We Lived : Ibo Customs and Stories (London: Heinemann, 1969).
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Traditional African religions.
Traditional African religion portal
Religion portal
Media related to Traditional African religions at Wikimedia Commons
African Comparative Belief
Afrika world.net A website with extensive links and information about traditional African religions Archived 2019-06-01 at the Wayback Machine
Baba Alawoye.com Baba'Awo Awoyinfa Ifaloju, showcasing Ifa using web media 2.0 (blogs, podcasting, video & photocasting)[dead link]
culture-exchange.blog/animism-modern-africa  An article explaining the parallels between traditional and modern religious practices in Africa
Religion in AfricaReligions
Traditional African religions portal
Akamba mythology
Akan religion
Ancient Egyptian religion
Baháʼí Faith
Bantu mythology
Traditional Berber religion
Bono mythology
Buddhism
Bushongo mythology
Christianity
Dahomean religion
Dinka religion
Dogon religion
Efik mythology
Hinduism
Igbo religion
Irreligion
Islam
Isoko mythology
Jainism
Judaism
Khoe/San religion
Lotuko mythology
Lozi mythology
Lugbara mythology
Maasai mythology
Malagasy mythology
Mbuti mythology
Serer religion
Serer creation myth
Traditional African religions
Tumbuka mythology
Waaq
Yoruba religion
Zulu religionSovereign states
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Republic of the Congo
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Dependencies, autonomies, and other territories
Canary Islands (Spain)
Ceuta (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte (France)
Melilla (Spain)
Puntland
Réunion (France)
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
St.
Helena (UK)
Somaliland
Western Sahara
Zanzibar (Tanzania)
See also: African diaspora religions
ReligionReligious groups and denominationsWesternAbrahamicJudaism
Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Modern
Zionist
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Samaritanism
Haymanot
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
list
Christianity
Catholicism
Latin
Eastern
Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy
Nestorianism
Ancient
Assyrian
Proto-Protestantism
Hussites/Moravians
Waldensians
Protestantism
Adventism
Anabaptism
Amish
Brethren
Hutterites
Mennonites
Schwenkfelders
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism
Congregationalism
Presbyterianism
Reformed
Charismatic Christianity
Pentecostal
Charismatic
Neo-charismatic
Evangelicalism
Irvingism
Lutheranism
Methodism
Holiness
Nondenominational
Plymouth Brethren
Quakerism
Restorationism
Esoteric
Independent Catholicism
Judaizers
Nontrinitarianism
Bible Students/Jehovah's Witnesses
British Israelism
Christadelphians
Mormonism
Oneness Pentecostalism
Spiritual
Swedenborgianism
Tolstoyan
Unitarianism
list
Islam
Sunni
Ash'ari
Maturidi
Traditionalist theology
Salafism
Wahhabism
Modernist Salafism
Shia
Twelver
Zaidiyyah
Isma'ilism
Alawis
Sufism
Khawarij
Ibadism
Alevism
Ahmadi
Mahdavia
Quranism
Milah Abraham
Non-denominational
list
Other
Bábism
Baháʼí
Druze
Ali-Illahism
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Iranian
Zoroastrianism
Yazidism
Yarsanism
Assianism/Uatsdin
Roshani
EasternEast AsianChinese
Chinese folk religion
Confucianism
Luoism
Nuo
Salvationist
Xiantiandao
Yiguandao
Taoism
Folk Taoism
Yao Taoism
Japanese
Shinto
list
Shugendō
Tenrikyo
Ryukyuan
Korean
Korean shamanism
Cheondoism
Jeungsanism
IndianHinduism
Vaishnavism
Krishnaism
Sri Vaishnavism
Brahma Sampradaya
Nimbarka Sampradaya
Pushtimarg
Mahanubhava
Ramanandi
Warkari
Swaminarayan
Shaivism
Shaiva Siddhanta
Ganapatya
Kashmiri
Kapalika
Kaumaram
Lingayatism
Nath
Balinese
Shaktism
Smartism
Sauraism
Śrauta
Sant Mat
Neo-Hinduism
list
Buddhism
Theravada
Mahayana
Chan/Zen/Thiền
Amidism
Nichiren
Vajrayana
Tibetan
Neo-Buddhism
list
Other
Ayyavazhi
Kalash
Jainism
Digambara
Śvētāmbara
Sarnaism
Kirat Mundhum
Kalash
Srilankan Vedda
Ravidassia
Sikhism
Khalsa
Sects
EthnicAltaic
Turko-Mongolic
Burkhanism
Tengrism
Vattisen Yaly
Tungusic
Evenki
Manchu
Austroasiatic
Vietnamese
Đạo Mẫu
Caodaism
Hoahaoism
Sarnaism
Austronesian
Batak Parmalim
Dayak
Kaharingan
Momolianism
Indonesian
Aliran Kepercayaan
Kejawèn
Kapitayan
Karo Pemena
Malaysian
Philippine Dayawism
Tagalog
Polynesian
Hawaiian
Māori
Sumbese Marapu
Sundanese Wiwitan
NativeAmerican
Abenaki
Anishinaabe
Blackfoot
Californian
Miwok
Ohlone
Pomo
Cherokee
Chilote
Choctaw
Creek
Guarani
Haida
Ho-Chunk
Hopi
Iroquois
Longhouse
Seneca
Wyandot
Jivaroan
Kwakwakaʼwakw
Lakota
Lenape
Mapuche
Mesoamerican
Aztec
Maya
Olmec
Purépecha
Midewiwin
Muisca
Native American Church
Navajo
Nuu-chah-nulth
Pawnee
Tsimshian
Ute
Zuni
Tai and Miao
Ahom
Hmongism
Mo
Satsana Phi
Tibeto-Burmese
Bon
Burmese
Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Heraka
Kiratism
Qiang
Sanamahism
Traditional  AfricanNorth African
Berber
Guanche church
Sub-SaharanAfrican
Akamba
Akan
Baluba
Bantu
Kongo
Zulu
Bushongo
Dinka
Dogon
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Ik
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
Odinani
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Urhobo
Waaqeffanna
Yoruba
Ifá
Diasporic:
Candomblé
Bantu
Jejé
Ketu
Comfa
Convince
Espiritismo
Kumina
Obeah
Palo
Quimbanda
Santería
Tambor de Mina
Trinidad Orisha
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti
Other ethnic
Aboriginal Australian
Inuit
Papuan
Siberian
New religionsSyncretic
Brahmoism
Falun Gong
Japanese
Meivazhi
Modekngei
New Acropolis
New Age
New Thought
Rajneesh
Rastafari
Sant Mat
Radha Soami
Spiritualism
Subud
Tensegrity
Thelema
Theosophy
Neo-Theosophy
Agni Yoga
Transcendental Meditation
Unitarian Universalism
White Brotherhood
ModernPaganism
African
Godianism
Armenian
Baltic
Dievturība
Romuva
Caucasian
Abkhaz
Circassian
Celtic
Druidry
Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Neoshamanism
Ossetian
Polytheistic reconstructionism
Romanian
Slavic
Uralic
Estonian
Finnish
Hungarian
Mari
Mordvin
Sámi
Udmurt
Wicca
Zalmoxianism
list
De novo
Anthroposophy
Discordianism
Eckankar
Fourth Way
Goddess
Jediism
Satanism
Scientology
UFO religion
Raëlism
Historical religions
Prehistoric
Paleolithic
Ainu
Arabian
Armenian
Baltic
Old Prussian
Latvian
Lithuanian
Basque
Celtic
Druidism
Irish
Cook Islands
Dravidian
Egyptian
Atenism
Etruscan
Finnish
Fuegian
Selk'nam
Georgian
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Frankish
Norse
Greek
Mysteries
Orphism
Gnosticism
Hermeticism
Greco-Buddhism
Guanche
Harappan
Hittite
Hungarian
Hurrian
Inca
Jamaican Maroon
Manichaeism
Mazdakism
Melanesian
Mesopotamian
Sumerian
Babylonian
Micronesian
Nauruan
Olmec
Paleo-Balkan
Albanian
Illyrian
Thracian
Dacian
Proto-Indo-Iranian
Vedic
Iranian
Rapa Nui
Roman
Cult of Magna Mater
Imperial cult
Gallo-Roman
Mithraism
Mysteries of Isis
Semitic
Canaanite
Punic
Yahwism
Scythian
Slavic
Somali
Tongan
Urartu
Vainakh
Zapotec
TopicsAspects
Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Call to prayer
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Denomination
Entheogens
Ethnic
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Goddess
Indigenous
Meditation
Monasticism
Monk
Nun
Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Prophecy
Religious experience
Ritual
Liturgy
Purification
Sacrifice
Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship
Theism
Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism
Religiousstudies
Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Neurotheology
Philosophy
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women
Religion and society
Agriculture
Business
Clergy / Laity
monasticism
ordination
Priest
Conversion
assimilation
missionary
proselytism
Disability
Education
Fanaticism
Freedom
pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism
Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Populations
Religiocentrism
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence
persecution
terrorism
war
Wealth
Secularism and irreligion
Agnosticism
Antireligion
Atheism
Criticism
Deconstruction
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated
Overviewsand lists
Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
Names of God
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars
Category
Portal
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquote
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 3 October 2022, at 15:00 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
