Voltaire - Wikipedia
Voltaire
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
French writer, historian, and philosopher (1694–1778)
For other uses, see Voltaire (disambiguation).
VoltairePortrait by Nicolas de Largillière, c. 1724BornFrançois-Marie Arouet(1694-11-21)21 November 1694Paris, Kingdom of FranceDied30 May 1778(1778-05-30) (aged 83)Paris, Kingdom of FranceResting placePanthéon, Paris, FranceOccupationWriter, philosopherLanguageFrenchNationalityFrenchAlma materCollège Louis-le-GrandPartnerÉmilie du Châtelet (1733–1749),Marie Louise Mignot (1744–1778)Philosophy careerEraAge of EnlightenmentRegionWestern philosophyFrench philosophySchoolLumièresPhilosophesDeismClassical liberalismMain interestsPolitical philosophy, literature, historiography, biblical criticismNotable ideasPhilosophy of history, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, separation of church and state
Influences
Francis Bacon, Pierre Bayle, Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet, Miguel de Cervantes, Plato, Cicero, Émilie de Chatelet, Confucius, Pierre Corneille, Epicurus, Homer, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, John Locke, Lucian, Lucretius, Jean Meslier, Molière, Isaac Newton, Alexander Pope, Jean Racine, William Shakespeare, Ibn Tufail, Virgil
Influenced
Vissarion Belinsky, Jeremy Bentham, Jorge Luis Borges, Lord Byron, Catherine the Great, Emilie de Chatelet, Denis Diderot, Gustave Flaubert, Frederick the Great, William Godwin, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Alexander Herzen, Kermani, Christopher Hitchens, Victor Hugo, Karl Marx, Napoleon, Friedrich Nietzsche, Thomas Paine, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Percy Bysshe Shelley, David Strauss, Mary Wollstonecraft
Signature
François-Marie Arouet (French: [fʁɑ̃swa maʁi aʁwɛ]; 21 November 1694 – 30 May 1778) was a French Enlightenment writer, historian, and philosopher.
Known by his nom de plume Voltaire (/vɒlˈtɛər, voʊl-/; also US: /vɔːl-/; French: [vɔltɛːʁ]), he was famous for his wit, and his criticism of Christianity—especially the Roman Catholic Church—and of slavery.
Voltaire was an advocate of freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and separation of church and state.
Voltaire was a versatile and prolific writer, producing works in almost every literary form, including plays, poems, novels, essays, histories, and scientific expositions.
He wrote more than 20,000 letters and 2,000 books and pamphlets.
Voltaire was one of the first authors to become renowned and commercially successful internationally.
He was an outspoken advocate of civil liberties and was at constant risk from the strict censorship laws of the Catholic French monarchy.
His polemics witheringly satirized intolerance, religious dogma, and the French institutions of his day.
His best-known work and magnum opus, Candide, is a novella which comments on, criticizes, and ridicules many events, thinkers, and philosophies of his time.
Contents
Early life
François-Marie Arouet was born in Paris, the youngest of the five children of François Arouet (1649–1722), a lawyer who was a minor treasury official, and his wife, Marie Marguerite Daumard (c. 1660–1701), whose family was on the lowest rank of the French nobility.
Some speculation surrounds Voltaire's date of birth, because he claimed he was born on 20 February 1694 as the illegitimate son of a nobleman, Guérin de Rochebrune or Roquebrune.
Two of his older brothers—Armand-François and Robert—died in infancy, and his surviving brother Armand and sister Marguerite-Catherine were nine and seven years older, respectively.
Nicknamed "Zozo" by his family, Voltaire was baptized on 22 November 1694, with François de Castagnère, abbé de Châteauneuf [fr], and Marie Daumard, the wife of his mother's cousin, standing as godparents.
He was educated by the Jesuits at the Collège Louis-le-Grand (1704–1711), where he was taught Latin, theology, and rhetoric; later in life he became fluent in Italian, Spanish, and English.
By the time he left school, Voltaire had decided he wanted to be a writer, against the wishes of his father, who wanted him to become a lawyer.
Voltaire, pretending to work in Paris as an assistant to a notary, spent much of his time writing poetry.
When his father found out, he sent Voltaire to study law, this time in Caen, Normandy.
But the young man continued to write, producing essays and historical studies.
Voltaire's wit made him popular among some of the aristocratic families with whom he mixed.
In 1713, his father obtained a job for him as a secretary to the new French ambassador in the Netherlands, the marquis de Châteauneuf [fr], the brother of Voltaire's godfather.
At The Hague, Voltaire fell in love with a French Protestant refugee named Catherine Olympe Dunoyer (known as 'Pimpette'). Their affair, considered scandalous, was discovered by de Châteauneuf and Voltaire was forced to return to France by the end of the year.
Voltaire was imprisoned in the Bastille from 16 May 1717 to 15 April 1718 in a windowless cell with ten-foot-thick walls.
Most of Voltaire's early life revolved around Paris.
From early on, Voltaire had trouble with the authorities for critiques of the government.
As a result, he was twice sentenced to prison and once to temporary exile to England.
One satirical verse, in which Voltaire accused the Régent of incest with his daughter, resulted in an eleven-month imprisonment in the Bastille.
The Comédie-Française had agreed in January 1717 to stage his debut play, Œdipe, and it opened in mid-November 1718, seven months after his release.
Its immediate critical and financial success established his reputation.
Both the Régent and King George I of Great Britain presented Voltaire with medals as a mark of their appreciation.
He mainly argued for religious tolerance and freedom of thought.
He campaigned to eradicate priestly and aristo-monarchical authority, and supported a constitutional monarchy that protects people's rights.
Arouet adopted the name Voltaire in 1718, following his incarceration at the Bastille.
Its origin is unclear.
It is an anagram of AROVET LI, the Latinized spelling of his surname, Arouet, and the initial letters of le jeune ("the young"). According to a family tradition among the descendants of his sister, he was known as le petit volontaire ("determined little thing") as a child, and he resurrected a variant of the name in his adult life.
The name also reverses the syllables of Airvault, his family's home town in the Poitou region.
Richard Holmes supports the anagrammatic derivation of the name, but adds that a writer such as Voltaire would have intended it to also convey connotations of speed and daring.
These come from associations with words such as voltige (acrobatics on a trapeze or horse), volte-face (a spinning about to face one's enemies), and volatile (originally, any winged creature). "Arouet" was not a noble name fit for his growing reputation, especially given that name's resonance with à rouer ("to be beaten up") and roué (a débauché).
In a letter to Jean-Baptiste Rousseau in March 1719, Voltaire concludes by asking that, if Rousseau wishes to send him a return letter, he do so by addressing it to Monsieur de Voltaire.
A postscript explains: "J'ai été si malheureux sous le nom d'Arouet que j'en ai pris un autre surtout pour n'être plus confondu avec le poète Roi", ("I was so unhappy under the name of Arouet that I have taken another, primarily so as to cease to be confused with the poet Roi.") This probably refers to Adenes le Roi, and the 'oi' diphthong was then pronounced like modern 'ouai', so the similarity to 'Arouet' is clear, and thus, it could well have been part of his rationale.
Voltaire is known also to have used at least 178 separate pen names during his lifetime.
Career
Early fiction
Voltaire's next play, Artémire, set in ancient Macedonia, opened on 15 February 1720. It was a flop and only fragments of the text survive.
He instead turned to an epic poem about Henry IV of France that he had begun in early 1717. Denied a licence to publish, in August 1722 Voltaire headed north to find a publisher outside France.
On the journey, he was accompanied by his mistress, Marie-Marguerite de Rupelmonde, a young widow.
At Brussels, Voltaire and Rousseau met up for a few days, before Voltaire and his mistress continued northwards.
A publisher was eventually secured in The Hague.
In the Netherlands, Voltaire was struck and impressed by the openness and tolerance of Dutch society.
On his return to France, he secured a second publisher in Rouen, who agreed to publish La Henriade clandestinely.
After Voltaire's recovery from a month-long smallpox infection in November 1723, the first copies were smuggled into Paris and distributed.
While the poem was an instant success, Voltaire's new play, Mariamne, was a failure when it first opened in March 1724. Heavily reworked, it opened at the Comédie-Française in April 1725 to a much-improved reception.
It was among the entertainments provided at the wedding of Louis XV and Marie Leszczyńska in September 1725.
Great Britain
In early 1726, the aristocratic chevalier de Rohan-Chabot taunted Voltaire about his change of name, and Voltaire retorted that his name would win the esteem of the world, while Rohan would sully his own.
The furious Rohan arranged for his thugs to beat up Voltaire a few days later.
Seeking redress, Voltaire challenged Rohan to a duel, but the powerful Rohan family arranged for Voltaire to be arrested and imprisoned without trial in the Bastille on 17 April 1726. Fearing indefinite imprisonment, Voltaire asked to be exiled to England as an alternative punishment, which the French authorities accepted.
On 2 May, he was escorted from the Bastille to Calais and embarked for Britain.
Elémens de la philosophie de Neuton, 1738
In England, Voltaire lived largely in Wandsworth, with acquaintances including Everard Fawkener.
From December 1727 to June 1728 he lodged at Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, now commemorated by a plaque, to be nearer to his British publisher.
Voltaire circulated throughout English high society, meeting Alexander Pope, John Gay, Jonathan Swift, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, and many other members of the nobility and royalty.
Voltaire's exile in Great Britain greatly influenced his thinking.
He was intrigued by Britain's constitutional monarchy in contrast to French absolutism, and by the country's greater freedom of speech and religion.
He was influenced by the writers of the time, and developed an interest in English literature, especially Shakespeare, who was still little known in continental Europe.
Despite pointing out Shakespeare's deviations from neoclassical standards, Voltaire saw him as an example for French drama, which, though more polished, lacked on-stage action.
Later, however, as Shakespeare's influence began growing in France, Voltaire tried to set a contrary example with his own plays, decrying what he considered Shakespeare's barbarities.
Voltaire may have been present at the funeral of Isaac Newton,[a] and met Newton's niece, Catherine Conduitt.
In 1727, he published two essays in English, Upon the Civil Wars of France, Extracted from Curious Manuscripts and Upon Epic Poetry of the European Nations, from Homer Down to Milton.
Voltaire also published a letter about the Quakers after he attended one of their services.
After two and a half years in exile, Voltaire returned to France, and after a few months in Dieppe, the authorities permitted him to return to Paris.
At a dinner, French mathematician Charles Marie de La Condamine proposed buying up the lottery that was organized by the French government to pay off its debts, and Voltaire joined the consortium, earning perhaps a million livres.
He invested the money cleverly and on this basis managed to convince the Court of Finances of his responsible conduct, allowing him to take control of a trust fund inherited from his father.
He was now indisputably rich.
Further success followed in 1732 with his play Zaïre, which when published in 1733 carried a dedication to Fawkener praising English liberty and commerce.
He published his admiring essays on British government, literature, religion, and science in Letters Concerning the English Nation (London, 1733). In 1734, they were published in Rouen as Lettres philosophiques, causing a huge scandal.[b] Published without approval of the royal censor, the essays lauded British constitutional monarchy as more developed and more respectful of human rights than its French counterpart, particularly regarding religious tolerance.
The book was publicly burnt and banned, and Voltaire was again forced to flee Paris.
Château de Cirey
In the frontispiece to Voltaire's book on Newton's philosophy, Émilie du Châtelet appears as Voltaire's muse, reflecting Newton's heavenly insights down to Voltaire.
In 1733, Voltaire met Émilie du Châtelet (Marquise du Châtelet), a mathematician and married mother of three, who was 12 years his junior and with whom he was to have an affair for 16 years.
To avoid arrest after the publication of Lettres, Voltaire took refuge at her husband's château at Cirey on the borders of Champagne and Lorraine.
Voltaire paid for the building's renovation, and Émilie's husband sometimes stayed at the château with his wife and her lover.
The intellectual paramours collected around 21,000 books, an enormous number for the time.
Together, they studied these books and performed scientific experiments at Cirey, including an attempt to determine the nature of fire.
Having learned from his previous brushes with the authorities, Voltaire began his habit of avoiding open confrontation with the authorities and denying any awkward responsibility.
He continued to write plays, such as Mérope (or La Mérope française) and began his long researches into science and history.
Again, a main source of inspiration for Voltaire were the years of his British exile, during which he had been strongly influenced by the works of Isaac Newton.
Voltaire strongly believed in Newton's theories; he performed experiments in optics at Cirey, and was one of the promulgators of the famous story of Newton's inspiration from the falling apple, which he had learned from Newton's niece in London and first mentioned in his Letters.
Pastel by Maurice Quentin de La Tour, 1735
In the fall of 1735, Voltaire was visited by Francesco Algarotti, who was preparing a book about Newton in Italian.
Partly inspired by the visit, the Marquise translated Newton's Latin Principia into French, which remained the definitive French version into the 21st century.
Both she and Voltaire were also curious about the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz, a contemporary and rival of Newton.
While Voltaire remained a firm Newtonian, the Marquise adopted certain aspects of Leibniz's critiques.
Voltaire's own book Elements of the Philosophy of Newton made the great scientist accessible to a far greater public, and the Marquise wrote a celebratory review in the Journal des savants.
Voltaire's work was instrumental in bringing about general acceptance of Newton's optical and gravitational theories in France, in contrast to the theories of Descartes.
Voltaire and the Marquise also studied history, particularly the great contributors to civilization.
Voltaire's second essay in English had been "Essay upon the Civil Wars in France". It was followed by La Henriade, an epic poem on the French King Henri IV, glorifying his attempt to end the Catholic-Protestant massacres with the Edict of Nantes, which established religious toleration.
There followed a historical novel on King Charles XII of Sweden.
These, along with his Letters on the English, mark the beginning of Voltaire's open criticism of intolerance and established religions.[citation needed] Voltaire and the Marquise also explored philosophy, particularly metaphysical questions concerning the existence of God and the soul.
Voltaire and the Marquise analyzed the Bible and concluded that much of its content was dubious.
Voltaire's critical views on religion led to his belief in separation of church and state and religious freedom, ideas that he had formed after his stay in England.
In August 1736, Frederick the Great, then Crown Prince of Prussia and a great admirer of Voltaire, initiated a correspondence with him.
That December, Voltaire moved to Holland for two months and became acquainted with the scientists Herman Boerhaave and Willem 's Gravesande.
From mid-1739 to mid-1740 Voltaire lived largely in Brussels, at first with the Marquise, who was unsuccessfully attempting to pursue a 60-year-old family legal case regarding the ownership of two estates in Limburg.
In July 1740, he traveled to the Hague on behalf of Frederick in an attempt to dissuade a dubious publisher, van Duren, from printing without permission Frederick's Anti-Machiavel.
In September Voltaire and Frederick (now King) met for the first time in Moyland Castle near Cleves and in November Voltaire was Frederick's guest in Berlin for two weeks, followed by a meeting in September 1742 at Aix-la-Chapelle.
Voltaire was sent to Frederick's court in 1743 by the French government as an envoy and spy to gauge Frederick's military intentions in the War of the Austrian Succession.
Though deeply committed to the Marquise, Voltaire by 1744 found life at her château confining.
On a visit to Paris that year, he found a new love—his niece.
At first, his attraction to Marie Louise Mignot was clearly sexual, as evidenced by his letters to her (only discovered in 1957). Much later, they lived together, perhaps platonically, and remained together until Voltaire's death.
Meanwhile, the Marquise also took a lover, the Marquis de Saint-Lambert.
Prussia
Die Tafelrunde by Adolph von Menzel: guests of Frederick the Great at Sanssouci, including members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences and Voltaire (third from left)
After the death of the Marquise in childbirth in September 1749, Voltaire briefly returned to Paris and in mid-1750 moved to Prussia at the invitation of Frederick the Great.
The Prussian king (with the permission of Louis XV) made him a chamberlain in his household, appointed him to the Order of Merit, and gave him a salary of 20,000 French livres a year.
He had rooms at Sanssouci and Charlottenburg Palace.
Life went well for Voltaire at first, and in 1751 he completed Micromégas, a piece of science fiction involving ambassadors from another planet witnessing the follies of humankind.
However, his relationship with Frederick began to deteriorate after he was accused of theft and forgery by a Jewish financier, Abraham Hirschel, who had invested in Saxon government bonds on behalf of Voltaire at a time when Frederick was involved in sensitive diplomatic negotiations with Saxony.
He encountered other difficulties: an argument with Maupertuis, the president of the Berlin Academy of Science and a former rival for Émilie's affections, provoked Voltaire's Diatribe du docteur Akakia ("Diatribe of Doctor Akakia"), which satirized some of Maupertuis's theories and his persecutions of a mutual acquaintance, Johann Samuel König.
This greatly angered Frederick, who ordered all copies of the document burned.
On 1 January 1752, Voltaire offered to resign as chamberlain and return his insignia of the Order of Merit; at first, Frederick refused until eventually permitting Voltaire to leave in March.
On a slow journey back to France, Voltaire stayed at Leipzig and Gotha for a month each, and Kassel for two weeks, arriving at Frankfurt on 31 May.
The following morning, he was detained at an inn by Frederick's agents, who held him in the city for over three weeks while Voltaire and Frederick argued by letter over the return of a satirical book of poetry Frederick had lent to Voltaire.
Marie Louise joined him on 9 June.
She and her uncle only left Frankfurt in July after she had defended herself from the unwanted advances of one of Frederick's agents, and Voltaire's luggage had been ransacked and valuable items taken.
Voltaire's attempts to vilify Frederick for his agents' actions at Frankfurt were largely unsuccessful, including his Mémoires pour Servir à la Vie de M. de Voltaire, published posthumously.
However, the correspondence between them continued, and though they never met in person again, after the Seven Years' War they largely reconciled.
Geneva and Ferney
Voltaire's château at Ferney, France
Voltaire's slow progress toward Paris continued through Mainz, Mannheim, Strasbourg, and Colmar, but in January 1754 Louis XV banned him from Paris, and he turned for Geneva, near which he bought a large estate (Les Délices) in early 1755. Though he was received openly at first, the law in Geneva, which banned theatrical performances, and the publication of The Maid of Orleans against his will soured his relationship with Calvinist Genevans.
In late 1758, he bought an even larger estate at Ferney, on the French side of the Franco-Swiss border.
The town would adopt his name, calling itself Ferney-Voltaire, and this became its official name in 1878.
Early in 1759, Voltaire completed and published Candide, ou l'Optimisme (Candide, or Optimism). This satire on Leibniz's philosophy of optimistic determinism remains Voltaire's best-known work.
He would stay in Ferney for most of the remaining 20 years of his life, frequently entertaining distinguished guests, such as James Boswell, Adam Smith, Giacomo Casanova, and Edward Gibbon.[c] In 1764, he published one of his best-known philosophical works, the Dictionnaire philosophique, a series of articles mainly on Christian history and dogmas, a few of which were originally written in Berlin.
From 1762, as an unmatched intellectual celebrity, he began to champion unjustly persecuted individuals, most famously the Huguenot merchant Jean Calas.
Calas had been tortured to death in 1763, supposedly because he had murdered his eldest son for wanting to convert to Catholicism.
His possessions were confiscated, and his two daughters were taken from his widow and forced into Catholic convents.
Voltaire, seeing this as a clear case of religious persecution, managed to overturn the conviction in 1765.
Voltaire was initiated into Freemasonry a little over a month before his death.
On 4 April 1778, he attended la Loge des Neuf Sœurs in Paris, and became an Entered Apprentice Freemason.
According to some sources, "Benjamin Franklin ... urged Voltaire to become a freemason; and Voltaire agreed, perhaps only to please Franklin." However, Franklin was merely a visitor at the time Voltaire was initiated, the two only met a month before Voltaire's death, and their interactions with each other were brief.
House in Paris where Voltaire died
Death and burial
Jean-Antoine Houdon, Voltaire, 1778, National Gallery of Art
In February 1778, Voltaire returned for the first time in over 25 years to Paris, among other reasons to see the opening of his latest tragedy, Irene.
The five-day journey was too much for the 83-year-old, and he believed he was about to die on 28 February, writing "I die adoring God, loving my friends, not hating my enemies, and detesting superstition." However, he recovered, and in March he saw a performance of Irene, where he was treated by the audience as a returning hero.
He soon became ill again and died on 30 May 1778. The accounts of his deathbed have been numerous and varying, and it has not been possible to establish the details of what precisely occurred.
His enemies related that he repented and accepted the last rites from a Catholic priest, or that he died in agony of body and soul, while his adherents told of his defiance to his last breath.
According to one story of his last words, when the priest urged him to renounce Satan, he replied, "This is no time to make new enemies." However, this appears to have originated from a joke in a Massachusetts newspaper in 1856, and was only attributed to Voltaire in the 1970s.
Because of his well-known criticism of the Church, which he had refused to retract before his death, Voltaire was denied a Christian burial in Paris, but friends and relations managed to bury his body secretly at the Abbey of Scellières in Champagne, where Marie Louise's brother was abbé. His heart and brain were embalmed separately.
Voltaire's tomb in the Paris Panthéon
On 11 July 1791, the National Assembly of France, regarding Voltaire as a forerunner of the French Revolution, had his remains brought back to Paris and enshrined in the Panthéon.[d] An estimated million people attended the procession, which stretched throughout Paris.
There was an elaborate ceremony, including music composed for the event by André Grétry.
Writings
History
Voltaire had an enormous influence on the development of historiography through his demonstration of fresh new ways to look at the past.
Guillaume de Syon argues:
Voltaire recast historiography in both factual and analytical terms.
Not only did he reject traditional biographies and accounts that claim the work of supernatural forces, but he went so far as to suggest that earlier historiography was rife with falsified evidence and required new investigations at the source.
Such an outlook was not unique in that the scientific spirit that 18th-century intellectuals perceived themselves as invested with.
A rationalistic approach was key to rewriting history.
Voltaire's best-known histories are History of Charles XII (1731), The Age of Louis XIV (1751), and his Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations (1756). He broke from the tradition of narrating diplomatic and military events, and emphasized customs, social history and achievements in the arts and sciences.
The Essay on Customs traced the progress of world civilization in a universal context, rejecting both nationalism and the traditional Christian frame of reference.
Influenced by Bossuet's Discourse on Universal History (1682), he was the first scholar to attempt seriously a history of the world, eliminating theological frameworks, and emphasizing economics, culture and political history.
He treated Europe as a whole rather than a collection of nations.
He was the first to emphasize the debt of medieval culture to Middle Eastern civilization, but otherwise was weak on the Middle Ages.
Although he repeatedly warned against political bias on the part of the historian, he did not miss many opportunities to expose the intolerance and frauds of the church over the ages.
Voltaire advised scholars that anything contradicting the normal course of nature was not to be believed.
Although he found evil in the historical record, he fervently believed reason and expanding literacy would lead to progress.
Voltaire explains his view of historiography in his article on "History" in Diderot's Encyclopédie: "One demands of modern historians more details, better ascertained facts, precise dates, more attention to customs, laws, mores, commerce, finance, agriculture, population." Voltaire's histories imposed the values of the Enlightenment on the past, but at the same time he helped free historiography from antiquarianism, Eurocentrism, religious intolerance and a concentration on great men, diplomacy, and warfare.
Yale professor Peter Gay says Voltaire wrote "very good history", citing his "scrupulous concern for truths", "careful sifting of evidence", "intelligent selection of what is important", "keen sense of drama", and "grasp of the fact that a whole civilization is a unit of study".
Poetry
From an early age, Voltaire displayed a talent for writing verse, and his first published work was poetry.
He wrote two book-long epic poems, including the first ever written in French, the Henriade, and later, The Maid of Orleans, besides many other smaller pieces.[citation needed]
The Henriade was written in imitation of Virgil, using the alexandrine couplet reformed and rendered monotonous for modern readers but it was a huge success in the 18th and early 19th century, with sixty-five editions and translations into several languages.
The epic poem transformed French King Henry IV into a national hero for his attempts at instituting tolerance with his Edict of Nantes.
La Pucelle, on the other hand, is a burlesque on the legend of Joan of Arc.
Prose
Title page of Voltaire's Candide, 1759
Many of Voltaire's prose works and romances, usually composed as pamphlets, were written as polemics.
Candide attacks the passivity inspired by Leibniz's philosophy of optimism through the character Pangloss's frequent refrain that circumstances are the "best of all possible worlds". L'Homme aux quarante ecus (The Man of Forty Pieces of Silver) addresses social and political ways of the time; Zadig and others, the received forms of moral and metaphysical orthodoxy; and some were written to deride the Bible.
In these works, Voltaire's ironic style, free of exaggeration, is apparent, particularly the restraint and simplicity of the verbal treatment.
Candide in particular is the best example of his style.
Voltaire also has—in common with Jonathan Swift—the distinction of paving the way for science fiction's philosophical irony, particularly in his Micromégas and the vignette "Plato's Dream" (1756).
Voltaire at Frederick the Great's Sanssouci, by Pierre Charles Baquoy
In general, his criticism and miscellaneous writing show a similar style to Voltaire's other works.
Almost all of his more substantive works, whether in verse or prose, are preceded by prefaces of one sort or another, which are models of his caustic yet conversational tone.
In a vast variety of nondescript pamphlets and writings, he displays his skills at journalism.
In pure literary criticism his principal work is the Commentaire sur Corneille, although he wrote many more similar works—sometimes (as in his Life and Notices of Molière) independently and sometimes as part of his Siècles.
Voltaire's works, especially his private letters, frequently urge the reader: "écrasez l'infâme", or "crush the infamous". The phrase refers to contemporaneous abuses of power by royal and religious authorities, and the superstition and intolerance fomented by the clergy.
He had seen and felt these effects in his own exiles, the burnings of his books and those of many others, and in the atrocious persecution of Jean Calas and François-Jean de la Barre.
He stated in one of his most famous quotes that "Superstition sets the whole world in flames; philosophy quenches them."
The most oft-cited Voltaire quotation is apocryphal.
He is incorrectly credited with writing, "I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it." These were not his words, but rather those of Evelyn Beatrice Hall, written under the pseudonym S. G. Tallentyre in her 1906 biographical book The Friends of Voltaire.
Hall intended to summarize in her own words Voltaire's attitude towards Claude Adrien Helvétius and his controversial book De l'esprit, but her first-person expression was mistaken for an actual quotation from Voltaire.
Her interpretation does capture the spirit of Voltaire's attitude towards Helvétius; it had been said Hall's summary was inspired by a quotation found in a 1770 Voltaire letter to an Abbot le Riche, in which he was reported to have said, "I detest what you write, but I would give my life to make it possible for you to continue to write." Nevertheless, scholars believe there must have again been misinterpretation, as the letter does not seem to contain any such quote.[e]
Voltaire's first major philosophical work in his battle against "l'infâme" was the Traité sur la tolérance (Treatise on Tolerance), exposing the Calas affair, along with the tolerance exercised by other faiths and in other eras (for example, by the Jews, the Romans, the Greeks and the Chinese). Then, in his Dictionnaire philosophique, containing such articles as "Abraham", "Genesis", "Church Council", he wrote about what he perceived as the human origins of dogmas and beliefs, as well as inhuman behavior of religious and political institutions in shedding blood over the quarrels of competing sects.
Amongst other targets, Voltaire criticized France's colonial policy in North America, dismissing the vast territory of New France as "a few acres of snow" ("quelques arpents de neige").
Letters
Voltaire also engaged in an enormous amount of private correspondence during his life, totalling over 20,000 letters.
Theodore Besterman's collected edition of these letters, completed only in 1964, fills 102 volumes.
One historian called the letters "a feast not only of wit and eloquence but of warm friendship, humane feeling, and incisive thought."
In Voltaire's correspondence with Catherine the Great he derided democracy.
He wrote, "Almost nothing great has ever been done in the world except by the genius and firmness of a single man combating the prejudices of the multitude."
Religious and philosophical views
Voltaire at 70; engraving from 1843 edition of his Philosophical Dictionary
Like other key Enlightenment thinkers, Voltaire was a deist.
He challenged orthodoxy by asking: "What is faith? Is it to believe that which is evident? No.
It is perfectly evident to my mind that there exists a necessary, eternal, supreme, and intelligent being.
This is no matter of faith, but of reason."
In a 1763 essay, Voltaire supported the toleration of other religions and ethnicities: "It does not require great art, or magnificently trained eloquence, to prove that Christians should tolerate each other. I, however, am going further: I say that we should regard all men as our brothers.
What? The Turk my brother? The Chinaman my brother? The Jew? The Siam? Yes, without doubt; are we not all children of the same father and creatures of the same God?"
In one of his many denunciations of priests of every religious sect, Voltaire describes them as those who "rise from an incestuous bed, manufacture a hundred versions of God, then eat and drink God, then piss and shit God."
Christianity
Historians have described Voltaire's description of the history of Christianity as "propagandistic". His Dictionnaire philosophique is responsible for the myth that the early Church had fifty gospels before settling on the standard canonical four as well as propagating the myth that the canon of the New Testament was decided at the First Council of Nicaea.
Voltaire is partially responsible for the misattribution of the expression Credo quia absurdum to the Church Fathers.
Furthermore, despite the death of Hypatia being the result of finding herself in the crossfires of a mob (likely Christian) during a political feud in 4th-century Alexandria, Voltaire promoted the theory that she was stripped naked and murdered by the minions of the bishop Cyril of Alexandria, concluding by stating that "when one finds a beautiful woman completely naked, it is not for the purpose of massacring her." Voltaire meant for this argument to bolster one of his anti-Catholic tracts.
In a letter to Frederick II, King of Prussia, dated 5 January 1767, he wrote about Christianity:
La nôtre [religion] est sans contredit la plus ridicule, la plus absurde, et la plus sanguinaire qui ait jamais infecté le monde."Ours [i.e., the Christian religion] is assuredly the most ridiculous, the most absurd and the most bloody religion which has ever infected this world.
Your Majesty will do the human race an eternal service by extirpating this infamous superstition, I do not say among the rabble, who are not worthy of being enlightened and who are apt for every yoke; I say among honest people, among men who think, among those who wish to think. ... My one regret in dying is that I cannot aid you in this noble enterprise, the finest and most respectable which the human mind can point out."
In La bible enfin expliquée, he expressed the following attitude to lay reading of the Bible: It is characteristic of fanatics who read the holy scriptures to tell themselves: God killed, so I must kill; Abraham lied, Jacob deceived, Rachel stole: so I must steal, deceive, lie.
But, wretch, you are neither Rachel, nor Jacob, nor Abraham, nor God; you are just a mad fool, and the popes who forbade the reading of the Bible were extremely wise.
Voltaire's opinion of the Bible was mixed.
Although influenced by Socinian works such as the Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum, Voltaire's skeptical attitude to the Bible separated him from Unitarian theologians like Fausto Sozzini or even Biblical-political writers like John Locke.
His statements on religion also brought down on him the fury of the Jesuits and in particular Claude-Adrien Nonnotte.
This did not hinder his religious practice, though it did win for him a bad reputation in certain religious circles.
The deeply Christian Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart wrote to his father the year of Voltaire's death, saying, "The arch-scoundrel Voltaire has finally kicked the bucket ..." Voltaire was later deemed to influence Edward Gibbon in claiming that Christianity was a contributor to the fall of the Roman Empire in his book The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire:As Christianity advances, disasters befall the [Roman] empire—arts, science, literature, decay—barbarism and all its revolting concomitants are made to seem the consequences of its decisive triumph—and the unwary reader is conducted, with matchless dexterity, to the desired conclusion—the abominable Manicheism of Candide, and, in fact, of all the productions of Voltaire's historic school—viz., "that instead of being a merciful, ameliorating, and benignant visitation, the religion of Christians would rather seem to be a scourge sent on man by the author of all evil."
However, Voltaire also acknowledged the self-sacrifice of Christians.
He wrote: "Perhaps there is nothing greater on earth than the sacrifice of youth and beauty, often of high birth, made by the gentle sex in order to work in hospitals for the relief of human misery, the sight of which is so revolting to our delicacy.
Peoples separated from the Roman religion have imitated but imperfectly so generous a charity." Yet, according to Daniel-Rops, Voltaire's "hatred of religion increased with the passage of years.
The attack, launched at first against clericalism and theocracy, ended in a furious assault upon Holy Scripture, the dogmas of the Church, and even upon the person of Jesus Christ Himself, who [he] depicted now as a degenerate." Voltaire's reasoning may be summed up in his well-known saying, "Those who can make you believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities."
Judaism
According to Orthodox rabbi Joseph Telushkin, the most significant Enlightenment hostility against Judaism was found in Voltaire; 30 of the 118 articles in his Dictionnaire philosophique dealt with Jews or Judaism, describing them in consistently negative ways.
For example, in Voltaire's A Philosophical Dictionary, he wrote of Jews: "In short, we find in them only an ignorant and barbarous people, who have long united the most sordid avarice with the most detestable superstition and the most invincible hatred for every people by whom they are tolerated and enriched." Telushkin states that Voltaire did not limit his attack to aspects of Judaism that Christianity used as a foundation, repeatedly making it clear that he despised Jews.
On the other hand, Peter Gay, a contemporary authority on the Enlightenment, also points to Voltaire's remarks (for instance, that the Jews were more tolerant than the Christians) in the Traité sur la tolérance and surmises that "Voltaire struck at the Jews to strike at Christianity". Whatever anti-semitism Voltaire may have felt, Gay suggests, derived from negative personal experience.
Arthur Hertzberg, a Conservative Rabbi, claims that Gay's second suggestion is also untenable, as Voltaire himself denied its validity when he remarked that he had "forgotten about much larger bankruptcies through Christians".[clarification needed] However, Bertram Schwarzbach's far more detailed studies of Voltaire's dealings with Jewish people throughout his life concluded that he was anti-biblical, not anti-semitic.
His remarks on the Jews and their "superstitions" were essentially no different from his remarks on Christians.
Some authors link Voltaire's anti-Judaism to his polygenism.
According to Joxe Azurmendi this anti-Judaism has a relative importance in Voltaire's philosophy of history.
However, Voltaire's anti-Judaism influenced later authors like Ernest Renan.
Voltaire did have a Jewish friend, Daniel de Fonseca, whom he esteemed highly, and proclaimed him as "the only philosopher, perhaps, among the Jews of his time".
Voltaire had also condemned the persecution of Jews on several occasions including in his work Henriade, and never advocated violence or attacks against them.
According to the historian Will Durant, Voltaire had praised the simplicity, sobriety, regularity, and industry of Jews, however subsequently, Voltaire became strongly anti-Semitic after some regrettable personal financial transactions and quarrels with Jewish financiers.
In his Essai sur les moeurs Voltaire had denounced the ancient Hebrews using strong language; a Catholic priest had protested against this censure.
The anti-Semitic passages in Voltaire's Dictionnaire philosophique were criticized by Isaac De Pinto in 1762. Subsequently, Voltaire agreed with the criticism of the anti-Semitic passages and stated that De Pinto's letter convinced that there are "highly intelligent and cultivated people" among the Jews and that he had been "wrong to attribute to a whole nation the vices of some individuals"; he also promised to revise the objectionable passages for forthcoming editions of the Dictionnaire philosophique, but failed to do so.
Islam
Voltaire's views about Islam were generally negative, and he found its holy book, the Quran, to be ignorant of the laws of physics.
In a 1740 letter to Frederick II of Prussia, Voltaire ascribes to Muhammad a brutality that "is assuredly nothing any man can excuse" and suggests that his following stemmed from superstition; Voltaire continued, "But that a camel-merchant should stir up insurrection in his village; that in league with some miserable followers he persuades them that he talks with the angel Gabriel; that he boasts of having been carried to heaven, where he received in part this unintelligible book, each page of which makes common sense shudder; that, to pay homage to this book, he delivers his country to iron and flame; that he cuts the throats of fathers and kidnaps daughters; that he gives to the defeated the choice of his religion or death: this is assuredly nothing any man can excuse, at least if he was not born a Turk, or if superstition has not extinguished all natural light in him."
In 1748, after having read Henri de Boulainvilliers and George Sale, he wrote again about Mohammed and Islam in "De l'Alcoran et de Mahomet" ("On the Quran and on Mohammed"). In this essay, Voltaire maintained that Mohammed was a "sublime charlatan"[f] Drawing on complementary information in Herbelot's "Oriental Library", Voltaire, according to René Pomeau, adjudged the Quran, with its "contradictions, ... absurdities, ... anachronisms", to be "rhapsody, without connection, without order, and without art". Thus he "henceforward conceded" that "if his book was bad for our times and for us, it was very good for his contemporaries, and his religion even more so.
It must be admitted that he removed almost all of Asia from idolatry" and that "it was difficult for such a simple and wise religion, taught by a man who was constantly victorious, could hardly fail to subjugate a portion of the earth." He considered that "its civil laws are good; its dogma is admirable which it has in common with ours" but that "his means are shocking; deception and murder".
In his Essay on the Manners and Spirit of Nations (published 1756), Voltaire deals with the history of Europe before Charlemagne to the dawn of the age of Louis XIV, and that of the colonies and the East.
As a historian, he devoted several chapters to Islam, Voltaire highlighted the Arabian, Turkish courts, and conducts.
Here he called Mohammed a "poet", and stated that he was not an illiterate.
As a "legislator", he "changed the face of part of Europe [and] one half of Asia." In chapter VI, Voltaire finds similarities between Arabs and ancient Hebrews, that they both kept running to battle in the name of God, and sharing a passion for the spoils of war.
Voltaire continues that, "It is to be believed that Mohammed, like all enthusiasts, violently struck by his ideas, first presented them in good faith, strengthened them with fantasy, fooled himself in fooling others, and supported through necessary deceptions a doctrine which he considered good." He thus compares "the genius of the Arab people" with "the genius of the ancient Romans".
According to Malise Ruthven, as Voltaire learned more about Islam his opinion of the faith became more positive.
As a result, his book, Fanaticism (Mohammad the Prophet), inspired Goethe, who was attracted to Islam, to write a drama on this theme, though completed only the poem Mahomets-Gesang ("Mahomet's Singing").
Drama Mahomet
Main article: Mahomet (play)
The tragedy Fanaticism, or Mahomet the Prophet (French: Le fanatisme, ou Mahomet le Prophete) was written in 1736 by Voltaire.
The play is a study of religious fanaticism and self-serving manipulation.
The character Muhammad orders the murder of his critics.
Voltaire described the play as "written in opposition to the founder of a false and barbarous sect."
Voltaire described Muhammad as an "impostor", a "false prophet", a "fanatic" and a "hypocrite". Defending the play, Voltaire said that he "tried to show in it into what horrible excesses fanaticism, led by an impostor, can plunge weak minds". When Voltaire wrote in 1742 to César de Missy, he described Mohammed as deceitful.
In his play, Mohammed was "whatever trickery can invent that is most atrocious and whatever fanaticism can accomplish that is most horrifying.
Mahomet here is nothing other than Tartuffe with armies at his command." After later having judged that he had made Mohammed in his play "somewhat nastier than he really was", Voltaire claims that Muhammad stole the idea of an angel weighing both men and women from Zoroastrians, who are often referred to as "Magi". Voltaire continues about Islam, saying:
Nothing is more terrible than a people who, having nothing to lose, fight in the united spirit of rapine and of religion.
In a 1745 letter recommending the play to Pope Benedict XIV, Voltaire described Muhammad as "the founder of a false and barbarous sect" and "a false prophet". Voltaire wrote: "Your holiness will pardon the liberty taken by one of the lowest of the faithful, though a zealous admirer of virtue, of submitting to the head of the true religion this performance, written in opposition to the founder of a false and barbarous sect.
To whom could I with more propriety inscribe a satire on the cruelty and errors of a false prophet, than to the vicar and representative of a God of truth and mercy?" His view was modified slightly for Essai sur les Moeurs et l'Esprit des Nations, although it remained negative.
In 1751, Voltaire performed his play Mohamet once again, with great success.
Hinduism
Commenting on the sacred texts of the Hindus, the Vedas, Voltaire observed: The Veda was the most precious gift for which the West had ever been indebted to the East.
He regarded Hindus as "a peaceful and innocent people, equally incapable of hurting others or of defending themselves." Voltaire was himself a supporter of animal rights and was a vegetarian.
He used the antiquity of Hinduism to land what he saw as a devastating blow to the Bible's claims and acknowledged that the Hindus' treatment of animals showed a shaming alternative to the immorality of European imperialists.
Confucianism
Life and Works of Confucius, by Prospero Intorcetta, 1687
Works attributed to Confucius were translated into European languages through the agency of Jesuit missionaries stationed in China.[g] Matteo Ricci was among the earliest to report on the teachings of Confucius, and father Prospero Intorcetta wrote about the life and works of Confucius in Latin in 1687.
Translations of Confucian texts influenced European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who hoped to improve European morals and institutions by the serene doctrines of the East.
Voltaire shared these hopes, seeing Confucian rationalism as an alternative to Christian dogma.
He praised Confucian ethics and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for Europe.
Confucius has no interest in falsehood; he did not pretend to be prophet; he claimed no inspiration; he taught no new religion; he used no delusions; flattered not the emperor under whom he lived...— Voltaire
With the translation of Confucian texts during the Enlightenment, the concept of a meritocracy reached intellectuals in the West, who saw it as an alternative to the traditional Ancien Régime of Europe.
Voltaire wrote favourably of the idea, claiming that the Chinese had "perfected moral science" and advocating an economic and political system after the Chinese model.
Views on race and slavery
An illustration of a scene from Candide where the protagonist encounters a slave in French Guiana
Voltaire rejected the biblical Adam and Eve story and was a polygenist who speculated that each race had entirely separate origins.
According to William Cohen, like most other polygenists, Voltaire believed that because of their different origins, Black Africans did not entirely share the natural humanity of white Europeans.
According to David Allen Harvey, Voltaire often invoked racial differences as a means to attack religious orthodoxy, and the Biblical account of creation.
Other historians, instead, have suggested that Voltaire's support for polygenism was more heavily encouraged by his investments in the French Compagnie des Indes and other colonial enterprises that engaged in the slave trade.
His most famous remark on slavery is found in Candide, where the hero is horrified to learn "at what price we eat sugar in Europe" after coming across a slave in French Guiana who has been mutilated for escaping, who opines that, if all human beings have common origins as the Bible taught, it makes them cousins, concluding that "no one could treat their relatives more horribly". Elsewhere, he wrote caustically about "whites and Christians [who] proceed to purchase negroes cheaply, in order to sell them dear in America". Voltaire has been accused of supporting the slave trade as per a letter attributed to him, although it has been suggested that this letter is a forgery "since no satisfying source attests to the letter's existence."
In his Philosophical Dictionary, Voltaire endorses Montesquieu's criticism of the slave trade: "Montesquieu was almost always in error with the learned, because he was not learned, but he was almost always right against the fanatics and the promoters of slavery."
Zeev Sternhell argues that despite his shortcomings, Voltaire was a forerunner of liberal pluralism in his approach to history and non-European cultures.
Voltaire wrote, "We have slandered the Chinese because their metaphysics is not the same as ours ... This great misunderstanding about Chinese rituals has come about because we have judged their usages by ours, for we carry the prejudices of our contentious spirit to the end of the world." In speaking of Persia, he condemned Europe's "ignorant audacity" and "ignorant credulity". When writing about India, he declares, "It is time for us to give up the shameful habit of slandering all sects and insulting all nations!" In Essai sur les mœurs et l'esprit des nations, he defended the integrity of the Native Americans and wrote favorably of the Inca Empire.
Appreciation and influence
According to Victor Hugo: "To name Voltaire is to characterize the entire eighteenth century." Goethe regarded Voltaire as the greatest literary figure of modern times, and possibly of all time.
According to Diderot, Voltaire's influence would extend far into the future.[h] Napoleon commented that till he was sixteen he "would have fought for Rousseau against the friends of Voltaire, today it is the opposite ... The more I read Voltaire the more I love him.
He is a man always reasonable, never a charlatan, never a fanatic" (though he later criticized Voltaire's work Mahomet during his captivity on Saint Helena). Frederick the Great commented on his good fortune for having lived in the age of Voltaire, and corresponded with him throughout his reign until Voltaire's death.
In England, Voltaire's views influenced Godwin, Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, Bentham, Byron and Shelley.
Macaulay made note of the fear that Voltaire's very name incited in tyrants and fanatics.[i]
In Russia, Catherine the Great had been reading Voltaire for sixteen years prior to becoming Empress in 1762. In October 1763, she began a correspondence with the philosopher that continued till his death.
The content of these letters has been described as being akin to a student writing to a teacher.
Upon Voltaire's death, the Empress purchased his library, which was then transported and placed in The Hermitage.
Alexander Herzen remarked that "The writings of the egoist Voltaire did more for liberation than those of the loving Rousseau did for brotherhood." In his famous letter to N. V. Gogol, Vissarion Belinsky wrote that Voltaire "stamped out the fires of fanaticism and ignorance in Europe by ridicule."
In his native Paris, Voltaire was remembered as the defender of Jean Calas and Pierre Sirven.
Although Voltaire's campaign had failed to secure the annulment of la Barre's execution for blasphemy against Christianity, the criminal code that sanctioned the execution was revised during Voltaire's lifetime.
In 1764, Voltaire successfully intervened and secured the release of Claude Chamont, arrested for attending Protestant services.
When Comte de Lally was executed for treason in 1766, Voltaire wrote a 300-page document in his defense.
Subsequently, in 1778, the judgment against de Lally was expunged just before Voltaire's death.
The Genevan Protestant minister Pomaret once said to Voltaire, "You seem to attack Christianity, and yet you do the work of a Christian." Frederick the Great noted the significance of a philosopher capable of influencing judges to change their unjust decisions, commenting that this alone is sufficient to ensure the prominence of Voltaire as a humanitarian.
Under the French Third Republic, anarchists and socialists often invoked Voltaire's writings in their struggles against militarism, nationalism, and the Catholic Church.
The section condemning the futility and imbecility of war in the Dictionnaire philosophique was a frequent favorite, as were his arguments that nations can only grow at the expense of others.
Following the liberation of France from the Vichy regime in 1944, Voltaire's 250th birthday was celebrated in both France and the Soviet Union, honoring him as "one of the most feared opponents" of the Nazi collaborators and someone "whose name symbolizes freedom of thought, and hatred of prejudice, superstition, and injustice."
Jorge Luis Borges stated that "not to admire Voltaire is one of the many forms of stupidity" and included his short fiction such as Micromégas in "The Library of Babel" and "A Personal Library." Gustave Flaubert believed that France had erred gravely by not following the path forged by Voltaire instead of Rousseau.
Most architects of modern America were adherents of Voltaire's views.
According to Will Durant:Italy had a Renaissance, and Germany had a Reformation, but France had Voltaire; he was for his country both Renaissance and Reformation, and half the Revolution.
He was first and best in his time in his conception and writing of history, in the grace of his poetry, in the charm and wit of his prose, in the range of his thought and his influence.
His spirit moved like a flame over the continent and the century, and stirs a million souls in every generation.
Voltaire and Rousseau
Voltaire's junior contemporary Jean-Jacques Rousseau commented on how Voltaire's book Letters on the English played a great role in his intellectual development.
Having written some literary works and also some music, in December 1745 Rousseau wrote a letter introducing himself to Voltaire, who was by then the most prominent literary figure in France, to which Voltaire replied with a polite response.
Subsequently, when Rousseau sent Voltaire a copy of his book Discourse on Inequality, Voltaire replied, noting his disagreement with the views expressed in the book:
No one has ever employed so much intellect to persuade men to be beasts.
In reading your work one is seized with a desire to walk on all fours [marcher à quatre pattes]. However, as it is more than sixty years since I lost that habit, I feel, unfortunately, that it is impossible for me to resume it.
Subsequently, commenting on Rousseau's romantic novel Julie, or the New Heloise, Voltaire stated:
No more about Jean-Jacques' romance if you please.
I have read it, to my sorrow, and it would be to his if I had time to say what I think of this silly book.
Voltaire quipped that the first half of Julie had been written in a brothel and the second half in a lunatic asylum.
In his Lettres sur La Nouvelle Heloise, written under a pseudonym, Voltaire criticized Rousseau's grammatical mistakes:
Paris recognized Voltaire's hand and judged the patriarch to be bitten by jealousy.
In reviewing Rousseau's book Emile, Voltaire dismissed it as "a hodgepodge of a silly wet nurse in four volumes, with forty pages against Christianity, among the boldest ever known." He expressed admiration for the section titled Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar, calling it "fifty good pages ... it is regrettable that they should have been written by ... such a knave." He went on to predict that Emile would be forgotten within a month.
In 1764, Rousseau published Lettres de la montagne on religion and politics.
In the fifth letter he wondered why Voltaire had not been able to imbue the Genevan councilors, who frequently met him, "with that spirit of tolerance which he preaches without cease, and of which he sometimes has need". The letter continued with an imaginary speech in the voice of Voltaire, acknowledging authorship of the heretical book Sermon of the Fifty, which the real Voltaire had repeatedly denied.
In 1772, when a priest sent Rousseau a pamphlet denouncing Voltaire, Rousseau responded by defending his rival:
He has said and done so many good things that we should draw the curtain over his irregularities.
In 1778, when Voltaire was given unprecedented honors at the Théâtre-Français, an acquaintance of Rousseau ridiculed the event.
This was met by a sharp retort from Rousseau:
How dare you mock the honors rendered to Voltaire in the temple of which he is the god, and by the priests who for fifty years have been living off his masterpieces?
On 2 July 1778, Rousseau died one month after Voltaire.
In October 1794, Rousseau's remains were moved to the Panthéon near the remains of Voltaire.[j]
Louis XVI, while incarcerated in the Temple, lamented that Rousseau and Voltaire had "destroyed France".[k]
Legacy
Voltaire, by Jean-Antoine Houdon, 1778 (National Gallery of Art)
Voltaire perceived the French bourgeoisie to be too small and ineffective, the aristocracy to be parasitic and corrupt, the commoners as ignorant and superstitious, and the Church as a static and oppressive force useful only on occasion as a counterbalance to the rapacity of kings, although all too often, even more rapacious itself.
Voltaire distrusted democracy, which he saw as propagating the idiocy of the masses.
Voltaire long thought only an enlightened monarch could bring about change, given the social structures of the time and the extremely high rates of illiteracy, and that it was in the king's rational interest to improve the education and welfare of his subjects.
But his disappointments and disillusions with Frederick the Great changed his philosophy somewhat, and soon gave birth to one of his most enduring works, his novella Candide, ou l'Optimisme (Candide, or Optimism, 1759), which ends with a new conclusion of quietism: "It is up to us to cultivate our garden." His most polemical and ferocious attacks on intolerance and religious persecutions indeed began to appear a few years later.
Candide was also burned, and Voltaire jokingly claimed the actual author was a certain 'Demad' in a letter, where he reaffirmed the main polemical stances of the text.
He is remembered and honored in France as a courageous polemicist who indefatigably fought for civil rights (such as the right to a fair trial and freedom of religion) and who denounced the hypocrisies and injustices of the Ancien Régime.
The Ancien Régime involved an unfair balance of power and taxes between the three Estates: clergy and nobles on one side, the commoners and middle class, who were burdened with most of the taxes, on the other.
He particularly had admiration for the ethics and government as exemplified by the Chinese philosopher Confucius.
Voltaire is also known for many memorable aphorisms, such as "Si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer" ("If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him"), contained in a verse epistle from 1768, addressed to the anonymous author of a controversial work on The Three Impostors.
But far from being the cynical remark it is often taken for, it was meant as a retort to atheistic opponents such as d'Holbach, Grimm, and others.
He has had his detractors among his later colleagues.
The Scottish Victorian writer Thomas Carlyle argued that "Voltaire read history, not with the eye of devout seer or even critic, but through a pair of mere anti-catholic spectacles."
The town of Ferney, where Voltaire lived out the last 20 years of his life, was officially named Ferney-Voltaire in honor of its most famous resident, in 1878. His château is a museum.
Voltaire's library is preserved intact in the National Library of Russia at Saint Petersburg.
In the Zurich of 1916, the theatre and performance group who would become the early avant-garde Dada movement named their theater the Cabaret Voltaire.
A late-20th-century industrial music group later adopted the same name.
Astronomers have bestowed his name on the Voltaire crater on Deimos and the asteroid 5676 Voltaire.
Voltaire was also known to have been an advocate for coffee, as he was reported to have drunk it 50–72 times per day.
It has been suggested that high amounts of caffeine stimulated his creativity.
His great-grand-niece was the mother of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, a Catholic philosopher and Jesuit priest.
His book Candide was listed as one of The 100 Most Influential Books Ever Written, by Martin Seymour-Smith.
In the 1950s, the bibliographer and translator Theodore Besterman started to collect, transcribe and publish all of Voltaire's writings.
He founded the Voltaire Institute and Museum in Geneva where he began publishing collected volumes of Voltaire's correspondence.
On his death in 1976, he left his collection to the University of Oxford, where the Voltaire Foundation became established as a department.
The Foundation has continued to publish the Complete Works of Voltaire, a complete chronological series expected to reach completion in 2018 with around 200 volumes, fifty years after the series began.
It also publishes the series Oxford University Studies in the Enlightenment, begun by Bestermann as Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century, which has reached more than 500 volumes.
Works
Non-fiction
Letters on the Quakers (1727)
Letters concerning the English nation (London, 1733) (French version entitled Lettres philosophiques sur les Anglais, Rouen, 1734), revised as Letters on the English (circa 1778)
"Le Mondain" (1736)
Sept Discours en Vers sur l'Homme (1738)
The Elements of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy (1738; 2nd expanded ed. 1745)
Dictionnaire philosophique (1752)
The Sermon of the Fifty (1759)
The Calas Affair: A Treatise on Tolerance (1762)
Traité sur la tolérance (1763)
Ce qui plaît aux dames (1764)
Idées républicaines (1765)
La Philosophie de l'histoire (1765)
Questions sur les Miracles (1765)
L'Ingénu (1767)
La Princesse de Babylone (1768)
Des singularités de la nature (1768)
Les Dialogues d’Evhémère (1777)
History
History of Charles XII, King of Sweden (1731)
The Age of Louis XIV (1751)
The Age of Louis XV (1746–1752; published separately 1768)
Annals of the Empire – Charlemagne, AD 742 – Henry VII 1313, Vol.
I (1754)
Annals of the Empire – Louis of Bavaria, 1315 to Ferdinand II 1631 Vol.
II (1754)
Essay on Universal History, the Manners, and Spirit of Nations (1756)
History of the Russian Empire Under Peter the Great (Vol.
I 1759; Vol.
II 1763)
Novellas
The One-eyed Street Porter, Cosi-sancta (1715)
Micromégas (1738)
The World as it Goes (1750)
Memnon (1750)
Bababec and the Fakirs (1750)
Timon (1755)
Plato's Dream (1756)
The Travels of Scarmentado (1756)
The Two Consoled Ones (1756)
Zadig, or, Destiny (1757)
Candide, or Optimism (1758)
Story of a Good Brahman (1759)
The King of Boutan (1761)
The City of Cashmere (1760)
An Indian Adventure (1764)
The White and the Black (1764)
Jeannot and Colin (1764)
The Blind Judges of Colors (1766)
The Princess of Babylon (1768)
The Man with Forty Crowns (1768)
The Letters of Amabed (1769)
The Huron, or Pupil of Nature (1771)
The White Bull (1772)
An Incident of Memory (1773)
The History of Jenni (1774)
The Travels of Reason (1774)
The Ears of Lord Chesterfield and Chaplain Goudman (1775)
Plays
Voltaire wrote between fifty and sixty plays, including a few unfinished ones.
Among them are:
Œdipe (1718)
Artémire (1720)
Mariamne (1724)
Brutus (1730)
Éryphile (1732)
Zaïre (1732), inspiration for Zaira, opera by Vincenzo Bellini (1829)
Alzire, ou les Américains (1736), inspiration for Alzira, opera by Giuseppe Verdi (1845)
Zulima (1740)
Mahomet (1741)
Mérope (1743)
La princesse de Navarre (1745)
Sémiramis (1748), inspiration for Semiramide, opera by Gioachino Rossini (1823)
Nanine (1749)
L'Orphelin de la Chine (1755)[l]
Socrate (published 1759)
La Femme qui a Raison (1759)
Tancrède (1760), inspiration for Tancredi, opera by Gioachino Rossini (1813)
Don Pèdre, roi de Castille (1774)
Sophonisbe (1774)
Irène (1778)
Agathocle (1779)
Collected works
Oeuvres complètes de Voltaire, A. Beuchot (ed.). 72 vols. (1829–1840)
Oeuvres complètes de Voltaire, Louis E.D. Moland and G. Bengesco (eds.). 52 vols. (1877–1885)
Oeuvres complètes de Voltaire, Theodore Besterman, et al. (eds.). 144 vols. (1968–2018)
See also
Poetry portal
Biography portal
Boulevard Voltaire
List of liberal theorists
Mononymous persons
Voltaire Human Rights Awards, Australia
Voltaire Foundation
Voltaire Prize for Tolerance, International Understanding and Respect for Differences, University of Potsdam, Germany
References
Informational notes
Dobre and Nyden suggest that there is no clear evidence that Voltaire was present; see Mihnea Dobre, Tammy Nyden (2013). Cartesian Empiricism.
Springer. p. 89. ISBN 978-94-007-7690-6.
Contrary to the idea that Voltaire wrote the Letters in English, they were written in French and then translated into English by John Lockman.
The Scottish diarist Boswell recorded their conversations in 1764, which are published in Boswell and the Grand Tour.
It was rumoured that in May 1814, his and Rousseau's bones were removed from the Panthéon and discarded on the outskirts of Paris by supporters of the Bourbon Restoration.
Both tombs were opened in 1897, and the remains were still there.
Nevertheless, some modern historians have published the rumor as fact.
Charles Wirz, archivist at the Voltaire Institute and Museum in Geneva, recalled in 1994, that Hall 'wrongly' placed this quotation between speech marks in two of her works about Voltaire, recognising expressly the quotation in question was not one, in a letter of 9 May 1939, which was published in 1943 in volume LVIII under the title "Voltaire never said it" (pp. 534–35) of the review Modern language notes, Johns Hopkins Press, 1943, Baltimore.
An extract from the letter: 'The phrase "I disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it" which you have found in my book Voltaire in His Letters is my own expression and should not have been put in inverted commas.
Please accept my apologies for having, quite unintentionally, misled you into thinking I was quoting a sentence used by Voltaire (or anyone else but myself).' The words "my own" were underlined personally by Hall in her letter.
To believe certain commentators – Norbert Guterman, A Book of French Quotations, 1963 – Hall was referencing back to a Voltaire letter of 6 February 1770 to an abbot le Riche where Voltaire supposedly said, "Reverend, I hate what you write, but I will give my life so that you can continue to write." The problem is that, if you consult the letter itself, the sentence there does not appear, nor even the idea: "A M Le Riche a Amiens. 6 February.
You left, Sir, des Welches for des Welches.
You will find everywhere barbarians obstinate.
The number of wise will always be small.
It is true … it has increased; but it is nothing in comparison with the stupid ones; and, by misfortune, one says that God is always for the big battalions.
It is necessary that the decent people stick together and stay under cover.
There are no means that their small troop could tackle the party of the fanatics in open country.
I was very sick, I was near death every winter; this is the reason, Sir, why I have answered you so late.
I am not less touched by it than your memory.
Continue to me your friendship; it comforts me my evils and stupidities of the human genre.
Receive my assurances, etc." Voltaire, however, did not hesitate to wish censure against slander and personal libels.
Here is what he writes in his "Atheism" article in the Dictionnaire philosophique: "Aristophanes (this man that the commentators admire because he was Greek, not thinking that Socrates was Greek also), Aristophanes was the first who accustomed the Athenians to consider Socrates an atheist. … The tanners, the shoemakers and the dressmakers of Athens applauded a joke in which one represented Socrates raised in the air in a basket, announcing there was God, and praising himself to have stolen a coat by teaching philosophy.
A whole people, whose bad government authorized such infamous licences, deserved well what it got, to become the slave of the Romans, and today of the Turks."
Written and published in 1748 in Volume IV of the Œuvres de Voltaire, following his Tragedy of Mahomet.
The first was Michele Ruggieri, who had returned from China to Italy in 1588 and carried on translating in Latin the Chinese classics while residing in Salerno.
Diderot, in a letter to E.M. Falconet, dated 15 February 1766: Pile assumptions on assumptions; accumulate wars on wars; make interminable disturbances succeed to interminable disturbances; let the universe be inundated by a general spirit of confusion; and it would take a hundred thousand years for the works and the name of Voltaire to be lost.
Macaulay, in his essay on Frederick the Great: In truth, of all the intellectual weapons that have been wielded by man, the most terrible was the mockery of Voltaire.
Bigots and tyrants, who had never been moved by the wailings and cursing of millions, turned pale at his name.
"From that haven of neighborly peace their spirits rose to renew their war for the soul of the Revolution, of France, and of Western man", writes Will Durant.
In a celebrated letter, dated 2 April 1764, Voltaire had predicted the future occurrence of the French Revolution which he characterized as "a splendid outburst." Will Durant commented: Yet...he never for a moment supposed that in this "splendid outburst" all France would accept enthusiastically the philosophy of this queer Jean-Jacques Rousseau who, from Geneva and Paris, was thrilling the world with sentimental romances and revolutionary pamphlets.
The complex soul of France seemed to have divided itself into these two men, so different and yet so French.
Nietzsche speaks of "la gaya scienza, the light feet, wit, fire, grace, strong logic, arrogant intellectuality, the dance of the stars"—surely he was thinking of Voltaire.
Now beside Voltaire put Rousseau: all heat and fantasy, a man with noble and jejune visions, the idol of la bourgeois gentile-femme, announcing like Pascal that the heart has its reason which the head can never understand.
This is an adaptation of the famous Chinese play The Orphan of Zhao, based on historical events in the Spring and Autumn period.
Citations
Voltaire, La philosophie de l'histoire, Changuion, 1765.
Susan Sarah Cohen (2012). 2000. Walter de Gruyter. p. 90. ISBN 978-3-11-095695-5.
"Christopher Hitchens' Defense of the Enlightenment". 28 July 2018.
Heiner F. Klemme, Manfred Kuehn (2016). The Bloomsbury Dictionary of Eighteenth-Century German Philosophers.
Bloomsbury. p. 821. ISBN 978-1-4742-5600-1.
"Voltaire". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
"Voltaire". Collins English Dictionary.
HarperCollins.
Retrieved 1 August 2019.
"Voltaire". Lexico UK English Dictionary.
Oxford University Press.
Archived from the original on 22 March 2020.
"Voltaire". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins.
Retrieved 1 August 2019.
"Voltaire". Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
Retrieved 1 August 2019.
"Voltaire – Biography".
Pearson 2005, pp. 9–14.
Pearson 2005, p. 9.
Pearson 2005, p. 10.
Pearson 2005, p. 12.
Pearson 2005, pp. 24–25.
Liukkonen, Petri. "Voltaire". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library.
Archived from the original on 17 February 2015.
Pearson 2005, pp. 32–33.
a b Pearson 2005, p. 36.
Pearson 2005, pp. 36–37.
Pearson 2005, pp. 43, 45.
Fitzpatrick, Martin (2000). "Toleration and the Enlightenment Movement" in Grell/Porter, Toleration in Enlightenment Europe, p. 64, footnote 91, Cambridge University Press
Pearson 2005, pp. 49–50.
Pearson 2005, pp. 50–52.
Pearson 2005, p. 52.
a b c d e f Shank, J. B. (2009). "Voltaire". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Marvin Perry et al. (2015), Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society, Volume II, ISBN 978-1-305-09142-9, p. 427
Christopher Thacker (1971). Voltaire.
Profiles in literature series.
Taylor & Francis. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-7100-7020-3.
Pearson 2005, p. 17.
Pearson 2005, p. 24.
Holmes, Richard (2000). Sidetracks: Explorations of a Romantic Biographer.
HarperCollins. pp. 345–66. and "Voltaire's Grin" in New York Review of Books, 30 November 1995, pp. 49–55
– "Voltaire to Jean Baptiste Rousseau, c. 1 March 1719". Electronic Enlightenment.
Ed.
Robert McNamee et al.
Vers. 2.1. University of Oxford. 2010. Web. 20 June 2010.
results, search (1998). A Dictionary of Pseudonyms and Their Origins, with Stories of Name Changes, 3rd Edition.
Mcfarland & Co Inc Pub.
ISBN 0-7864-0423-X.
Pearson 2005, p. 54.
Pearson 2005, p. 55.
Pearson 2005, p. 57.
Pearson 2005, p. 59.
Pearson 2005, pp. 60–61.
Pearson 2005, p. 61.
Pearson 2005, p. 62.
a b c Pearson 2005, p. 64.
Pearson 2005, p. 65.
Pearson 2005, p. 66.
Pearson 2005, pp. 66–67.
a b c d "The Life of Voltaire". Thegreatdebate.org.uk.
Retrieved 3 August 2009.
Davidson, Ian (9 April 2010). "Voltaire in England". Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via 
Pearson 2005, p. 67.
Pearson 2005, pp. 76, 80, 83.
a b c d Pearson 2005, p. 82.
Pearson 2005, pp. 78–82.
Pearson 2005, pp. 69–70.
Pearson 2005, p. 77.
Betts, C. J. (1984). Early Deism in France: From the So-Called 'Déistes' of Lyon (1564) to Voltaire's Lettres philosophiques (1734). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. p. 245. ISBN 9789400961166. Retrieved 5 May 2022.
Pearson 2005, p. 85.
Shank, J. B. (2008). The Newton Wars.
U of Chicago Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-226-74947-1.
Davidson, Ian (2010). Voltaire: A Life.
Profile Books, London. p. 76. ISBN 978-1-84668-226-1.
Pearson 2005, p. 87.
Pearson 2005, pp. 92–93, 95.
a b Pearson 2005, p. 97.
Pearson 2005, p. 99.
Shank, J. B. (2008). The Newton Wars and the Beginning of the French Enlightenment.
University of Chicago Press. p. 366. ISBN 978-0-226-74945-7.
Schiff, Stacy (13 January 2011). "'Voltaire In Love': An Ardent, Intellectual Affair". npr books.
Retrieved 22 June 2014.
Pearson 2005, pp. 117–21.
Pearson 2005, p. 122.
Pearson 2005, pp. 155, 157.
"Voltaire and Emilie du Chatelet". Château de Cirey – Residence of Voltaire.
Retrieved 5 November 2018.
Pearson 2005, pp. 128, 138–39.
Saintsbury 1911, p. 201.
Pearson 2005, p. 138.
Pearson 2005, p. 137.
Pearson 2005, p. 153.
Pearson 2005, pp. 140–41.
Bryant, Walter W. (1907). A History of Astronomy. p. 53.
Pearson 2005, pp. 129–30.
Pearson 2005, pp. 143–44.
Pearson 2005, pp. 151–52.
Pearson 2005, pp. 162–64.
Pearson 2005, p. 166.
Pearson 2005, pp. 167–70.
Pearson 2005, p. 173.
Pearson 2005, pp. 175–77.
Davidson, Ian (1979). Voltaire in Exile.
Grove Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-8021-4236-8.
Durant & Durant 1980, p. 392.
Davidson, Ian (1979). Voltaire in Exile.
Grove Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-8021-4236-8.
Pearson 2005, pp. 214–17.
Pearson 2005, p. 218.
Pearson 2005, p. 219.
Pearson 2005, p. 217.
Pearson 2005, pp. 220–21.
Pearson 2005, pp. 221–22.
Pearson 2005, pp. 225–29.
Pearson 2005, pp. 229–30.
Pearson 2005, pp. 232–35.
Mitford, Nancy (1970) Frederick the Great pp. 184–85, 269
Pearson 2005, pp. 236–37.
Pearson 2005, p. 238.
Pearson 2005, pp. 244–45.
Pearson 2005, p. 247.
Pearson 2005, pp. 263–64.
Le Royer, Élie (23 November 1878). "Décret du Président de la République française n°6148 du 23 novembre 1878". Gallica (in French). Retrieved 6 May 2021.
Pearson 2005, pp. 284–90.
Jasper Ridley (2011). The Freemasons: A History of the World's Most Powerful Secret Society.
Skyhorse Publishing Inc. p. 141. ISBN 978-1-61145-010-1.
"I did not know that: Mason Facts". Archived from the original on 12 January 2007.
"Voltaire on British Columbia Grand Lodge Site".
Young, Adrian (19 July 2010). "When Franklin Met Voltaire". Family Security Matters.
Archived from the original on 8 August 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018.
Pearson 2005, pp. 364–65, 371–72.
Peter Gay, The Enlightenment – An Interpretation, Volume 2: The Science of Freedom, Wildwood House, London, 1973, pp. 88–89.
Bulston, Michael E (2007). Teach What You Believe.
Paulist Press. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-8091-4481-5.
"Deathbed Remark: This Is No Time To Be Making New Enemies". quoteinvestigator.com.
Pearson 2005, pp. 386–87.
Pearson 2005, pp. 388–89.
Pearson 2005, pp. 388, 391.
Pearson 2005, pp. 411–16.
Pearson 2005, pp. 416–17.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 926.
Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 5th ed, 1954; "Cornu" article
Guillaume de Syon, "Voltaire" in Kelly Boyd. ed. (1999). Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, vol 2. Taylor & Francis. pp. 1270–72. ISBN 978-1-884964-33-6. {{cite book}}: |last= has generic name (help)
Sakmann, Paul (1971). "The Problems of Historical Method and of Philosophy of History in Voltaire". History and Theory. 11 (4): 24–59. doi:10.2307/2504245. JSTOR 2504245.
Gay, Peter (1988) Voltaire's Politics
Gay, Peter (1957). "Carl Becker's Heavenly City". Political Science Quarterly. 72 (2): 182–99. doi:10.2307/2145772. JSTOR 2145772.
Saintsbury 1911, p. 204i.
Saintsbury 1911, p. 205.
McCabe, Joseph, A Treatise on Toleration and Other Essays (Amherst: Prometheus Books 1994) ISBN 0-87975-881-3 p. viii.
Palmer, R.R.; Colton, Joel (1950). A History of the Modern World.
McGraw-Hill, Inc.
ISBN 0-07-040826-2.
Saintsbury 1911, p. 204.
Geoffrey Parrinder (2000). The Routledge Dictionary of Religious and Spiritual Quotations.
Routledge. p. 24. ISBN 978-0415233934.
Boller, Paul F. Jr.; George, John (1989). They Never Said It: A Book of Fake Quotes, Misquotes, and Misleading Attributions.
New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0-19-505541-1.
Brumfitt, J. H. (1965). "The Present State of Voltaire Studies". Forum for Modern Language Studies.
Court of the University of St Andrews.
I (3): 230. doi:10.1093/fmls/I.3.230.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 138.
Massie, Robert K. (2011). Catherine the Great: Portrait of a Woman.
New York: Random House. p. 335
Paul Hazard, European thought in the eighteenth century from Montesquieu to Lessing (1954). pp 402–15.
"Voltaire". Deism.com. 25 June 2009. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
Voltaire. W. Dugdale, A Philosophical Dictionary ver 2, 1843, p. 473 sec 1. Retrieved 31 October 2007.
Voltaire (1763) A Treatise on Toleration
a b Ruthven, Malise. "Voltaire's Fanaticism, or Mahomet the Prophet:A New Translation; Preface: Voltaire and Islam". Retrieved 12 August 2015.
Bremmer 2010, p. 9.
Harrison, Peter (2017). "'I Believe Because It Is Absurd': The Enlightenment Invention of Tertullian's Credo". Church History 86.2: 350–59.
Watts, Edward Jay.
Hypatia: the life and legend of an ancient philosopher.
Oxford University Press, 2017, 139.
Voltaire (1869). Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Volume 7. p. 184.
Mathews, Chris (2009). Modern Satanism: Anatomy of a Radical Subculture.
Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 16.
Coakley, Sarah (2012). Faith, Rationality and the Passions. p. 37.
Cronk, Nicholas (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Voltaire.
Cambridge University Press. p. 199.
R. E. Florida Voltaire and the Socinians 1974 "Voltaire from his very first writings on the subject of religion showed a libertine scorn of scripture, which he never lost.
This set him apart from Socinianism even though he admired the simplicity of Socinian theology as well as their ...".
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, Retirement Series: Volume 7: 28 November 1813 to 30 September 1814: Volume 7: 28 November 1813 to 30 September 1814. Princeton University Press. p. 27ed by J. Jefferson Looney
Les chrétiens n'avaient regardé jusqu'à présent le fameux Mahomet que comme un heureux brigand, un imposteur habile, un législateur presque toujours extravagant.
Quelques Savants de ce siècle, sur la foi des rapsodies arabesques, ont entrepris de le venger de l'injustice que lui font nos écrivains.
Ils nous le donnent comme un génie sublime, et comme un homme des plus admirables, par la grandeur de ses entreprises, de ses vue, de ses succès, Claude-Adrien Nonnotte
Les erreurs de Voltaire, Jacquenod père et Rusand, 1770, Vol I, p. 70.
M. de Voltaire nous assure qu'il [Mahomet] avait une éloquence vive et forte, des yeux perçants, une physionomie heureuse, l'intrépidité d'Alexandre, la libéralité et la sobriété dont Alexandre aurait eu besoin pour être un grand homme en tout ... Il nous représente Mahomet comme un homme qui a eu la gloire de tirer presque toute l'Asie des ténèbres de l'idolâtrie.
Il extrait quelques paroles de divers endroits de l'Alcoran, dont il admire le Sublime.
Il trouve que sa loi est extrêmement sage, que ses lois civiles sont bonnes et que son dogme est admirable en ce qu'il se conforme avec le nôtre.
Enfin pour prémunir les lecteurs contre tout ce que les Chrétiens ont dit méchamment de Mahomet, il avertit que ce ne sont guère que des sottises débitées par des moines ignorants et insensés., Nonnotte, p. 71.
Keffe, Simon P. (2003). The Cambridge Companion to Mozart.
Cambridge Companions to Music.
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 0-521-00192-7.
"Gibbon; or, the Infidel Historian". The Dublin Review.
Burns, Oates and Washbourne. 8: 208. 1840.
Thomas E. Woods, How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization (Regnery Publishing 2005) pp. 169–70
Daniel-Rops, Henri (1964). History of the Church of Christ.
Dutton. p. 47. His hatred of religion increased with the passage of years.
The attack, launched at first against clericalism and theocracy, ended in a furious assault upon Holy Scripture, the dogmas of the Church, and even upon the person of Jesus Christ Himself, who was depicted now as a degenerate
a b c Prager, D; Telushkin, J. Why the Jews?: The Reason for Antisemitism.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983. pp. 128–89.
Poliakov, L. The History of Anti-Semitism: From Voltaire to Wagner.
Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1975 (translated). pp. 88–89.
Voltaire, François-Marie (1827). Essai sur les Moeurs.
Garnery.
See also: Voltaire, François-Marie (1789). Dictionnaire Philosophique.
a b Voltaire. 1843. A Philosophical Dictionary page 94
Gay, P. The Party of Humanity: Essays in the French Enlightenment.
Alfred Knopf, 1964. pp. 103–05.
Hertzberg, A. The French Enlightenment and the Jews.
Columbia University, 1968. p. 284.
(Schwarzbach, Bertram), "Voltaire et les juifs: bilan et plaidoyer", Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century (SVEC) 358, Oxford
Azurmendi, Joxe (2014). Historia, arraza, nazioa.
Donostia: Elkar. pp. 177–86. ISBN 978-84-9027-297-8
Friedenwald, Harry (1944). The Jews and Medicine.
Johns Hopkins Press. p. 725.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 629.
a b Durant & Durant 1967, p. 630.
Gunny, Ahmad (1996). Images of Islam in 18th Century Writings.
However, Islam still remains a false religion in Voltaire's eyes—he claims that the Quran betrays ignorance of the most elementary laws of physics.
Letter to Frederick II of Prussia (December 1740), published in Oeuvres complètes de Voltaire, Vol. 7 (1869), edited by Georges Avenel, p. 105
Pomeau.
Voltaire en son temps.
Fareed Ali Haddawy, Hussain (1962). English Arabesque: The Oriental Mode in Eighteenth-century English Literature.
Cornell University.
Ormsby, F.E. (1899). Planets and People, Volume 5, Issue 1. p. 184.
Smollett, Tobias; Morley, John (1901). The Works of Voltaire: A philosophical dictionary. p. 101.
a b c Pomeau, René (1995) La religion de Voltaire. A.G Nizet.
ISBN 2-7078-0331-6. p. 157.
Smollett, Tobias; Morley, John (1901). The Works of Voltaire: A philosophical dictionary. pp. 102–04.
Pomeau, René (1995) La religion de Voltaire. A.G Nizet.
ISBN 2-7078-0331-6. pp. 156–57.
Voltaire, Essais sur les Mœurs, 1756, Chap.
VI. – De l'Arabie et de Mahomet.
Voltaire, Essais sur les Mœurs, 1756, Chap.
VII. – De l'Alcoran, et de la loi musulmane.
Examen si la religion musulmane était nouvelle, et si elle a été persécutante.
The history of Charles xii. king of Sweden [tr. and abridged by A. Henderson from the work by F.M.A. de Voltaire]. 1734. p. 112.
Shah Kazemi, Reza.
The Spirit of Tolerance in Islam. pp. 5–6. Voltaire also 'pointed out that no Christian state allowed the presence of a mosque; but that the Ottoman state was filled with Churches.'
Avez-vous oublié que ce poète était astronome, et qu'il réforma le calendrier des Arabes ?, Lettre civile et honnête à l'auteur malhonnête de la "Critique de l'histoire universelle de M. de Voltaire" (1760), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 24, p. 164.
Voltaire (1824). A Philosophical Dictionary, Volume 1. J. and H.L. Hunt. p. 76.
Ce fut certainement un très grand homme, et qui forma de grands hommes.
Il fallait qu'il fût martyr ou conquérant, il n'y avait pas de milieu.
Il vainquit toujours, et toutes ses victoires furent remportées par le petit nombre sur le grand.
Conquérant, législateur, monarque et pontife, il joua le plus grand rôle qu'on puisse jouer sur la terre aux yeux du commun des hommes ; mais les sages lui préféreront toujours Confutzée, précisément parce qu'il ne fut rien de tout cela, et qu'il se contenta d'enseigner la morale la plus pure à une nation plus ancienne, plus nombreuse, et plus policée que la nation arabe., Remarques pour servir de supplément à l'Essai sur les Mœurs (1763), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 24, Chap.
IX – De Mahomet, p. 590.
J'ai dit qu'on reconnut Mahomet pour un grand homme ; rien n'est plus impie, dites-vous.
Je vous répondrai que ce n'est pas ma faute si ce petit homme a changé la face d'une partie du monde, s'il a gagné des batailles contre des armées dix fois plus nombreuses que les siennes, s'il a fait trembler l'Empire romain, s'il a donné les premiers coups à ce colosse que ses successeurs ont écrasé, et s'il a été législateur de l'Asie, de l'Afrique, et d'une partie de l'Europe., « Lettre civile et honnête à l'auteur malhonnête de la Critique de l'histoire universelle.
Voltaire (1760), in Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 24, p. 164.
Gunny, Ahmad (1996). Images of Islam in 18th Century Writings. p. 142.
Allen Harvey, David.
The French Enlightenment and Its Others: The Mandarin, the Savage, and the Invention of the Human Sciences.
« Essai sur les Mœurs et l'Esprit des Nations » (1756), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 11, Chap.
VII – De l'Alcoran, et de la loi musulmane, p. 244.
Il est évident que le génie du peuple arabe, mis en mouvement par Mahomet, fit tout de lui-même pendant près de trois siècles, et ressembla en cela au génie des anciens Romains., « Essais sur les Mœurs » (1756), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire, éd.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 11, Chap.
VI – De l'Arabie et de Mahomet, p. 237. et écrit que « dans nos siècles de barbarie et d'ignorance, qui suivirent la décadence et le déchirement de l'Empire romain, nous reçûmes presque tout des Arabes : astronomie, chimie, médecine Préface de l'Essai sur l'Histoire universelle » (1754), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire, éd.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 24, p. 49. Si ces Ismaélites ressemblaient aux Juifs par l'enthousiasme et la soif du pillage, ils étaient prodigieusement supérieurs par le courage, par la grandeur d'âme, par la magnanimité., « Essai sur les Mœurs et l'Esprit des Nations » (1756), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire, éd.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 11, Chap.
VI – De l'Arabie et de Mahomet, p. 231. et que « dès le second siècle de Mahomet, il fallut que les chrétiens d'Occident s'instruisissent chez les musulmans » Essais sur les Mœurs » (1756), dans Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, Voltaire, éd.
Moland, 1875, Vol. 11, Chap.
VI – De l'Arabie et de Mahomet, p. 237.
Malise Ruthven (26 November 2018). "Voltaire's Fanaticism, or Mahomet the Prophet: A New Translation". As Voltaire’s knowledge of Islam deepened, he clearly became better disposed towards the faith.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein.
Muhammad.
Encyclopedia Britannica.
Archived from the original on 20 March 2016.
Voltaire, Mahomet the Prophet or Fanaticism: A Tragedy in Five Acts, trans.
Robert L. Myers, (New York: Frederick Ungar, 1964).
Voltaire Letter to Benedict XIV written in Paris on 17 August 1745: "Your holiness will pardon the liberty taken by one of the lowest of the faithful, though a zealous admirer of virtue, of submitting to the head of the true religion this performance, written in opposition to the founder of a false and barbarous sect.
To whom could I with more propriety inscribe a satire on the cruelty and errors of a false prophet, than to the vicar and representative of a God of truth and mercy? Your holiness will therefore give me leave to lay at your feet both the piece and the author of it, and humbly to request your protection of the one, and your benediction upon the other; in hopes of which, with the profoundest reverence, I kiss your sacred feet."
Voltaire, Le Fanatisme ou Mahomet le prophète (1741), Œuvres complètes.
Garnier, 1875, Vol.4, p135.
Mahomet le fanatique, le cruel, le fourbe, et, à la honte des hommes, le grand, qui de garçon marchand devient prophète, législateur et monarque, (Mohammed the fanatic, the cruel, the deceiver, and to men's shame, the great, who from a grocer's boy became a prophet, a legislator and a monarch). Recueil des Lettres de Voltaire (1739–1741), Voltaire, Sanson et Compagnie, 1792, Lettre à M. De Cideville, conseiller honoraire du parlement (5 mai 1740), p. 163.
Voltaire in His Letters: Being a Selection from His Correspondence. p. 74. translated and edited by Evelyn Beatrice Hall
Gunny, Ahmad (1996). Images of Islam in 18th Century Writings.
He expanded on this idea in his letter to César de Missy (Ist September 1742) where he described Mahomet as a deceitful character.
Voltaire, Lettres inédites de Voltaire, Didier, 1856, Vol 1, Letter to César De Missy, 1 September 1743, p. 450.
"The Atheist's Bible", p. 198, by Georges Minois, 2012
Je sais que Mahomet n'a pas tramé précisément l'espèce de trahison qui fait le sujet de cette tragédie ... Je n'ai pas prétendu mettre seulement une action vraie sur la scène, mais des mœurs vraies, faire penser les hommes comme ils pensent dans les circonstances où ils se trouvent, et représenter enfin ce que la fourberie peut inventer de plus atroce, et ce que le Fanatisme peut exécuter de plus horrible.
Mahomet n'est ici autre chose que Tartuffe les armes à la main.
Je me croirai bien récompensé de mon travail, si quelqu'une de ces âmes faibles, toujours prêtes à recevoir les impressions d'une fureur étrangère qui n'est pas au fond de leur cœur, peut s'affermir contre ces funestes séductions par la lecture de cet ouvrage., Voltaire, Letter to Frederick II, King of Prussia, 20 January 1742.
Il n'appartenait assurément qu'aux musulmans de se plaindre ; car j'ai fait Mahomet un peu plus méchant qu'il n'était, Lettre à Mme Denis, 29 October 1751, Lettres choisies de Voltaire, Libraires associés, 1792, Vol. 2, p. 113.
Smollett, Tobias; Morley, John (1905). The Works of Voltaire: A philosophical dictionary. p. 105.
The Works of Voltaire: The dramatic works of Voltaire.
St.
Hubert Guild. 1901. p. 12.
Voltaire, Letter to Benedict XIV written in Paris on 17 August 1745: Your holiness will pardon the liberty taken by one of the lowest of the faithful, though a zealous admirer of virtue, of submitting to the head of the true religion this performance, written in opposition to the founder of a false and barbarous sect.
To whom could I with more propriety inscribe a satire on the cruelty and errors of a false prophet, than to the vicar and representative of a God of truth and mercy? Your holiness will therefore give me leave to lay at your feet both the piece and the author of it, and humbly to request your protection of the one, and your benediction upon the other; in hopes of which, with the profoundest reverence, I kiss your sacred feet.
Berman, Nina (2011). German Literature on the Middle East: Discourses and Practices, 1000–1989. University of Michigan Press. p. 118.
The Concept of Human Dignity in the French and American Enlightenments: Religion, Virtue, Liberty. 2006. p. 280. Voltaire goes on to accuse other religions such as Islam for their own intolerance (359). Voltaire, then, seems to consider Christianity as one of many intolerant and absurd religions.
Elmarsafy, Ziad (2010). "The Enlightenment Qur'an: The Politics of Translation and the Construction of Islam". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 130 (3): 462–64. JSTOR 23044965.
Mathilde Hilger, Stephanie (2009). Strategies of Response and the Dynamics of European Literary Culture, 1790–1805. Rodopi. p. 100.
"Lectures on the science of language, delivered at the Royal institution of Great Britain in 1861 [and 1863]", by Max Muller, p. 148, originally from Oxford University
Chatterjee, Ramananda, ed. (1922). "Review and Notices of Books: Hindu Culture". The Modern Review. 32: 183.
Pensées végétariennes, Voltaire, éditions Mille et une nuits.
Guardian (UK) newspaper, review of Bloodless Revolution, published by Harper-Collins
a b Windows into China– John Parker, p. 25, ISBN 0-89073-050-4.
Mungello, David E. (1971). "Leibniz's Interpretation of Neo-Confucianism". Philosophy East and West.
University of Hawaii Press. 21 (1): 3–22. doi:10.2307/1397760. JSTOR 1397760.
John M. Hobson, The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation, pp. 194–95, ISBN 0-521-54724-5.
Rowbotham, Arnold H. (December 1932). "Voltaire, Sinophile". PMLA. 47 (4): 1050–1065. doi:10.2307/457929. JSTOR 457929. S2CID 251028175.
Bailey, Paul (19 July 2002). "Voltaire and Confucius: French attitudes towards China in the early twentieth century". History of European Ideas. 14 (6): 817–37. doi:10.1016/0191-6599(92)90168-C.
a b c Lan, Feng (2005). Ezra Pound and Confucianism: remaking humanism in the face of modernity.
University of Toronto Press. p. 190. ISBN 978-0-8020-8941-0.
a b Schwarz, Bill. (1996). The expansion of England: race, ethnicity and cultural history.
Psychology Pres.
ISBN 0-415-06025-7, p. 229.
Sala-Molins, Louis (2006) Dark side of the light: slavery and the French Enlightenment.
Univ Of Minnesota Press.
ISBN 0-8166-4389-X. p. 102
de Viguerie, Jean (July 1993). "Les 'Lumieres' et les peuples". Revue Historique. 290 (1): 161–89.
William B. Cohen (2003). The French encounter with Africans: White response to Blacks, 1530–1880. Indiana University Press. p. 86.
David Allen Harvey (2012). The French Enlightenment and its Others:The Mandarin, the Savage, and the Invention of the Human Sciences.
Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 135–46.
Giovannetti-Singh, Gianamar (7 September 2022). "Racial Capitalism in Voltaire's Enlightenment". History Workshop Journal (84).
Gliozzi, Giuliano (1979). "Poligenismo e razzismo agli albori del secolo dei lumi". Rivista di Filosofia. 70 (1): 1–31.
Duchet, Michèle (1971). Anthropologie et histoire au siècle des Lumières: Buffon, Voltaire, Rousseau, Helvétius, Diderot (in French). Paris: F. Maspero.
ISBN 9782226078728.
Davis, David Brion, The problem of slavery in Western culture (New York: Oxford University Press 1988) ISBN 0-19-505639-6 p. 392
Stark, Rodney, For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery (2003), p. 359
Miller, Christopher L., The French Atlantic triangle: literature and culture of the slave trade (2008) pp. x, 7, 73, 77
Catherine A. Reinhardt (2006). Claims to Memory: Beyond Slavery and Emancipation in the French Caribbean.
Berghahn Books. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-84545-079-3.
Durant & Durant 1980, p. 358.
a b c Sternhell, Zeev (2010). The Anti-Enlightenment Tradition.
Yale University Press. p. 126.
Sternhell, Zeev (2010). The Anti-Enlightenment Tradition.
Yale University Press. p. 283.
a b Will Durant (1933). The Story of Philosophy 2nd ed.
Simon & Schuster. p. 259.
a b c d Durant & Durant 1967, p. 881.
a b Theodore Besterman (1969). Voltaire.
Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc. p. 11.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 880.
Ashburton Guardian: "A Protest", 21 October 1889
a b Durant & Durant 1967, p. 139.
a b Wheeler, J.M.; Foote, G.W. (1894). Voltaire: A Sketch of His Life and Works.
Robert Forder. p. 69.
"The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. 2012".
Durant & Durant 1967, pp. 139–40.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 879.
Herzen, Alexander (1979). From the Other Shore.
Oxford University Press.
Belinsky, Vissarion Grigoryevich (2001) . Selected Philosophical Works.
University Press of the Pacific.
ISBN 978-0-89875-654-8. Retrieved 3 November 2018.
Durant & Durant 1980, pp. 734–36.
a b Durant & Durant 1980, p. 736.
McKinley, C. Alexander (2008). Illegitimate Children of the Enlightenment: Anarchists and the French Revolution, 1880–1914. Peter Lang. p. 87.
McKinley, C. Alexander (2008). Illegitimate Children of the Enlightenment: Anarchists and the French Revolution, 1880–1914. Peter Lang. p. 88.
Fellows, Otis (1970). From Voltaire to "La Nouvelle Critique" : Problems and Personalities.
Librairie Droz. p. 13.
Borges, Jorge Luis; Ferrari, Osvaldo (2015). Conversations.
London: Seagull Books. pp. 220–26.
Flaubert, Gustave. "Lettre à Amélie Bosquet du 2 janvier 1868". Correspondance.
Biblioteque de la Pléiade.
Tome III. Je crois même que, si nous sommes tellement bas moralement et politiquement, c’est qu’au lieu de suivre la grande route de M. de Voltaire, c’est-à-dire celle de la Justice et du Droit, on a pris les sentiers de Rousseau, qui, par le Sentiment, nous ont ramené au catholicisme.
Durant & Durant 1980, p. 753.
Durant & Durant 1980, p. 370.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 31.
a b Durant & Durant 1967, p. 170.
a b Durant & Durant 1967, p. 149.
Durant & Durant 1967, pp. 190–91.
a b Durant & Durant 1967, pp. 197–99.
Durant & Durant 1967, pp. 877–78.
Durant & Durant 1967, p. 886.
Durant & Durant 1967, pp. 879, 886.
a b Durant & Durant 1967, p. 887.
Will Durant (1933). The Story of Philosophy 2nd ed.
Simon & Schuster. p. 261.
a b Will Durant (1933). The Story of Philosophy 2nd ed.
Simon & Schuster. p. 187.
"Democracy". The Philosophical Dictionary.
Knopf. 1924. Retrieved 1 July 2008.
"Letter on the subject of Candide, to the Journal encyclopédique July 15, 1759". University of Chicago.
Archived from the original on 13 October 2006. Retrieved 7 January 2008.
a b Liu, Wu-Chi (1953). "The Original Orphan of China". Comparative Literature. 5 (3): 206–07. doi:10.2307/1768912. JSTOR 1768912.
Gay, Peter Voltaire's Politics: The Poet as Realist (New Haven:Yale University 1988), p. 265: "If the heavens, despoiled of his august stamp could ever cease to manifest him, if God didn't exist, it would be necessary to invent him.
Let the wise proclaim him, and kings fear him."
"Beacon Lights of History", p. 207, by Jon Lord, publisher = Cosimo, Inc, 2009. – German Philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, however, called Carlyle a muddlehead who had not even understood the Enlightenment values he thought he was promoting.
See – Nietzsche and Legal Theory: Half-Written Laws, by Peter Goodrich, Mariana Valverde, published by Routledge, p. 5
Pearson 2005, p. 430.
Schmadel, Lutz D.; International Astronomical Union (2003). Dictionary of minor planet names.
Springer. p. 481. ISBN 978-3-540-00238-3. Retrieved 9 September 2011.
Koerner, Brendan (June 2005). "Brain Brew". The Washington Monthly: 46–49.
Cowell, Siôn (2001). The Teilhard Lexicon: Understanding the language, terminology, and vision of the writings of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin.
Brighton: Sussex Academic Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-902210-37-7. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
Kurian, George Thomas (2010). The Encyclopedia of Christian Literature.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. p. 591. ISBN 978-0-8108-6987-5. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
a b Barber, Giles (2004). "Besterman, Theodore Deodatus Nathaniel (1904–1976)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.
Vol. Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/37189. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Mason, Haydn. "A history of the Voltaire Foundation" (PDF). Voltaire Foundation.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 May 2016.
a b c Julia, Aurélie (October 2011). "Voltaire à Oxford, The Voltaire Foundation". Revue des Deux Mondes (in French). English translation at "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
Johnson, Michael (23 January 2010). "Voltaire the Survivor". The International Herald Tribune.
The New York Times Company.
Retrieved 4 May 2016.
Dates of the first performance, unless otherwise noted.
Garreau, Joseph E. (1984). "Voltaire", vol. 5, pp. 113–17, in McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of World Drama, Stanley Hochman, editor in chief.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
ISBN 978-0-07-079169-5.
"Voltaire". History and biography. 27 July 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2019.
Sources
Bremmer, Jan (2010). The Rise of Christianity Through the Eyes of Gibbon, Harnack and Rodney Stark.
Barkhuis.
ISBN 978-90-77922-70-5.
Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1980) . The Story of Civilization: The Age of Voltaire.
Simon & Schuster.
ISBN 978-0-671-01325-7.
Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1967). The Story of Civilization: Rousseau and Revolution.
Simon & Schuster.
ISBN 1-56731-021-4.
Pearson, Roger (2005). Voltaire Almighty: A Life in Pursuit of Freedom.
Bloomsbury.
ISBN 978-1-58234-630-4.
This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Saintsbury, George (1911). "Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de".  In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica.
Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 199–205.
Further reading
App, Urs.
The Birth of Orientalism.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010 (hardcover, ISBN 978-0-8122-4261-4); contains a 60-page chapter (pp. 15–76) on Voltaire as a pioneer of Indomania and his use of fake Indian texts in anti-Christian propaganda.
Besterman, Theodore, Voltaire, (1969).
Brumfitt, J. H. Voltaire: Historian (1958) online edition Archived 5 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Carlyle, Thomas (1829). "Voltaire". Critical and Miscellaneous Essays: Volume I. The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes.
Vol. XXVI. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons (published 1904). pp. 396–468.
Davidson, Ian, Voltaire: A Life, London, Profile Books, 2010. ISBN 978-1-60598-287-8.
Gay, Peter, Voltaire's Politics, The Poet as Realist, Yale University, 1988.
Hadidi, Djavâd, Voltaire et l'Islam, Publications Orientalistes de France, 1974. ISBN 978-2-84161-510-0.
Knapp, Bettina L. Voltaire Revisited (2000).
Mason, Haydn, Voltaire: A Biography (1981) ISBN 978-0-8018-2611-5.
McElroy, Wendy (2008). "Voltaire (1694–1778)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. p. 523. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n319. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Muller, Jerry Z., 2002. The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought.
Anchor Books.
ISBN 978-0-385-72166-0.
Quinones, Ricardo J. Erasmus and Voltaire: Why They Still Matter (University of Toronto Press; 2010) 240 pages; Draws parallels between the two thinkers as voices of moderation with relevance today.
Schwarzbach, Bertram Eugene, Voltaire's Old Testament Criticism, Librairie Droz, Geneva, 1971.
Torrey, Norman L., The Spirit of Voltaire, Columbia University Press, 1938.
Vernon, Thomas S. (1989). "Chapter V: Voltaire". Great Infidels.
M & M Press.
ISBN 0-943099-05-6. Archived from the original on 8 February 2001.
Wade, Ira O. (1967). Studies on Voltaire.
New York: Russell & Russell.
Wright, Charles Henry Conrad, A History of French Literature, Oxford University Press, 1912.
The Cambridge Companion to Voltaire, ed. by Nicholas Cronk, 2009.
In French
Korolev, S. "Voltaire et la reliure des livres". Revue Voltaire.
Paris, 2013. No. 13. pp. 233–40.
René Pomeau, La Religion de Voltaire, Librairie Nizet, Paris, 1974.
Valérie Crugten-André, La vie de Voltaire
Primary sources
Morley, J., The Works of Voltaire: A Contemporary Version (21 vol.; 1901), online edition
External links
Voltaire  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Works by Voltaire in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Voltaire at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Voltaire at Internet Archive
Works by Voltaire at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Gabrielle Émilie Le Tonnelier de Breteuil Marquise du Châtelet, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland
Hewett, Caspar J. M. (August 2006). "The Great Debate: Life of Voltaire". Retrieved 2 November 2008.
The Société Voltaire
An analysis of Voltaire's texts (in the "textes" topic) (in French)
Complete French ebooks of Voltaire (in French)
Institut et Musée Voltaire, Geneva, Switzerland Archived 12 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine
Works by Voltaire edited at athena.unige.ch (in French)
Internet Encyclopaedia of Philosophy on Voltaire
Complete listing of current published editions of Voltaire's works
Online Library of Liberty – The Works of Voltaire (1901). Some volumes, including mostly the unabridged Dictionnaire philosophique, translated by William F. Fleming
Voltaire's works: works: text, concordances and frequency list
Voltaire's writings from Philosophical Dictionary.
Selected and Translated by H.I. Woolf, 1924
Voltaire, his work in audio version  (in French)
VoltaireProseworks
Letters on the English
Elements of the Philosophy of Newton
Zadig
History of Charles XII
The Age of Louis XIV
Micromégas
Annals of the Empire
"Plato's Dream"
Doctor Akakia
"Essai sur les mœurs et l'esprit des nations"
Candide
Treatise on Tolerance
Dictionnaire philosophique
Commentaires sur Corneille
Idées républicaines
Questions sur les Miracles
L'Ingénu
"The Historical Praise of Reason"
Précis du siècle de Louis XV
Des singularités de la nature
The Man of Forty Crowns
The White Bull
Les Dialogues d’Evhémère
Poetry
Henriade
"Le Mondain"
Poème sur le désastre de Lisbonne
"Épître à l'Auteur du Livre des Trois Imposteurs"
The Maid of Orleans
Drama
Oedipus
Artémire
Hérode et Mariamne
Brutus
Ériphyle
Zaïre
La Prude
Socrates
Mahomet
Mérope
La princesse de Navarre
Sémiramis
Nanine
L'Orphelin de la Chine
La Femme qui a Raison
Tancrède
Don Pèdre, roi de Castille
Sophonisbe
Irène
Agathocle
Other
Samson (opera)
Related
Les Délices
Institut et Musée Voltaire
Émilie du Châtelet
Voltaire Foundation
Complete Works of Voltaire
Ferney-Voltaire
The Friends of Voltaire (1906 book)
Voltaire (1933 film)
Passionate Minds (2006 novel)
Articles related to Voltaire
Académie française seat 33
Vincent Voiture (1634)
François Eudes de Mézeray (1648)
Jean Barbier d'Aucour (1683)
François de Clermont-Tonnerre (1694)
Nicolas de Malézieu (1701)
Jean Bouhier (1727)
François-Marie Arouet dit Voltaire (1746)
Jean-François Ducis (1778)
Raymond Desèze (1816)
Amable Guillaume Prosper Brugière, baron de Barante (1828)
Auguste Joseph Alphonse Gratry (1867)
René Taillandier (1873)
Maxime Du Camp (1880)
Paul Bourget (1894)
Edmond Jaloux (1936)
Jean-Louis Vaudoyer (1950)
Marcel Brion (1964)
Michel Mohrt (1985)
Dominique Bona (2013)
Age of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Lumières
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Universality
Weimar Classicism
ThinkersEngland
Joseph Addison
Anthony Ashley-Cooper
Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Anthony Collins
Edward Gibbon
William Godwin
James Harrington
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
John Milton
Isaac Newton
Alexander Pope
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Joshua Reynolds
Algernon Sidney
Matthew Tindal
John Trenchard
Mary Wollstonecraft
France
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
René Louis d'Argenson
Pierre Bayle
Pierre Beaumarchais
Nicolas Chamfort
Émilie du Châtelet
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
René Descartes
Denis Diderot
Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle
Olympe de Gouges
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Baron d'Holbach
Louis de Jaucourt
Julien Offray de La Mettrie
Antoine Lavoisier
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Maréchal
Jean Meslier
Montesquieu
Étienne-Gabriel Morelly
Blaise Pascal
François Quesnay
Guillaume Thomas François Raynal
Marquis de Sade
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Firmin Abauzit
Charles Bonnet
Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui
Jean-Louis de Lolme
Pierre Prévost
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Antoine-Jacques Roustan
Horace Bénédict de Saussure
Jacob Vernes
Jacob Vernet
Germany
Justus Henning Böhmer
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Immanuel Kant
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg
Moses Mendelssohn
Samuel von Pufendorf
Friedrich Schiller
Christian Thomasius
Gabriel Wagner
Christian Felix Weiße
Adam Weishaupt
Christoph Martin Wieland
Thomas Wizenmann
Christian Wolff
Greece
Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais
Ireland
George Berkeley
Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke
Jonathan Swift
John Toland
Italy
Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Ferdinando Galiani
Luigi Galvani
Antonio Genovesi
Francesco Mario Pagano
Giovanni Salvemini
Pietro Verri
Giambattista Vico
Netherlands
Balthasar Bekker
Pieter de la Court
Petrus Cunaeus
Hugo Grotius
François Hemsterhuis
Christiaan Huygens
Adriaan Koerbagh
Frederik van Leenhof
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Bernard Nieuwentyt
Baruch Spinoza
Jan Swammerdam
Hendrik Wyermars
Poland
Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Stanisław Staszic
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski
Portugal
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Ion Budai-Deleanu
Dinicu Golescu
Petru Maior
Samuil Micu-Klein
Gheorghe Șincai
Russia
Catherine II
Denis Fonvizin
Antiochus Kantemir
Mikhail Kheraskov
Mikhail Lomonosov
Nikolay Novikov
Alexander Radishchev
Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Dositej Obradović
Avram Mrazović
Spain
José Cadalso
Charles III
Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro
Leandro Fernández de Moratín
Valentin de Foronda
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos
Martín Sarmiento
Diego de Torres Villarroel
Scotland
James Beattie
Joseph Black
Hugh Blair
James Boswell
James Burnett
Robert Burns
William Cullen
Adam Ferguson
Thomas Gordon
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
James Hutton
James Mill
John Millar
Isaac Newton
William Ogilvie
John Playfair
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Dugald Stewart
United States
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine
Romanticism 
Category
French Revolution
Causes
Timeline
Ancien Régime
Revolution
Constitutional monarchy
Republic
Directory
Consulate
Glossary
Journals
Museum
Significant civil and political events by year1788
Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788)
Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)
What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789)
Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789)
Convocation of the Estates General (5 May 1789)
Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789)
National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790)
Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789)
National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791)
Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789)
Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789)
Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789)
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789)
Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)
Nationalization of the Church properties (2 Nov 1789)
Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790)
Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790)
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790)
Fête de la Fédération (14 Jul 1790)
Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791)
Champ de Mars massacre (17 Jul 1791)
Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791)
The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791)
National Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792)
France declares war (20 Apr 1792)
Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792)
Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792)
September Massacres (Sep 1792)
National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795)
First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)
Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793)
Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795)
Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794)
Committee of Public Safety
Committee of General Security
Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793)
Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793)
Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793)
The Death of Marat (painting)
Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793)
Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793)
Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)
Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794)
Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794)
Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794)
Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794)
White Terror (Fall 1794)
Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)
Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III (1 Apr 1795)
Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795)
Directoire (1795–99)
Council of Five Hundred
Council of Ancients
Conspiracy of the Equals (May 1796)
Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797)
Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)
Law of 22 Floréal Year VI (11 May 1798)
Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799)
Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799)
Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799)
Consulate
Revolutionary campaigns1792
Verdun
Thionville
Valmy
Royalist Revolts
Chouannerie
Vendée
Dauphiné
Lille
Siege of Mainz
Jemappes
Namur [fr]
First Coalition
War in the Vendée
Battle of Neerwinden)
Battle of Famars (23 May 1793)
Expedition to Sardinia (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793)
Battle of Kaiserslautern
Siege of Mainz
Battle of Wattignies
Battle of Hondschoote
Siege of Bellegarde
Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees)
Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793)
First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793)
Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees)
Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793)
Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794)
Second Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr – 1 May 1794)
Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794)
Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794)
Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794)
Chouannerie
Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
Peace of Basel
Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796)
Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796)
Battle of Theiningen
Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796)
Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796)
Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796)
Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796)
First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796)
Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796)
Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796)
Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796)
Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796)
Battle of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796)
Ireland expedition (Dec 1796)
Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797)
Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797)
Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797)
Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797)
Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797)
Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)
French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798)
French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801)
Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798)
Quasi-War (1798–1800)
Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798)
Second Coalition (1798–1802)
Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799)
Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799)
Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799)
Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799)
Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799)
First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799)
Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799)
Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799)
Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799)
Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800)
Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800)
Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800)
League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02)
Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801)
Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801)
Algeciras campaign (8 Jul 1801)
Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)
Treaty of Paris (25 Jun 1802)
Military leaders FranceFrench Army
Eustache Charles d'Aoust
Pierre Augereau
Alexandre de Beauharnais
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Jean-Baptiste Bessières
Guillaume Brune
Jean François Carteaux
Jean-Étienne Championnet
Chapuis de Tourville
Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Louis Desaix
Jacques François Dugommier
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas
Charles François Dumouriez
Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino
Louis-Charles de Flers
Paul Grenier
Emmanuel de Grouchy
Jacques Maurice Hatry
Lazare Hoche
Jean-Baptiste Jourdan
François Christophe de Kellermann
Jean-Baptiste Kléber
Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
Jean Lannes
Charles Leclerc
Claude Lecourbe
François Joseph Lefebvre
Étienne Macdonald
Jean-Antoine Marbot
Marcellin Marbot
François Séverin Marceau
Auguste de Marmont
André Masséna
Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey
Jean Victor Marie Moreau
Édouard Mortier, Duke of Trévise
Joachim Murat
Michel Ney
Pierre-Jacques Osten [fr]
Nicolas Oudinot
Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Józef Poniatowski
Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr
Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer
Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier
Joseph Souham
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Louis-Gabriel Suchet
Belgrand de Vaubois
Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno
French Navy
Charles-Alexandre Linois
Opposition Austria
József Alvinczi
Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen
Count of Clerfayt (Walloon)
Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg
Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss)
Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth
Pál Kray (Hungarian)
Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French)
Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon)
Karl Mack von Leiberich
Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon)
Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich
Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen
Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló (Hungarian)
Karl Philipp Sebottendorf
Dagobert von Wurmser
Britain
Sir Ralph Abercromby
James Saumarez, 1st Baron de Saumarez
Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth
Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
Netherlands
William V, Prince of Orange
Prussia
Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick
Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
Russia
Alexander Korsakov
Alexander Suvorov
Spain
Luis Firmin de Carvajal
Antonio Ricardos
Other significant figures and factionsPatriotic Society of 1789
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette
François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt
Isaac René Guy le Chapelier
Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau
Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord
Nicolas de Condorcet
Feuillantsand monarchiens
Grace Elliott
Arnaud de La Porte
Jean-Sifrein Maury
François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy
Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas
Antoine Barnave
Lafayette
Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth
Charles Malo François Lameth
André Chénier
Jean-François Rewbell
Camille Jordan
Madame de Staël
Boissy d'Anglas
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard
Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac
Girondins
Jacques Pierre Brissot
Jean-Marie Roland de la Platière
Madame Roland
Father Henri Grégoire
Étienne Clavière
Marquis de Condorcet
Charlotte Corday
Marie Jean Hérault
Jean Baptiste Treilhard
Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve
Jean Debry
Olympe de Gouges
Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet
Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux
The Plain
Abbé Sieyès
de Cambacérès
Charles-François Lebrun
Pierre-Joseph Cambon
Bertrand Barère
Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot
Philippe Égalité
Louis Philippe I
Mirabeau
Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville
Jean Joseph Mounier
Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours
François de Neufchâteau
Montagnards
Maximilien Robespierre
Georges Danton
Jean-Paul Marat
Camille Desmoulins
Louis Antoine de Saint-Just
Paul Barras
Louis Philippe I
Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau
Jacques-Louis David
Marquis de Sade
Georges Couthon
Roger Ducos
Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois
Jean-Henri Voulland
Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai
Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville
Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
Jean-Pierre-André Amar
Prieur de la Côte-d'Or
Prieur de la Marne
Gilbert Romme
Jean Bon Saint-André
Jean-Lambert Tallien
Pierre Louis Prieur
Antoine Christophe Saliceti
Hébertistsand Enragés
Jacques Hébert
Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne
Pierre Gaspard Chaumette
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Antoine-François Momoro
François-Nicolas Vincent
François Chabot
Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte
Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel
François Hanriot
Jacques Roux
Stanislas-Marie Maillard
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Jean-François Varlet
Theophile Leclerc
Claire Lacombe
Pauline Léon
Gracchus Babeuf
Sylvain Maréchal
Others
Charles X
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
Louis XVIII
Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien
Louis Henri, Prince of Condé
Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé
Marie Antoinette
Napoléon Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Joseph Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Empress Joséphine
Joachim Murat
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Jacques-Donatien Le Ray
Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes
Talleyrand
Thérésa Tallien
Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target
Catherine Théot
Madame de Lamballe
Madame du Barry
Louis de Breteuil
de Chateaubriand
Jean Chouan
Loménie de Brienne
Charles Alexandre de Calonne
Jacques Necker
Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil
List of people associated with the French Revolution
Influential thinkers
Les Lumières
Beaumarchais
Edmund Burke
Anacharsis Cloots
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Pierre Claude François Daunou
Diderot
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
Antoine Lavoisier
Montesquieu
Thomas Paine
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Abbé Sieyès
Voltaire
Mary Wollstonecraft
Cultural impact
La Marseillaise
Cockade of France
Flag of France
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Marianne
Bastille Day
Panthéon
French Republican calendar
Metric system
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
Cult of the Supreme Being
Cult of Reason
Temple of Reason
Sans-culottes
Phrygian cap
Women in the French Revolution
Incroyables and merveilleuses
Symbolism in the French Revolution
Historiography of the French Revolution
Influence of the French Revolution
Voltaire's CandideAdaptations
Candide, Part II (1760 novel)
Candide (1956 operetta)
Modern interpretations
Candy (1958 novel)
Candide ou l'optimisme au XXe siècle (1960 film)
Candy (1968 film)
Mondo candido (1975 film)
The Optimists (2006 film)
Related
Cunégonde
Johan Robeck
Pope Urban X
A few acres of snow
Poème sur le désastre de Lisbonne
Social and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Boétie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
Müntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Suárez
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cortés
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helvétius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Staël
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Guénon
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Kołakowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nursî
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Röpke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
Žižek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
Authority control General
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National libraries
Norway
Chile
Spain
France (data)
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Romania
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Vatican
Art research institutes
KulturNav (Norway)
RKD Artists (Netherlands)
Artist Names (Getty)
Biographical dictionaries
Germany
Scientific databases
CiNii (Japan)
zbMATH
Other
Faceted Application of Subject Terminology
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
MusicBrainz artist
RISM (France)
RERO (Switzerland)
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
Trove (Australia)
Retrieved from ""
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
More
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisource
Languages
Edit links
This page was last edited on 4 October 2022, at 13:42 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
