Limit (mathematics)
Contents
History
Types of limits
Uses
Properties
See also
Notes
References
External links
Navigation menu
In sequences
In functions
Nonstandard analysis
Limit sets
Series
Continuity of a function at a point
Continuous functions
Limit points
Derivative
Sequences of real numbers
Order of convergence
Computability
Personal tools
Namespaces
Views
Search
Navigation
Contribute
Tools
Print/export
In other projects
Languages
Real numbers
Infinity as a limit
Metric space
Topological space
Function space
One-sided limit
Infinity in limits of functions
Limit set of a sequence
Limit set of a trajectory
Power series
Cauchy sequences
In mathematics, a limit is the value that a function (or sequence) approaches as the input (or index) approaches some value.
Limits are essential to calculus and mathematical analysis, and are used to define continuity, derivatives, and integrals.
The concept of a limit of a sequence is further generalized to the concept of a limit of a topological net, and is closely related to limit and direct limit in category theory.
In formulas, a limit of a function is usually written as
(although a few authors may use "Lt" instead of "lim")
and is read as "the limit of f of x as x approaches c equals L".
The fact that a function f approaches the limit L as x approaches c is sometimes denoted by a right arrow ( or 
, as in
which reads "
of 
tends to 
as 
tends to 
Grégoire de Saint-Vincent gave the first definition of limit (terminus) of a geometric series in his work Opus Geometricum : "The terminus of a progression is the end of the series, which none progression can reach, even not if she is continued in infinity, but which she can approach nearer than a given segment."
The modern definition of a limit goes back to Bernard Bolzano who, in 1817, introduced the basics of the epsilon-delta technique to define continuous functions.
However, his work was not known during his lifetime.
Augustin-Louis Cauchy in 1821, followed by Karl Weierstrass, formalized the definition of the limit of a function which became known as the (ε, δ)-definition of limit.
The modern notation of placing the arrow below the limit symbol is due to G. H.
Hardy, who introduced it in his book A Course of Pure Mathematics in 1908.
The expression 0.999... should be interpreted as the limit of the sequence 0.9, 0.99, 0.999, ... and so on.
This sequence can be rigorously shown to have the limit 1, and therefore this expression is meaningfully interpreted as having the value 1.
Formally, suppose a1, a2, … is a sequence of real numbers.
When the limit of the sequence exists, the real number L is the limit of this sequence if and only if for every real number ε > 0, there exists a natural number N such that for all n > N, we have |an − L| < ε.
The notation
lim
is often used, and which is read as
The formal definition intuitively means that eventually, all elements of the sequence get arbitrarily close to the limit, since the absolute value |an − L| is the distance between an and L.
Not every sequence has a limit.
If it does, then it is called convergent, and if it does not, then it is divergent.
One can show that a convergent sequence has only one limit.
The limit of a sequence and the limit of a function are closely related.
On one hand, the limit as n approaches infinity of a sequence {an} is simply the limit at infinity of a function a(n)—defined on the natural numbers {n}.
On the other hand, if X is the domain of a function f(x) and if the limit as n approaches infinity of f(xn) is L for every arbitrary sequence of points {xn} in {X – {x0}} which converges to x0, then the limit of the function f(x) as x approaches x0 is L.
One such sequence would be {x0 + 1/n}.
There is also a notion of having a limit "at infinity", as opposed to at some finite 
A sequence 
is said to "tend to infinity" if, for each real number 
, known as the bound, there exists an integer 
such that for each 
That is, for every possible bound, the magnitude of the sequence eventually exceeds the bound.
This is often written 
lim
or simply 
Such sequences are also called unbounded.
It is possible for a sequence to be divergent, but not tend to infinity.
Such sequences are called oscillatory.
An example of an oscillatory sequence is 
For the real numbers, there are corresponding notions of tending to positive infinity and negative infinity, by removing the modulus sign from the above definition:
defines tending to positive infinity, while 
defines tending to negative infinity.
Sequences which do not tend to infinity are called bounded.
Sequences which do not tend to positive infinity are called bounded above, while those which do not tend to negative infinity are bounded below.
The discussion of sequences above is for sequences of real numbers.
The notion of limits can be defined for sequences valued in more abstract spaces.
One example of a more abstract space is metric spaces.
If 
is a metric space with distance function 
, and 
is a sequence in 
, then the limit (when it exists) of the sequence is an element 
such that, given 
, there exists an 
such that for each 
, the equation
is satisfied.
An equivalent statement is that 
if the sequence of real numbers 
An important example is the space of 
-dimensional real vectors, with elements 
where each of the 
are real, an example of a suitable distance function is the Euclidean distance, defined by
The sequence of points 
converges to 
if the limit exists and 
In some sense the most abstract space in which limits can be defined are topological spaces.
If 
is a topological space with topology 
, and 
is a sequence in 
, then the limit (when it exists) of the sequence is a point 
such that, given a (open) neighborhood 
of 
, there exists an 
such that for every 
is satisfied.
This section deals with the idea of limits of sequences of functions, not to be confused with the idea of limits of functions, discussed below.
The field of functional analysis partly seeks to identify useful notions of convergence on function spaces.
For example, consider the space of functions from a generic set 
to 
Given a sequence of functions 
such that each is a function 
, suppose that there exists a function such that for each 
or equivalently 
lim
Then the sequence 
is said to converge pointwise to 
However, such sequences can exhibit unexpected behavior.
For example, it is possible to construct a sequence of continuous functions which has a discontinuous pointwise limit.
Another notion of convergence is uniform convergence.
The uniform distance between two functions 
is the maximum difference between the two functions as the argument 
is varied.
That is, 
max
Then the sequence 
is said to uniformly converge or have a uniform limit of 
if 
with respect to this distance.
The uniform limit has "nicer" properties than the pointwise limit.
For example, the uniform limit of a sequence of continuous functions is continuous.
Many different notions of convergence can be defined on function spaces.
This is sometimes dependent on the regularity of the space.
Prominent examples of function spaces with some notion of convergence are Lp spaces and Sobolev space.
Suppose f is a real-valued function and c is a real number.
Intuitively speaking, the expression
means that f(x) can be made to be as close to L as desired, by making x sufficiently close to c. In that case, the above equation can be read as "the limit of f of x, as x approaches c, is L".
Formally, the definition of the "limit of 
as 
approaches 
" is given as follows.
The limit is a real number 
so that, given an arbitrary real number 
(thought of as the "error"), there is a 
such that, for any 
satisfying 
, it holds that 
This is known as the (ε, δ)-definition of limit.
The inequality 
is used to exclude 
from the set of points under consideration, but some authors do not include this in their definition of limits, replacing 
with simply 
This replacement is equivalent to additionally requiring that 
be continuous at 
It can be proven that there is an equivalent definition which makes manifest the connection between limits of sequences and limits of functions.
The equivalent definition is given as follows.
First observe that for every sequence 
in the domain of 
, there is an associated sequence 
, the image of the sequence under 
The limit is a real number 
so that, for all sequences 
, the associated sequence 
It is possible to define the notion of having a limit "from above" or "left limit", and a notion of a limit "from below" or "right limit".
These need not agree.
An example is given by the positive indicator function, 
, defined such that 
if 
, and 
if 
At 
, the function has a "left limit" of 0, a "right limit" of 1, and its limit does not exist.
It is possible to define the notion of "tending to infinity" in the domain of 
lim
In this expression, the infinity is considered to be signed: either 
or 
The "limit of f as x tends to positive infinity" is defined as follows.
It is a real number 
such that, given any real 
, there exists an 
so that if 
Equivalently, for any sequence 
, we have 
It is also possible to define the notion of "tending to infinity" in the value of 
lim
The definition is given as follows.
Given any real number 
, there is a 
so that for 
, the absolute value of the function 
Equivalently, for any sequence 
, the sequence 
In non-standard analysis (which involves a hyperreal enlargement of the number system), the limit of a sequence 
can be expressed as the standard part of the value 
of the natural extension of the sequence at an infinite hypernatural index n=H.
Thus,
Here, the standard part function "st" rounds off each finite hyperreal number to the nearest real number (the difference between them is infinitesimal).
This formalizes the natural intuition that for "very large" values of the index, the terms in the sequence are "very close" to the limit value of the sequence.
Conversely, the standard part of a hyperreal 
represented in the ultrapower construction by a Cauchy sequence 
, is simply the limit of that sequence:
In this sense, taking the limit and taking the standard part are equivalent procedures.
Let 
be a sequence in a topological space 
For concreteness, 
can be thought of as 
, but the definitions hold more generally.
The limit set is the set of points such that if there is a convergent subsequence 
with 
, then 
belongs to the limit set.
In this context, such an 
is sometimes called a limit point.
A use of this notion is to characterize the "long-term behavior" of oscillatory sequences.
For example, consider the sequence 
Starting from n=1, the first few terms of this sequence are 
It can be checked that it is oscillatory, so has no limit, but has limit points 
This notion is used in dynamical systems, to study limits of trajectories.
Defining a trajectory to be a function 
, the point 
is thought of as the "position" of the trajectory at "time" 
The limit set of a trajectory is defined as follows.
To any sequence of increasing times 
, there is an associated sequence of positions 
If 
is the limit set of the sequence 
for any sequence of increasing times, then 
is a limit set of the trajectory.
Technically, this is the 
-limit set.
The corresponding limit set for sequences of decreasing time is called the 
-limit set.
An illustrative example is the circle trajectory: 
cos
sin
This has no unique limit, but for each 
, the point 
cos
sin
is a limit point, given by the sequence of times 
But the limit points need not be attained on the trajectory.
The trajectory 
cos
sin
also has the unit circle as its limit set.
Limits are used to define a number of important concepts in analysis.
A particular expression of interest which is formalized as the limit of a sequence is sums of infinite series.
These are "infinite sums" of real numbers, generally written as
This is defined through limits as follows: given a sequence of real numbers 
, the sequence of partial sums is defined by
If the limit of the sequence 
exists, the value of the expression 
is defined to be the limit.
Otherwise, the series is said to be divergent.
A classic example is the Basel problem, where 
Then 
However, while for sequences there is essentially a unique notion of convergence, for series there are different notions of convergence.
This is due to the fact that the expression 
does not discriminate between different orderings of the sequence 
, while the convergence properties of the sequence of partial sums can depend on the ordering of the sequence.
A series which converges for all orderings is called unconditionally convergent.
It can be proven to be equivalent to absolute convergence.
This is defined as follows.
A series is absolutely convergent if 
is well defined.
Furthermore, all possible orderings give the same value.
Otherwise, the series is conditionally convergent.
A surprising result for conditionally convergent series is the Riemann series theorem: depending on the ordering, the partial sums can be made to converge to any real number, as well as 
A useful application of the theory of sums of series is for power series.
These are sums of series of the form
Often 
is thought of as a complex number, and a suitable notion of convergence of complex sequences is needed.
The set of values of 
for which the series sum converges is a circle, with its radius known as the radius of convergence.
The definition of continuity at a point is given through limits.
The above definition of a limit is true even if 
Indeed, the function f need not even be defined at c.
However, if 
is defined and is equal to 
, then the function is said to be continuous at the point 
Equivalently, the function is continuous at 
if 
as 
, or in terms of sequences, whenever 
, then 
An example of a limit where 
is not defined at 
is given below.
Consider the function
then f is not defined (see Indeterminate form), yet as x moves arbitrarily close to 1, f(x) correspondingly approaches 2:
Thus, f(x) can be made arbitrarily close to the limit of 2—just by making x sufficiently close to 1.
In other words,
lim
2.
This can also be calculated algebraically, as 
{\textstyle {\frac {x{2}-1}{x-1}}={\frac {(x+1)(x-1)}{x-1}}=x+1}
for all real numbers x ≠ 1.
Now, since x + 1 is continuous in x at 1, we can now plug in 1 for x, leading to the equation
lim
2.
In addition to limits at finite values, functions can also have limits at infinity.
For example, consider the function
where:
As x becomes extremely large, the value of f(x) approaches 2, and the value of f(x) can be made as close to 2 as one could wish—by making x sufficiently large.
So in this case, the limit of f(x) as x approaches infinity is 2, or in mathematical notation,
lim
2.
An important class of functions when considering limits are continuous functions.
These are precisely those functions which preserve limits, in the sense that if 
is a continuous function, then whenever 
in the domain of 
, then the limit 
exists and furthermore is 
In the most general setting of topological spaces, a short proof is given below:
Let 
be a continuous function between topological spaces 
and 
By definition, for each open set 
in 
, the preimage 
is open in 
Now suppose 
is a sequence with limit 
in 
Then 
is a sequence in 
, and 
is some point.
Choose a neighborhood 
of 
Then 
is an open set (by continuity of 
which in particular contains 
, and therefore 
is a neighborhood of 
By the convergence of 
to 
, there exists an 
such that for 
, we have 
Then applying 
to both sides gives that, for the same 
, for each 
we have 
Originally 
was an arbitrary neighborhood of 
, so 
This concludes the proof.
In real analysis, for the more concrete case of real-valued functions defined on a subset 
, that is, 
, a continuous function may also be defined as a function which is continuous at every point of its domain.
In topology, limits are used to define limit points of a subset of a topological space, which in turn give a useful characterization of closed sets.
In a topological space 
, consider a subset 
A point 
is called a limit point if there is a sequence 
in 
such that 
The reason why 
is defined to be in 
rather than just 
is illustrated by the following example.
Take 
and 
Then 
, and therefore is the limit of the constant sequence 
But 
is not a limit point of 
A closed set, which is defined to be the complement of an open set, is equivalently any set 
which contains all its limit points.
The derivative is defined formally as a limit.
In the scope of real analysis, the derivative is first defined for real functions 
defined on a subset 
The derivative at 
is defined as follows.
If the limit
as 
exists, then the derivative at 
is this limit.
Equivalently, it is the limit as 
of
If the derivative exists, it is commonly denoted by 
For sequences of real numbers, a number of properties can be proven.
Suppose 
and 
are two sequences converging to 
and 
respectively.
equivalently, the function 
is continuous about positive 
A property of convergent sequences of real numbers is that they are Cauchy sequences.
The definition of a Cauchy sequence 
is that for every real number 
, there is an 
such that whenever 
Informally, for any arbitrarily small error 
, it is possible to find an interval of diameter 
such that eventually the sequence is contained within the interval.
Cauchy sequences are closely related to convergent sequences.
In fact, for sequences of real numbers they are equivalent: any Cauchy sequence is convergent.
In general metric spaces, it continues to hold that convergent sequences are also Cauchy.
But the converse is not true: not every Cauchy sequence is convergent in a general metric space.
A classic counterexample is the rational numbers, 
, with the usual distance.
The sequence of decimal approximations to 
, truncated at the 
th decimal place is a Cauchy sequence, but does not converge in 
A metric space in which every Cauchy sequence is also convergent, that is, Cauchy sequences are equivalent to convergent sequences, is known as a complete metric space.
One reason Cauchy sequences can be "easier to work with" than convergent sequences is that they are a property of the sequence 
alone, while convergent sequences require not just the sequence 
but also the limit of the sequence 
Beyond whether or not a sequence 
converges to a limit 
, it is possible to describe how fast a sequence converges to a limit.
One way to quantify this is using the order of convergence of a sequence.
A formal definition of order of convergence can be stated as follows.
Suppose 
is a sequence of real numbers which is convergent with limit 
Furthermore, 
for all 
If positive constants 
and 
exist such that
lim
then 
is said to converge to 
with order of convergence 
The constant 
is known as the asymptotic error constant.
Order of convergence is used for example the field of numerical analysis, in error analysis.
Limits can be difficult to compute.
There exist limit expressions whose modulus of convergence is undecidable.
In recursion theory, the limit lemma proves that it is possible to encode undecidable problems using limits.
There are several theorems or tests that indicate whether the limit exists.
These are known as convergence tests.
Examples include the ratio test and the squeeze theorem.
However they may not tell how to compute the limit.
